758 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Haitians of all walks of life that prospects of long-­term survival of Duvalier regime are at present time poorest since his inauguration October 1957. Reasons are many and complex internal reasons may be summarized as follow: (1) Desperate economic-­financial situation stemming from heritage previous administrations aggravated by poor current coffee crop with sharp unseasonal decline in foreign exchange and government revenues. (2) Bad administrative practices and management of government machinery leading to almost total failure administration and constructive projects despite glowing promise. (3) Politically President Duvalier has succeeded in alienating practically all groups including not only supporters of this political opponents, but many patriotic Haitians initially prepared support him if given a chance, has estranged both influential Catholic Church and some Protestant groups and due largely excessive brutality secret police has won enemy all classes ranging from wealthy elite to black masses followers of ex-President Fignole.2 (4) He has ruthlessly trampled on civil liberties through suppression independent press and tolerated, If not directed, brutalities by secret police. Latest incident of savage beating responsible business man by officer of President guard culminates long record of brutality and has undone any possible good effect of relaxation harsh police measures in January this year. (5) President has almost entirely neglected any effort develop his own popularity. He remains largely isolated from population, holding court alone in palace with almost no attempt through public appearances in Port au Prince or provinces to broaden base his support. His furtive secretiveness probably overlaid with large measure primitive superstition has alienated most decent supporters, leaving him surrounded by small palace clique of persons of lowest possible result. Believe it is now too late for Duvalier succeed broadening base his popular support. Externally principal elements are: (1) The political alliance between Dejoie and Fignole has shaken government and holds greatest potential threat to regime. (2) Propaganda activities and threats of invasion from Dejoie and followers from Cuba are encouraging enemies and triggering many to abandon ship they believe will sink. 2 Daniel Fignole briefly served as the Provisional President of Haiti between May 26 and June 14, 1957.
