721.2315/159: Telegram
[Document 276]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, February 21, 1925—8 p.m.
15. Brazilian Chargé this morning left a note at the Department4 stating that Brazil
would have no reason to oppose Peruvian-Colombian treaty if Peru would assure Brazil
that in any arrangement for settlement of its boundary question with Colombia it will
make as a condition recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line established by the
Treaty of 1851 and the consequent dominion of Brazil over the territory to the east of
that line. The note added that if Colombia recognizes the above line Brazil will be
pleased to grant Colombia freedom of navigation on the rivers common to the two
countries. The Department therefore suggests a meeting in the Secretary of State’s
office between the Secretary of State, the Peruvian Ambassador, the Colombian
Minister and the Brazilian Chargé, a Procès Verbal of the same to be drawn up in the
following terms:
“Doctor Hernán Velarde, Doctor Enrique Olaya, and Mr. Samuel de Sousa
Leão Gracie, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Peru, Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Colombia, and Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim of Brazil, respectively, having on the invitation of the
Secretary of State of the United States, met with him in his office at the
Department of State, Washington, at . . . . . o’clock on February . ., 1925:
Mr. Hughes stated that he had invited Messrs. Velarde, Olaya and Gracie to
his office to discuss the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru signed
in Lima March 24, 1922, against the ratification of which formal protest had
been lodged in Lima by the Brazilian Government. Mr. Hughes stated that
the three Governments concerned had requested his good offices in the
settlement of this question and, after carefully considering the matter, he
desired to suggest as a solution of the difficulty the following:
First. The withdrawal by the Government of Brazil of its objection
to the ratification of the boundary treaty between Colombia and
Peru;
Second. The ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above
mentioned boundary convention;
