Haiti 763 have on our prestige in the emerging African countries, as well as the colored people of Asia. While very possibly few, if any, citizens of Ghana, Indonesia, or Thailand could identify the present Chief of State of Haiti, the existence of even a brief period of chaos in the oldest independent colored country located on our doorstep would be interpreted as a failure on our part in the field of international relations and would undoubtedly be exploited by communist parties in that part of the world. In other words, we cannot afford to let Haiti “go through the wringer”. It would be far too optimistic to forecast now that the aid we have already given will pull this Administration through its allotted course or that it will be the last aid we will be called upon to extend. However, it is my considered opinion that for better or for worse, both on grounds of moral principle and political expediency, we had no option but to follow the course we have elected to pursue up to now. To what extent we can continue to prop up this Government in the interest of both Haiti and United States is a question which will have to be answered when the time comes. Gerald A. Drew HA–14. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Haiti1  Washington, May 30, 1959, 7:07 p.m. 451. For Ambassador from Rubottom. Besides genuine concern which Department has for health of President Duvalier due his high office and long and friendly association with United States in various capacities, there is deep preoccupation 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.00/5–3059. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rubottom and initialed by Wieland. On May 27, Ambassador Drew informed the Department of State that he had learned from Haitian officials in strictest confidence that President Duvalier had suffered a coronary occlusion during the evening of May 24 and that his condition continued to be grave. (Telegram 415 from Port-­au-Prince, May 27; 738.11/5–2759) In response to a request from Haitian officials for United State medical assistance, the Department of State arranged with the Department of Defense for the Chief Cardiologist at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base to proceed with special equipment to Port-au-Prince on May 29. Documentation is in file 738.11. Following his recovery, President Duvalier sent a letter to President Eisenhower on July 13 personally thanking the President, the Department of State, and Ambassador Drew for their assistance during his illness. (738.11/7–2359)
