3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
247
not declassified] letter: “This theme is of great interest to General Haig,
and you will be able to have a fruitful discussion about it next time you
see him.”
When asked by a State Department official about his correspon-
dence with Toth, [9½ lines not declassified]
10. In his 5 March and 6 May 1977 public confessions, covered in
Izvestiya, Lipavskiy named both his original FSO contact, Levitsky, and
Levitsky’s FSO replacement, Joseph Presel, as “CIA agents”, as well as
Allyn Nathanson, who has since resigned from the Foreign Service. All
three charges are of course false. All three officers had Embassy contact
and reporting responsibilities for the Soviet dissident community. Li-
pavskiy, however, told Izvestiya that Levitsky had recruited him for
CIA; he demonstrated the spy gear he had received during his recruit-
ment meeting with Levitsky and from later deaddrop contacts. The Iz-
vestiya coverage of Lipavskiy’s confession clearly implied that the So-
viets also regarded Presel as one of the “Westerners” conspiring with
Shcharanskiy.
11. We must anticipate from all of this that the Soviets can prob-
ably put together a circumstantially plausible case against Shcharan-
skiy. They would seem to have several options for trying and disposing
of this case:
(a) a treason charge, conviction, and a death sentence;
(b) a treason charge, conviction, and a long prison term;
(c) a treason charge, conviction, a long prison sentence, but depor-
tation after a face-saving interval;
(d) a charge and conviction on anti-Soviet slander, and a prison
sentence;
(e) a charge and conviction on anti-Soviet slander, and a prison
sentence, but with deportation after a face-saving interval;
(In any of the preceding trial alternatives, of course, the Soviets
will have various options on how much to implicate US intelligence
specifically in the charges.)
(f) deportation without trial.
We consider (f) quite unlikely at this point. Options (d) and (e) are
possible, but growing increasingly doubtful given recent Soviet signals.
Any of options (a) through (c) are more likely, with option (c) probably
the best that can be hoped for.
