National Security Policy  1133
You also indicated, Mr. President, that Defense should not make its 
presentation until after completion of a related study to be undertaken 
by Dr. Kistiakowsky. (NSC Action No. 2245, approved June [illegible 
in the original], 1960). The latter study, which related to the [illegible 
in the original] reconnaissance satellite, was completed and presented 
to the Council as a special [illegible in the original] on August 25, 1960.
As I have indicated, today’s presentation relates to Defense space 
programs, the Planning Board has suggested that, at a later date, the 
Council might wish to hear a presentation on other outer space pro­
grams, which are being conducted under the auspices of NASA (the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration).
We shall now hear the Defense presentation, which will be 
given by Mr. John H. Rubel, Acting Director of Defense Research and 
Engineering.
(CALL ON: MR. RUBEL)
273.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 466th NSC Meeting1
Washington, November 7, 1960
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 466th Meeting of the National Security Council, Monday, Novem­
ber 7, 1960
Present at the 466th NSC Meeting were the President of the United 
States, Presiding; Mr. Livingston T. Merchant for the Secretary of State; 
the Secretary of Defense; and the Acting Directory, Office of Civil and 
Defense Mobilization (Patterson). Also attending the Meeting and 
participating in the Council Actions below were the Secretary of the 
Treasury; the Director Bureau of the Budget; and the Administrator, 
National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Item 1). Also present 
at the Meeting were the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; 
the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Acting Director of Central 
Intelligence (Cabell); the Director, U.S. Information Agency; from the 
Department of Defense—Deputy Secretary James H. Douglas, Messrs. 
Haydn Williams, John R. Rubel, Lt. Col. Paul Nadler, and Col. Harvey 
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Outer Space Programs Under the Auspices of the Depart­
ment of Defense. Top Secret; Eyes Only. 6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC 
Records.
