Chapter 1, 1988 5 The issues raised above fall within the Board’s charter to provide you our best advice on matters of intelligence. By your careful appointments, however, the Board comprises a unique repository of experience in national security affairs. It includes a former Secretary of State, a former Secretary of Defense, and two former National Security Advisors among other former Cabinet members. We hesitate to step beyond our formal mandate. But if the issue warrants, we believe it our obligation to make known to you other concerns which may fall outside the letter of the Board’s governing executive order. One such concern arises directly from the possible cheating or breakout scenarios mentioned above. We believe detailed analysis by the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs is required to determine what the net effect on the strategic balance might be under these ­scenarios. For different aspects of a START accord, at what level of intelligence uncertainty need we assume the Soviets may have gained a militarily significant advantage? At what level of intelligence uncertainty do the unknowns become dangerously destabilizing in times of crisis? A second area of concern is the disposition of the remaining U.S. strategic forces under a START regime of 50 percent reductions. Have the appropriate studies been undertaken to determine what force modernization or restructuring will be required to enhance the survivability and deterrent effect of the remaining forces? Will such forces meet the objectives and criteria set out in National Security Decision Directive 13,5 “Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy”? And have these requirements been put up against the budget constraints faced by the Department of Defense for the foreseeable future as well as the enormous political difficulties facing any attempt to restructure or modernize U.S. strategic forces? Mr. President, we have not raised these concerns to frustrate efforts to reach an agreement. We do so to ensure that whatever shortcomings exist with the proposed treaty be fully understood so that they can be addressed, thereby increasing the soundness of a START accord. As always, your Board stands ready to assist you in any manner you deem appropriate to address the issues raised in this letter. Sincerely, Anne L. Armstrong Chairman6 5 Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1981–1989, volume XLIII, National Security Policy, 1981–1984, Part 1. 6 Bush wrote at the bottom of the letter: “Why are we worse off even with the problems she raises if both sides verifiably destroy X number of weapons. The verification problems, I take it, already exist so why are we diminished if 50% cuts are made.”
