Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
547
The Middle East
Better still would be a significant breakthrough to peace in the
Middle East. It seems clear that in any case fulfillment of Camp David
will be an essential yardstick to measure the success of your Presi-
dency. This will require additional direct and deep involvement on
your part. I am still convinced that genuine progress is achievable.
However, we must recognize that the American Jewish commu-
nity harbors deep suspicion of this Administration. This can only be
overcome by a successful conclusion to the Israeli-Egyptian negotia-
tions. Moreover, suspicion is easily rekindled—witness the resurgence
of Jewish concern after the euphoria of Camp David.
In this situation I believe our strategy should be to make a max-
imum effort in the near future to conclude a treaty, to be followed by
negotiations regarding self-government in the West Bank and Gaza.
Once the latter are underway, we would be able to lower the profile of
our involvement in Middle East matters until after the 1980 election.
This maximum effort should be made between now and late spring—to
be followed by a gradual easing off on our part.
Another way perhaps of dealing with the linkage issue—in the
event that it proves impossible to obtain a formal Israeli commitment to
elections on the West Bank—might be an understanding between the
Israelis and the Egyptians or between the Israelis and ourselves (with
us conveying it to the Egyptians) that Israel will now undertake a series
of unilateral steps designed to set in motion a political process on the
West Bank/Gaza, pointing toward eventual self-government. This
could involve release of some prisoners, fewer restrictions on political
activity, the initiation of discussions on the subject of elections and the
scope of authority for the self-government, self-restraint on settle-
ments, etc. The point would be to substitute tangible Israeli actions for
the formal commitment that the Israelis may be unwilling to make pub-
licly (I will be exploring these and other ideas with Cy Vance and Bill
Quandt, and the above is merely suggestive).
In any case, we have little time left for endless litigation of the
issue, and within the next two weeks or so some basic strategic deci-
sions concerning the rest of this year and next year ought to be made.
US-USSR-China
Normalization with China obviously carries with it the risk of So-
viet over-reaction and miscalculations in both Peking and Moscow. We
are now directly in the middle of a very delicate balancing act—one
which is complicated by the fact that both Brezhnev and Deng are old
and we could, even in the next few years, see significant governmental
changes in both countries.
