International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
5
Fukuda emphasizing the importance you place on US-Japanese friend-
ship and bilaterally and in the context of the interests we share in the
Pacific with our fellow industrialized democracies.12
With regard to the Philippines, I will say that we will be under-
taking review of our basing requirements, that we cannot accept the
current Philippine negotiating proposal, that the bases are as much in
the [interests of?] the Philippines as they are in U.S. interests—and that
if the current outrageous demands are not lower we are prepared to do
without the bases. I will assure the Japanese that we will consult fully
with them during the Philippine base negotiating process.13
I will discuss your policies toward the People’s Republic of China and
Korea, making sure Prime Minister Fukuda understands the importance you
attach to questions concerning Korea, including the issue of troop levels, but
not going beyond your stated positions. With your agreement, I will confirm
your desire to have close consultations with Japan concerning Korea and U.S.
relations with the People’s Republic of China, and agreement on the desir-
ability of close US-Japanese consultations on all issues of common interest can
be highlighted in your review of the results of the mission.14
[Omitted here is discussion of Southern Africa, Cyprus, and the
Middle East.]
North-South Issues: I will state your commitment to a constructive
relationship with the developing countries, and your desire for close
cooperation among the industrialized countries to achieve this objec-
tive. I will emphasize that your Administration has not yet had a
chance to examine North-South issues in depth and has not come to
firm decisions on specific subjects. We will want to consult with the Eu-
ropeans and Japanese at the earliest possible moment. I will say that we
believe there are several suitable forums for such consultations in-
cluding the Executive Council of the OECD, the Trilateral summit pre-
paratory meetings, and the commissions of the CIEC.
agreements. We should tell them that they have a large trade surplus and should watch
it.” When Mondale suggested raising the issue of Japanese color television exports, Blu-
menthal replied, “As an example.” (Memorandum of conversation, undated; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 54, NSC–001, 1–22–77)
12 At the January 22 NSC meeting (see footnote 11 above), Brzezinski suggested that
U.S.-Japanese issues be broached “in a somewhat larger framework. We should empha-
size the importance of Japan’s assuming a major international role. We should put it in
the perspective of history. Then we could turn to specific issues where they might play a
greater role: trade, North-South issues, defense, etc. But do it in the context of Japan
emerging as a major global power.” Carter agreed, adding, “If Fukuda raises some spe-
cific questions it will give us a better idea of their concerns.” When Mondale suggested
that the United States and Japan were “immediately establishing closer working rela-
tions—this is a beginning,” Carter noted that “Japan is now a major world power and we
look forward to sharing the responsibility with her.”
13 Carter wrote “Do not be belligerent re Marcos with Fukuda” at the end of this
paragraph.
14 Carter indicated his approval of this position.
