416  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
a unified commander to the Joint Chiefs of Staff is a strategic channel. 
The President stated that he would approve this arrangement, provided 
that decisions on strategic matters such as the strength of reserves, the 
numbers of carriers, etc., are reserved to the unified commanders.
Mr. Harlow expressed doubt that the paragraph places it in quite 
that perspective. Therefore, Mr. Quarles and the President checked 
the wording and agreed it should be substantially as follows: “. . . 
upon the basis of the agreed defense military requirements of that 
command.”
The President then brought up the question of intelligence services. 
He asked why there is not a solid military intelligence plan, pointing 
out that under existing arrangement three separate intelligence jobs 
must be done, and the material brought together. He stated he felt that 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff could be better served by an autonomous intel­
ligence service at the Defense level.
Admiral Burke made a case for separate intelligence services based 
on his experience in CINCUNC, in which General Willoughby (G–2 of a 
unified command) had believed there were no Chinese in North Korea 
(November 1950). He expressed the opinion that in this circumstance 
Service disagreements were healthy. He further went on to mention a 
meeting on the subject of Laos conducted by the CIA. Here the CIA had 
been able to quote from many sources, including service intelligence. 
He felt the diversity had been helpful.
General Taylor reinforced the views of Admiral Burke to some 
extent by stating that the Joint Staff is providing autonomous intel­
ligence service for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and as such, will make a 
great contribution. He went further, however, to say that there are 
intelligence matters of unilateral Service concern that separate services 
should perform.
The President admitted that every military force needs its means 
of intelligence. He felt that the basic difficulty in this area was the intel­
ligence services located in the Pentagon. They should produce unified 
intelligence and the intelligence which is used by the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff should come through unified channels. He went on to comment 
on the fact that the War Colleges may contribute to the present insist­
ence on separate intelligence services. He stated his opinion that War 
Colleges should lose their Service identification and should be des­
ignated as Defense Colleges No. 1, 2, 3 and 4. On all the matters of 
intelligence, the President stated that he is not specifically requesting a 
change, but that he is requesting that the Department of Defense pon­
der these matters seriously.
John S.D. Eisenhower
