128
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
would have for them both economically and politically. The East Euro-
pean press has been highly critical of the US stand and has counterat-
tacked with condemnations of alleged injustices in the US and US
disregard for “economic and social” rights.
China is the only Communist country that seems to have derived
some satisfaction from the US stand. Peking clearly has taken heart
from recent difficulties in US–Soviet relations, and the Chinese see
Washington’s attitude on human rights as possibly signaling a tough-
ening US stance toward Moscow generally. The Chinese are ostensibly
unconcerned about their own vulnerability on the human rights issue,
but Peking probably has some private misgivings on this score. This
may explain the failure of Chinese media to highlight the human rights
controversy despite Peking’s penchant for emphasizing US–Soviet
differences.
The Industrial Democracies
There is broad approval in principle of the US human rights stand
in Western Europe, Canada, and Japan. But leaders of these countries
tend to define international issues on which the US takes a comprehen-
sive global approach in more parochial terms. Thus, the Europeans see
the human rights issue mainly in terms of East-West relations, while
the Japanese are primarily concerned with how the US stand will affect
US policy and Japanese interests in Asia.
The Europeans are concerned that US human rights initiatives risk
causing a deterioration in East-West relations that would have a more
damaging impact on Western Europe than on the US. As a result, gov-
ernment leaders have displayed a decided preference for pursuing
human rights objectives with quiet diplomacy and behind-the-scenes
approaches.
Britain’s Prime Minister Callaghan may have indicated to the So-
viets that Foreign Secretary Owen’s strong speech on human rights did
not herald a major change in UK policy.4 French officials are reportedly
worried about preserving what remains of the Franco-Soviet “special
relationship,” and they are eager to maintain a friendly atmosphere for
Brezhnev’s coming visit to Paris.5 In Germany, Chancellor Schmidt has
declared that Bonn will seek to advance the cause of human rights in its
4 In a March 3 address to the Diplomatic and Commonwealth Writers Association
in London, Owen endorsed the Carter administration’s human rights policy. Owen noted
that the British Government would “apply the same standards and judgements to Com-
munist countries, as we do to Chile, Uganda, and South Africa.” (Bernard D. Nossiter,
“Britian Supports Carter Stand on Human Rights,”The Washington Post, March 4, 1977,
p. A–1)
5 Brezhnev embarked on a 3-day state visit to France on June 20; see Jim Hogland,
“Brezhnev in Paris, Focuses on De´tente,” The Washington Post, June 21, 1977, p. A–14.
