Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 617 the Iranians have responded to the message sent to them on March 24,4 consequently our measures are suspended. We could ignore the conditions they set. The Pres said it would be better to say that the President of Iran has said that the hostages will be transferred, therefore, we are delaying our actions until a certain time . . . Mr. Powell said we could say the Iranians say they are ready to transfer the hostages. If they should release them by a certain time . . . Jordan said we should be careful. It is clear that Bani-Sadr and others are under the gun and have little room for maneuver. We should not put them in a corner. The Pres said we should acknowledge their decision. ZB said we should indicate that it was the result of your (the President’s) initiative. Jordan said he thought we should not mention our message. Saunders came in after being on the phone. He restated Amb. Lang’s understanding of the Khomeini statement and Bani-Sadr’s speech. The Pres said we should restate that Iran has announced that the hostages will be released after the Majlis meets. Our statement could say that Iranian officials have stated that the hostages will be released when the Majlis convenes. Mr. Christopher read a possible draft statement acknowledging the announcement of Bani-Sadr as a positive step, and acknowledging the Iranian Government statement that the hostage issue would be resolved when the Majlis convenes. There was also a statement at the end expressing unity with the families of the hostages.5 ZB said he was uneasy about making too positive a reading of the Iranian position. The President should take credit for the initiative. We should not read too much into their statement. Mention of the decision to be taken by the Majlis prompts a response from them saying that only the Majlis can decide the release of the hostages. We legitimize that position by mentioning it. The Pres said we are dealing with a crazy group. Bani-Sadr and others are holding on by their fingernails. If we leave out any mention of the Majlis, they could come back to us and demand acknowledgement of their position. He felt it was necessary to mention it in our statement. Jordan said the decision about the Majlis was already in the public domain. 4 See Document 220. 5 The draft was not found. See Document 234.
