International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 278. Action Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Toussaint), the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Nuclear Energy and Technology Affairs (Kratzer), and the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, February 4, 1977 United Nations Water Conference Issues for Decision A decision must be made on the U.S. posture and level of participation in the United Nations Water Conference scheduled for March 14–25 in Mar del Plata, Argentina. The last Administration planned for the U.S. to adopt a relatively low profile at the Conference, and not to announce any major initiatives which would cast us in a leadership role. The fact that this will be the first global forum for the new Administration requires that the strategy for our participation be re-examined. Third World countries will view the U.S. posture at the Conference (i.e., statements, commitments, level of delegation) as an early indication of how the new Administration intends to approach North-South problems. However, time is short in which to select meaningful initiatives that would enable the U.S. to assume a high profile leadership role. A decision to upgrade the nature of our substantive participation will require launching immediately an intensified interagency effort to reach agreement on U.S. initiatives; it will also require an expanded in-house staff effort. Unusual urgency in the selection of the head of our delegation is also involved because of unique administrative and security problems connected with the Mar del Plata venue. We have been alerted to the terrorist threat in Argentina and will provide protective security for all participants. Security must be more elaborate if Cabinet-level representation is involved. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 7, Memos/Letters From WC to Bureaus. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kahn, Long, and Blaney. Maynes initialed for Toussaint; Blaney initialed for Lake. Sent through Christopher. 927
