3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
447
Sol Goldstein asked for the Secretary’s views on the Moscow
Olympic Games in 1980. He said there was great concern and worry
about what might happen to Jewish spectators and participants. He
wondered whether the Soviets might not harass would-be Jewish emi-
grants before and during the Games. What if Jewish participants from
the United States were excluded. The Secretary said that we are dis-
cussing some of these issues with other countries but that it was not yet
clear what actions might be taken to reduce the fears which Mr. Gold-
stein expressed. He asked that any questions of this nature on the
Olympic Games be referred to Dr. Shulman in future, since the Ambas-
sador would be monitoring our review of the problem.
Ms. Jacqueline Levine raised again the question of trade and re-
quested a clarification on whether the Secretary had said that there was
no leverage in trade. The Secretary replied that he felt there was very
limited leverage in trade; he had not said that there was no leverage at
all. Ms. Levine asked how we could creatively come up with new ideas.
The Secretary said that he would be very grateful to receive any new
ideas on levers to use in dealing with the Soviets.
Gold said that during the group’s last meeting7 with the Secretary
there had been discussion of Embassy Moscow’s current policy on con-
tact between Embassy personnel and Soviet Jews. He also indicated
that he had heard the Embassy had now been effectively closed to So-
viet Jews. He wondered what the Secretary could say about Ambas-
sador Toon’s policy regarding contacts, specifically, with Jewish dissi-
dents. The Secretary referred this question to Mr. Luers who said that
Ambassador Toon had not restricted contacts between Embassy per-
sonnel and Soviet Jewish dissidents. The Ambassador had merely insti-
tutionalized procedures for approving such contacts within the Em-
bassy and had defined which staff members—principally those who
were knowledgeable about the problems Jewish and other dissidents
face in the USSR—would be able to meet with them.
Ms. Levine inquired about reports that the Soviets intended to cut
off all exit visas on January 1, 1979. Luers replied that a notice on the
bulletin board of one OVIR (Office of Soviet police which is responsible
for approving exit visas) had been spotted which reportedly carried a
message to this effect. But there has been no official confirmation that
this is, in fact, a new country-wide policy. We had heard nothing more
on the rumor and therefore assume that it has no foundation in fact.
The Secretary concluded the meeting by saying that he wished we
had better leverage on all of these issues. He wanted to emphasize,
however, that our resolve and efforts to work on all of these problems
7 See Document 105.
