1955  399
differed widely on status of Taiwan and on my government’s relations 
to Taiwan. I said that there was no use in pretending that these differ­
ences did not exist or that they could be easily resolved. I said that my 
suggestion did not involve third parties or question of justice or injus­
tice of conflicting claims in the area.
16. I stated that immediate and urgent problem we faced was 
not to reconcile conflicting views but to remove danger that a resort 
to force in the area might evoke international conflict. I stated that I 
believed Wang himself had previously recognized that this possibility 
existed. I said that these questions were grave and complicated and 
that negotiating their solution would take time and patience.
17. I pointed out that neither of us wanted to negotiate under 
threat of force and that there was hope of a constructive solution to the 
basic problems of the area only if threat of force were removed. I stated 
that the fact that our policies differed need not mean armed conflict. I 
stated that many countries were abnormally divided and that many 
governments faced situations which they considered abnormal intru­
sions into their territory. I pointed out that responsible governments 
nevertheless had renounced use of force in achievement of what they 
considered urgent and legitimate objectives of national policy. I stated 
that my suggestion did not call upon either his government or mine 
to renounce their objectives, but simply suggested we renounce use of 
force to implement our policies. I stated that this was to me an emi­
nently reasonable, simple, and straightforward proposal which could 
provide the basis for constructive solutions to other problems.
18. I concluded by expressing hope that Wang’s government would 
again consider suggestion we had made and that such reconsideration 
might lead to progress in the talks.
19. Wang replied that he could not agree to what I had said con­
cerning his government’s continued delay in implementing the agreed 
announcement. (Wang’s interpreter initially said “continued failure” 
but corrected this to “continued delay.” Ekvall states that “continued 
stalling” would have been more accurate English.)
20. Wang said that during discussion of first item of agenda before 
and after agreement was reached, his side had devoted great efforts to 
question of returning Americans from China. He said that this did not 
include only “ordinary” Americans but also Americans who had com­
mitted offenses. He stated that his side was still faithfully implementing 
the agreement on return of civilians. He said that there was therefore 
no reason to charge that his government had delayed in implementing 
agreed announcement and that he could not agree to this unjustified 
charge.
21. Wang continued with comments on my preliminary views on 
his opening statement. He said that it was wrong that there should be
