Afghanistan 19 5. Comment: This version of Daoud’s death tracks with the new regime’s subsequent formal announcement that the former leader had to be killed because he would not submit to the authority of the NMRC. The bloody details, however, will probably never be officially acknowledged. If this story is true—and we have no reason to doubt it considering the nature of this violent society—we are provided with a vivid illustration of how venomous was the hatred of the coup leaders against the “Nadir Shah” Yahya Khel clan of Mohammadzai family. Also, this is the stubborn way we would have expected Daoud to resist to the end. Eliot 10. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Departments of State and Defense, the National Security Agency, and the United States Pacific Command1 Kabul, April 30, 1978, 1430Z 3372. CINCPAC for POLAD. Subject: Afghan Communist Leader Becomes Ruler of Afghanistan. 1. On April 30, Radio Afghanistan announced at 1700 local time that pro-Soviet Communist Khalq Party leader Nur Mohammad Taraki has been named President of the Council of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) and Prime Minister (the same information was conveyed officially to the Embassy at 1825 in a circular notice, delivered by a member of the Foreign Ministry’s Protocol Department). As the top Afghan Communist becomes head of state and chief of government, the true political character of the coup leadership is now nakedly apparent to all. 2. Taraki, who was born on July 15, 1917, in Maimana Province in Northwestern Afghanistan, is a Pushtun. He has been a prominent Communist leader since 1965. Among the significant positions he has held are: Director-General of Publications in the Ministry of Press and Information (1950–51); editor-in-chief of the official Bakhtar news 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780185–0099. Secret; Flash. Sent for information Niact Immediate to London, Moscow, Islamabad, New Delhi, and Tehran (also for the USDAOs in the last three posts).
