National Security Policy 921 Nuclear Weapons. Mr. McCone remarked that the question of shar­ ing nuclear weapons with our allies would come up immediately when Congress reconvened because of the State-­Defense suggestion that GENIE be used by the U.K. under emergency conditions. The Joint Committee was so concerned about this suggestion that it wanted to have a special session to look into the matter, but was finally persuaded to discuss the problem in regular session. The question of other weap­ ons will no doubt be brought up in a general review of our whole policy on sharing nuclear weapons. Mr. McCone felt that this problem was really one to be handled by State and Defense. It was a difficult one because some members of the Joint Committee had previously stated publicly that our policy on sharing nuclear weapons involved no actual U.K. custody of nuclear weapons; contrary to this view, it now appeared that we were about to turn custody of some weapons over to the U.K. He suggested that sharing of nuclear weapons with allies was a topic deserving urgent consideration by the Council. Basic Organization of the Government for National Security. The Vice President said one subject was missing from the Planning Board’s con­ solidated list of topics, namely, the question of the basic organization of the Government for national security. After seven years of experience with the National Security Council in this Administration and four years’ experience with the OCB, he felt national security organization might be a proper topic for Council consideration. A Council discussion of the subject might also be advantageous because the Council is under study by the Jackson Sub-­Committee. The Vice President therefore sug­ gested that, subject to approval by the President, the Council examine the operation of the NSC and OCB machinery and consider suggestions which have been made for changes in the present system. Africa. Mr. Dulles said he did not see any subject related to Africa in the list of topics. Mr. Gray said the Planning Board was already engaged in revising Africa South of the Sahara (NSC 5818). Changes in the Character of the Cold War. The Vice President said he had had some very helpful discussions with the Director of Central Intelligence on changes in the character of the Cold War. He wondered whether the Intelligence Community might not be asked to give its reactions on this subject. Secretary Dillon said some very difficult con­ crete problems had arisen in this field. For example, he had found the Belgians were getting ready to do less rather than more with regard to NATO because of what they regarded as a detente in East-­West rela­ tions. In this connection the Vice President felt it might be useful for us to think of our own attitudes: The question was whether we were going to allow Khrushchev, by talking about peace and co-­existence, to silence all criticism of past and present Soviet actions.
