National Security Policy  383
112.	 Memorandum of Conversation Between Eisenhower and 
John Foster Dulles1
Augusta, November 30, 1958, 11:30 a.m.
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH THE PRESIDENT
ALSO PRESENT
Dr. Milton Eisenhower
Mr. Merchant
Mr. Greene
[Omitted here are paragraphs 1–5.]
6. I said that, with regard to the Mutual Security Program for FY 
1960, there has emerged disagreement between the State Department 
and the Bureau of the Budget. While I would not ask for a decision on 
the spur of the moment I would hope that the President would give us 
our day in court before cuts are made as I believe that we cannot do 
what we must do to lift the peoples of the underdeveloped nations up 
onto a plane of economic dynamism with the cut in mutual security 
funds on which the Bureau of the Budget is now insisting. Given the 
size of the resources which the Soviets and the Chinese Communists 
are devoting to an economic offensive in underdeveloped countries 
I thought that we must be prepared to make some sacrifices if we are 
successfully to meet this competition. I suggested that increased taxa­
tion, perhaps new forms of taxation such as a national sales tax, might 
be envisaged.
The President agreed that the American people must better under­
stand that they may have to undergo sturdy measures in order to be suc­
cessful in the kind of world struggle in which we are engaged, and said 
that he felt this should be made clear in his State of the Union Message. 
He noted two conflicting elements of the problem: Indispensable confi­
dence in the economic health of the US and in the dollar will not endure 
unless we balance our budget and correct our current unhealthy fiscal 
situation; at the same time we must find the funds to assist in the eco­
nomic development of other countries. In this connection he referred to 
a letter which he had had from Lewis Douglas (copy attached) about 
the importance of the availability of dollars to the underdeveloped 
countries. He also mentioned a letter he had had from Lamar Flemming 
about the difficulties being experienced by American companies oper­
ating in Latin America.
1 Source: Mutual Security Program funding. Secret; Personal and Private. Extracts—
4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President.
