Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 481 meeting saw the United States continuing to signal its willingness to maintain a constructive dialogue regarding the demands of the developing countries. This willingness to engage in dialogue was, however, clearly separated from any affirmation of the legitimacy of all the other demands of these countries. Subsequently, at Colombo, Sri Lanka, the nonaligned nations met and found that economic issues had replaced political issues as the prime vehicles for expressing their aspirations and frustrations.7 I have been speaking to you about the Third World. I know that there are those who question the validity of this term. They rightly point out that there is a tremendous difference between the least developed and the middle countries. This is true. Nevertheless, the strong feelings which exist among these countries arising from a common heritage of colonialism, from their perception of themselves as economically developing nations and from a feeling that they lack a voice in major economic decisions affecting them, give these countries a solidarity which is a reality. That solidarity withstood differences over the oil crisis. It has withstood general differences of view, for example, between those countries that are interested in debt relief and those countries which are more concerned about their international credit standing. Importance of the North-South Relationship It has been my experience that audiences attuned to the more exciting political aspects of foreign affairs do not find equal stimulation in discussions of economic issues. Yet, the average American citizen— concerned for his job, his standard of living, and the value of the dollar at home and abroad—has good reason to pay attention to the demands, sometimes excessive, of the Third World nations. Only a few statistics will illustrate why. • In 1977, 35% of total U.S. exports—$42 billion—went to developing countries. • The United States sells more manufactured goods to the developing countries than to Western Europe, Japan, and all the Communist countries combined. • The developing countries accounted for more than half of all U.S. exports of industrial machinery, electrical machinery, and aircraft. • They bought 50% of our wheat exports, 60% of our cotton exports, 70% of our rice exports, and 90% of our coal exports. • The United States imported goods worth $67 billion from developing countries in 1977—45% of our total imports. 7 The fifth annual conference of the Non-Aligned Movement took place in Colombo, Sri Lanka, August 16–19, 1976.
