Costa Rica  389
Within the country the government has experienced difficulties 
with its budget and there is a likelihood of a sizeable fiscal deficit for 
1957. Up to 1954 the fiscal policy offset the expansion of credit to the 
private sector, but since that time the government has competed with 
the private sector for available bank credit. If the excess of current gov-
ernment expenditures over revenues continues to increase, and if bank 
credit to the private sector expands at the rate of the recent past, the loss 
of exchange reserves will pose some very serious problems.
Indications are that Echandi is very much concerned over the 
future financial condition of his country. In a recent press conference 
(March 5) he said, “our country is facing an economic situation which 
can be serious, above all if coffee prices continue to drop”. He has indi-
cated that he will try to improve existing financial practices and future 
government revenue. In this connection he has announced that foreign 
capital could come to Costa Rica and work on even terms with Costa 
Rican capital.
(2) Coffee
The Costa Ricans are very much concerned over the possibility of 
an additional future drop in world market coffee prices. During 1957 
coffee export prices dropped from an average of $0.70 per pound to a 
low of $0.50 per pound. The decline in coffee prices induced Costa Rica 
to become a very active proponent and signatory of the Mexico City 
coffee pact last October,2 which called for withholding a portion of their 
1957–58 coffee crop in an effort to stabilize coffee prices. Mr. Echandi 
has already stated that coffee prices constitute a vital problem for Costa 
Rica, as unfortunately the economy depends fundamentally on the 
price of coffee. He has announced that he is in favor of the Mexican 
agreement and believes that if the coffee producing countries do not 
defend themselves against the trend towards low prices, the conse-
quences to Costa Rica’s economy will be disastrous.
The 1957–58 Costa Rican coffee crop is expected to be a record-­
breaking crop and the withholding from the export market of a size-
able portion of this crop (the excess over 80 percent of the average of 
the volume of the previous two crop years available for export) could 
prove to be an overwhelming financial burden for Costa Rica’s lim-
ited resources. Our Embassy estimates that approximately $35 million 
will be required during 1958 to finance the 1958–59 coffee crop and the 
1957–58 hold-­over surplus.
2 An English translation of the Convention of Mexico City, signed October 18, 1957 
is enclosed with Foreign Agriculture Service Report 27 from Mexico City, October 28, 
1957. (820.157/10–2857)
