274  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
For this reason, I suggest that you ask DOD for a less definitive 
statement of a long-­range requirement and a more evenhanded treat-
ment of the hardware options, including examination of a 1500 km 
MRBM6 based on the existing Pershing system that could be available 
in the same time frame as GLCM; and an entirely new missile with the 
same range as GLCM (2500 km) that would be available later. How-
ever, you need to be careful neither to endorse a requirement for more 
NATO long range capability while asking for more options nor to give 
the impression that you oppose such a requirement.
	
Enclosure
	
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter7
Washington, May 5, 1978
You and I and Charles Duncan will be meeting with the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff for lunch on Wednesday, May 10th. This will be followed 
by a meeting of the NSC (Dave Jones will be the only Chief present) to 
which Jim McIntyre has also been invited. The announced subject in 
both cases is the Consolidated Defense Guidance. I hope that the bulk 
of the discussion in both sessions will center on the elements of that 
guidance that deal with foreign policy, defense strategy, and defense 
programs, though inevitably the fiscal guidance portion is also likely 
to be touched upon.
If you care to examine some materials in advance of the meeting, I 
suggest that you re-­read the 10-­page summary of the major issues and 
features of the DOD Consolidated Guidance for Fiscal Year 80–84 and 
my accompanying memorandum to you dated 10 March.8 (Copies are 
attached.)
The Chiefs, I think, may be more outspoken than at previous meet-
ings. My impression from their remarks to me is that they value the 
opportunity to interact with you, but have concluded from their past 
experience that these interactions have not produced decisions they 
consider favorable. They were particularly disappointed with the bud-
get decisions in the Fiscal 79 budget—­decisions that some of them saw 
as contrary to the points that they raised in their December 14th break-
fast with you. They are rather pessimistic in general about the prognosis 
6 Carter underlined the phrase “examination of a 1500 km MRBM.”
7 Secret.
8 Attached but not printed is Brown’s March 10 memorandum to Carter, which is 
printed as Document 54.
