Human Rights
185
the subject. Paradoxically, the media in these countries are generally
free to report and comment on human rights issues.
Despite potential local difficulties, posts in Central America,
Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil have asked for speakers on human rights
while USIS posts in Guatemala and Paraguay have asked for exhibits
demonstrating the historic U.S. commitment to human rights. USIS Ca-
racas proposes a television co-production with Venezuelan national
television on the Administration’s human rights policy.
In addition to these field proposals, the Agency will: (1) produce a
television and radio series dramatizing human rights causes out of
Latin American and world history; (2) publish a 12-page insert on
human rights in the regional edition of the Agency magazine Horizons;
(3) publish human rights-oriented books for the Agency’s book transla-
tion program for general distribution and introduction into school cur-
ricula; (4) recommend that high-ranking USG officials who travel to
Latin America be available as voluntary speakers for human rights pro-
gramming; (5) produce a radio and press series to create greater recog-
nition and prestige for international and private organizations devoted
to human rights, with emphasis on the work of the Inter-American
Human Rights Commission.
AFRICA
African nations tend to applaud human rights concepts in the ab-
stract but many fail to put them into practice. Most African countries
are quick to condemn human rights violations elsewhere but are reluc-
tant to make a public denunciation of misdeeds in other OAU
countries.
Given such sensitivities, USIS programming in Africa must be
carefully handled in order to avoid the appearance of preaching and
charges of interference in local affairs. One approach will be to call on
State/CU resources to arrange two-way exchanges of persons in fields
of key importance to human rights, particularly in law and jurispru-
dence. Amnesty International and the American Civil Liberties Union
should be utilized, both as resources for these visitors and as sources of
speakers for overseas programming.
A second approach will be to publicize, especially through the
Voice of America and through post programming in individual coun-
tries, the efforts of African countries such as Botswana, Mauritius and
Gambia which have good human rights records.
Finally, through consultation with field posts, other media
products will be developed to further human rights goals. Exhibits, if
discreetly done, are an indispensable tool in closed societies such as
Guinea and Somalia, where they are often the post’s most effective in-
formation resource.
