240  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
distinguishability position and press the Soviets for acceptance of a 
high range threshold. If the Soviets indicate flexibility on their 600 km. 
range proposal, we should be prepared in the future to eliminate the 
distinguishability requirement and treat all long-­range ALCMs as 
nuclear-­armed.
NSC Staff Recommendation
That you approve Option 2.8
START—Mobile ICBMs
1. Mobile ICBM Sublimit. If the President decides now to change its 
position and allow mobiles, the issue is how should we deal with the 
question of a mobile sublimit when START negotiations resume. There 
is a consensus that, if mobiles are permitted, it is premature to table a 
specific numerical sublimit. If the President decides to maintain our 
current position to ban mobile ICBMs, no decisions on this issue (text 
ends in the middle of page 9) are required at this time.
Discussion
If mobile ICBMs are to be allowed in START, there is consensus that 
some form of sublimit is appropriate, to constrain Soviet deployment of 
mobiles to a level no greater than the U.S. plans to deploy. Verification 
and breakout concerns are not the driving considerations in limiting 
the number of mobile ICBMs once the number of launchers is several 
hundred.
One approach on sublimits is to defer the discussion until the 
Soviets accept our verification scheme. This approach was endorsed 
by the previous administration. A second approach is to propose a 
stand alone mobile ICBM sublimit now. Various values of such a sub-
limit have been considered in the past, with 500–700 warheads being 
accepted by most agencies.
A third approach is to propose a mobile ICBM sublimit, but to 
nest it within the 1540 warhead sublimit for heavy ICBMs. The Soviets 
would be allowed a total of 1540 warheads on heavy ICBMs and mobile 
ICBMs, of which no more than 500–800 could be on mobile ICBMs. This 
approach would force the Soviets to trade heavy ICBMs for mobiles, 
thus forcing tradeoffs between two systems of greatest concern to the 
United States. If the Soviets accept this approach either the first strike 
threat from Soviet heavy ICBMs or the number of relocatable targets 
the United States must hold at risk would be reduced.
On the other hand, some find such an approach difficult to explain 
since it appears to equate the SS–18, the most destabilizing Soviet 
8 Scowcroft initialed his approval.
