594  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
of both Congress and inflation on our FY 1980 budget are yet to be seen. 
We have not yet achieved any major changes in our actual capabilities 
in Europe. The Pact strength grows on the basis of its previously estab-
lished momentum. Soviet theater nuclear forces are being modernized 
to the alarm of our Allies. In addition to strengthening our forces and 
our lift, we must improve our C3, electronic warfare, and intelligence. 
All of this will take time and money, which we have decided to provide 
but whose results do not yet show. The US will need to exercise vigor-
ous leadership in NATO on the LTDP, and especially on theater nuclear 
forces.
(S) Currently, the Soviet Union fields forces that would cost us 
40 percent more than we are now spending annually, and is increasing 
its expenditures by not less than three percent per year. In total, NATO 
and the Warsaw Pact today spend about the same amounts on defense. 
Unless we can match Pact expansion in the long term, we will slide 
behind rapidly in military capabilities across the board. In five years, 
certainly before ten years time, the military balance will in that case 
have shifted adversely. But well before it does, it will cast before it a 
political shadow. In any era of strategic nuclear parity (which is the 
most favorable situation we are likely to have at any time in the 1980’s), 
Soviet conventional capabilities will be more able to threaten our global 
(what used to be called “strategic”) interests.
(S) Because of their larger military forces, and because many of the 
areas for potential military action are near Soviet borders, the Soviets 
hold some advantage over us in mounting limited intervention oper-
ations. Key areas of concern include the Mid-East, Persian Gulf, and 
Korea. We are pressing development of quick reaction plans and capa-
bilities, but remain limited by our strategic lift.
3. (S) I must stress that planned funding will not by itself allow us 
to maintain the precarious military balance that now exists, if the Sovi-
ets continue their trends of the past fifteen years. Our FY 1980 obliga-
tional authority, the best measure of our long term funding, increased 
only 1.7 percent in real dollars over 1979 based on 6.5 percent inflation. 
Our actual FY 1980 obligational authority may show little or no real 
increases over FY 1979. Furthermore, if current inflation rates persist, the 
preliminary budget targets for FY 1981 would allow for no real growth. 
It is unlikely that we will be able to sustain even current force levels 
should this no-­growth policy continue. At the same time, opportunities 
exist (and will have to be exploited in any event) for greater Allied con-
tributions to military efforts, better cooperation with them to produce 
greater effectiveness, and several areas of opportunity for exploitation 
of technological breakthroughs. If we can exploit these various poten-
tial advantages while avoiding political dissolution in our alliances and 
the perhaps even greater risk of an attitude, associated with some in the
