however, but Dr. Tsur reiterated the statement, saying that it was not the purpose of the Conference to consolidate the debts, much less the purpose of the Technical Committee, and that the plan of having the consolidation done by a special organ under the control of the Chinese Government had had the approval of the Cabinet. Mr. Tripier of the French Delegation, read a formal statement of the French Government’s attitude on debt consolidation (see page 28 of Minutes of the Technical Committee Meeting of November 21, 1925). Mr. Evans endeavored to ascertain whether the material debts would be included in the statement which had been promised from the Ministry of Communications but Dr. Tsur was not prepared to answer. In closing the meeting Dr. Tsur said that he had communicated informally the information concerning the plans of the Chinese Government to create a special organ to consolidate the debts and that he could not, under his instructions, give formal notice. Sub-Committee on Rates of Surtaxes, First Meeting, November 23, 1925. The Sub-Committee on Rates of Surtaxes held its first meeting on November 23, 1925, and, on motion of Mr. Hioki, Admiral Tsai was elected chairman. Admiral Tsai presented a revised list of “B” grade luxuries (see Annex I next after page 14 of Minutes of November 23, 1925). He also read a statement in explanation of the Estimated Revenue of Proposed Surtaxes from Foreign Imports (see page 3 of Minutes of November 23, 1925). Mr. Strawn remarked that it seemed to him that before they could come to an understanding on rates they must know to what purposes the revenues would be put and what amount would be required. Since there had been no report from the subcommittee on Purposes, he asked whether it would be appropriate to discuss the different rates before they knew the amount and purposes for which the money would be used. He expressed the view that under the Washington Treaty the Conference was required to consider what were the means of abolishing likin, how much money would be required for that purpose and how much money would be required to help China out of the present financial difficulty. He considered that the Delegates could interest themselves in these questions without any intention of interfering with China’s internal affairs. Dr. Yen agreed with Mr. Strawn, but pointed out that the Conference was really going beyond the terms of the Washington Treaty and were negotiating a new treaty. For that reason Dr.
