566  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
with nonprofessional technicians, mechanics, and maintenance men. 
Shortages of skilled technicians will persist, but the number available 
should increase significantly as a result of the high proportion of scien­
tific and technical subjects in the lower grades and the current empha­
sis on specialized training after lower school.
80. Soviet scientific facilities, in terms of financial support, organi­
zational direction, and number and quality of laboratories, are generally 
adequate for the utilization of scientific talent. In a few fields the USSR 
has facilities which are comparable, if not superior, to corresponding 
installations in the West. The continued expansion of these facilities, 
as well as a Soviet attempt to establish a broader geographic base for 
research activities, is indicated by the establishment of new scientific 
centers in Siberia. Announced plans call for completion in 1960 of a new 
“scientific city” near Novosibirsk, consisting of 13 research institutes 
and a university now under construction. Another center near Irkutsk, 
consisting of eight research institutes, is scheduled for completion in 
1965. The regime is making a major effort to attract competent scientific 
personnel to the new centers by creating favorable living conditions, 
establishing excellent research facilities, and assigning certain eminent 
scientists to these locations.
81. Some shortages of complex research instruments are believed 
to exist, particularly in low priority fields, but they probably do not 
significantly hamper research programs of major importance. For 
example, although the US has a considerably larger number of high 
speed electronic computers than the USSR, the number of computer 
hours actually utilized for high priority research is probably nearly the 
same since Soviet computers are not called upon to serve routine busi­
ness and government functions. Although Soviet-­produced equipment 
is often the equal of foreign-­produced equipment and occasionally its 
superior, the USSR will probably continue to import equipment for rea­
sons of expediency. During the next five years the USSR will continue 
to improve its capabilities in scientific instrumentation. Increasing 
numbers of highly qualified engineers will probably be made available 
for the development and production of scientific equipment, and an 
increasing amount of equipment will reflect original design concepts. 
However, we believe that the West will continue to lead in the develop­
ment of scientific equipment except in fields given very high priority 
by the Soviets.
82. The Satellites have made significant scientific contributions to 
Soviet technological development in only a few areas, principally in 
optics, electrical measuring instruments, communications equipment, 
synthetic fibers and pharmaceuticals. We expect an increase in Soviet 
use of Satellite resources in some basic theoretical and experimental 
fields. The Council for Economic Mutual Assistance (CEMA) recently
