International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
587
Roosevelt Administration, and the present type of import-control pro-
gram has existed for almost twenty years.
Currently the industry is most concerned about rapid surges in
specific products from other nations which can cause rapid loss of jobs
and production. Their proposal is to allow trade to grow, but not in
such disruptive ways—and that is the principal thrust of this paper.
As I explain in an attached outline of how this paper developed,3 it
began after the industry had secured an overwhelming vote in the
Congress to take textiles out of our MTN tariff negotiations, which leg-
islation you vetoed on November 11, 1978. Your veto message (which I
also enclose)4 was the starting point for this program.
Several agencies have expressed a distrust of this industry and its
associated unions, fearing that once a program such as this has your ap-
proval they will renege on their promises to help us in the Congress.
They recommend that failure of the MTN for any reason should imme-
diately terminate the program we have set out upon. I do not believe
this is realistic, but I do agree that we should think about how to handle
certain elements of the textile trade should the MTN not be approved. I
feel certain that a number of agencies would want to review where we
stand in that event.
As a whole, the document we have drafted addresses a number of
the industry’s problems in a coherent way, giving them a degree of cer-
tainty for annual planning purposes. This, as you know, is crucial to
good business operations. Most of what is in here is already in place or
is on the way even without this paper. There are, however, several con-
cepts enunciated which represent the first statement of these policy
directions:
(1) A global evaluation of imports. This is a promise that when we
look at potential quantitative restrictions for a supplier we will con-
sider the total volume of imports of the category of goods in question
from all sources. This recognizes that a sharp increase from one source
which would not cause us to respond if it were the only such increase,
would in fact cause action to be taken if it occurred on top of substantial
and disruptive levels of imports from multiple sources.
(2) An evaluation of the growth of imports from our three principal sup-
pliers (Hong Kong, Korea and Taiwan) in the context of the growth of the do-
mestic market. Currently growth accorded these major suppliers is de-
termined without explicitly requiring a review of the condition of the
U.S. market, often giving imports a disproportionate share of the
3 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Chronology of the Admin-
istration’s Textile Program.”
4 Attached but not printed is the November 11, 1978, press release announcing
Carter’s veto of H.R. 9937. See footnote 2, Document 196.
