1980 917 SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Harold Brown, as Chairman, asked that the group comment on the Defense paper that provided an estimate of the size and scope of the collective Defense program facing the free world and the United States, as its leader, if current national security guidance is to be followed and its goals achieved.2 Brown explained that the purpose of the paper was to set the context for consideration of the Defense budget. (C) The paper developed estimates of what it will take in ground, air, and naval forces of the U.S. and allies to produce various force level ratios between them and the Pact in critical geographical and functional areas. This also describes what these forces will cost the U.S. and its allies in money and manpower to implement current national security policy. The quantitative estimates are developed for two levels of assurance that the free world’s forces are adequate; for two dates, 1987 and 1995, for achieving either level of assurance; and for two levels of contributions by the rest of the free world—­one reflecting more equitable sharing of burdens by all nations, and an alternative where other nations continue on their current course. [4 lines not declassified] (C) Brown first asked Stan Turner for an estimate of Soviet reactions to the various free world build-­ups presented. Turner replied specifically with regard to the chart on strategic balance indicators that showed a steady and substantial Soviet advantage from ’75 to ’81, followed by a significant erosion of that Soviet advantage from ’81 to ’87. (The indicator in question presented the ratio of residual forces following a Soviet first-­strike counterforce and a U.S. retaliation counterforce.) Turner noted that this particular indicator showed a much earlier and more dramatic erosion of the Soviet advantage than other analyses with which he was more familiar. Others agreed with this observation. (S) Brown replied that this particular indicator is merely one measure. It emphasizes the effects of U.S. advantages, particularly in cruise missiles and SLBMs, and perhaps overemphasizes them. [9 lines not declassified] (S) General Jones thought the paper useful as a whole but thought that it understated our difficulties in the strategic balance. In particular he thought that looking only at ratios of residual strategic force obscured the heavier weight of the Soviet attack in megatons, assumed away current deficiencies in C3, and assumed that the U.S. five-­year program would continue on schedule contrary to what has happened in the past. Russ Murray said that some monies were added in the financial accounting to cover C3 improvements and other modernization, and that needed readiness improvements were funded before 2 See the attachment to Document 214.
