At the Three Power Conference at Geneva in 1927 the British Delegation proposed that cruisers be thus divided into two classes; those carrying eight inch guns and those carrying guns of six inches or less in calibre. They proposed further that eight inch gun cruisers be limited to a small number or to a small total tonnage limitation and that the smaller class of cruisers carrying six inch guns or less be permitted a much larger total tonnage, or, what amounts to the same thing, to a very large number of cruisers of this class. The limitation proposed by the British Delegation on this smaller class of cruisers was so high that the American Delegation considered it, in effect, no limitation at all. This same proposal is now presented in a new and even more objectionable form which still limits large cruisers which are suitable to American needs, but frankly places no limitation whatever on cruisers carrying guns of six inches or less in calibre. This proposal is obviously incompatible with the American position at the Three Power Conference. It is even more unacceptable than the proposal put forward by the British Delegation at that Conference not only because it puts the United States at a decided disadvantage but also because it discards altogether the principle of limitation as applied to important combatant types of vessels. Much of what has been said above as to vessels in Class 3 of the Franco–British agreement applies with equal or greater force to Class 4. The American Government can not accept as a distinct class of submarines those of over 600 tons leaving unlimited all submarines of 600 tons or under. Six hundred ton submarines are formidable combatant vessels. They carry the same torpedoes as are carried by larger submarines and of equal destructive force within the radius of their operation. They can also be armed with guns of five inch calibre. The United States would gladly, in conjunction with all the nations of the world, abolish the submarine altogether. If, however, submarines must be continued as instruments of naval warfare, it is the belief of the American Government that they should be limited to a reasonable tonnage or number.
