Afghanistan and, even without waiting for a solution in Afghanistan, to pursue explorations about TNF talks, and about how to prepare for SALT III. Perhaps Washington will conclude that talks could be held behind the scenes at the SCC [CCD?], augmented and kept in continuous session for the purpose, or perhaps you would wish to develop a scheme along the lines of my suggestion for a new joint committee of experts to explore the possibilities for balanced unilateral restraint. In any case I think we should settle on some coherent proposal and then begin to explore it, also in an unofficial way through “personal ideas” which I would float or some other means. (Of course we have to be careful not to appear too eager on interim observance of SALT, lest they decide to shake us up by indicating doubt that interim observance can continue very long.) D. One other avenue for exploring some of these ideas informally would be to send Averell Harriman over on a private visit.5 He would have access to Brezhnev and other leaders and would be taken seriously, but he could also discuss these issues informally and unofficially. If Harriman is too political and too closely connected to the administration, you might consider someone else, perhaps a businessman with good connections here. E. The measures we have taken thus far have had a three-fold purpose: showing the Soviets that such behavior cannot be cost-free; deterring future aggressive behavior; and, ideally, forcing a roll-back in Afghanistan. The first point we will have made if we stay the course. If we succeed in the second one—deterrence—the effort will have been well worth it, particularly if we were able to gain believable commitments against future such actions. But realistically we must admit, for purposes of choosing our long-range approach to relations with the Soviets, that the third may not happen. We may be faced with a fait accompli, the continued existence of [garble—Afghanistan] as an [garble—East?]-European style—or even Mongolian-style—satellite. In our actions and our public pronouncements about the duration of the measures we have taken, we need to balance that possibility against the intractable need for that minimum level of dealings with the Soviets which will head off nuclear confrontation. F. It is nevertheless just barely possible that the Soviets are having second thoughts, and we should not neglect opportunities to explore the possibility of a relatively quick reversal in Afghanistan. If there is any such opportunity, it might lie in the early deadline created by the Olympics. Therefore if we are going to give the Soviets any prodding 5 No record of a visit by Harriman to Moscow was found.
