Arms Control and Disarmament  1417
introduction of essential new weapon systems requiring new warheads 
and lead to the stockpiling of unproven weapons.
4. Nothing that has taken place in the recent past has, in the opin­
ion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, been cause for a basic change in the mil­
itary factors which influenced the views expressed by the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff in earlier memoranda. Rather, a strong adherence to the present 
United States position on the subject of Nuclear Testing seems plainly 
indicated. Accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff request that you convey 
the views expressed in this memorandum to the President.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
N.F. Twining
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff
358.	 Letter From the President’s Science Advisory Committee Panel 
on Surprise Attack to Killian1
August 15, 1958
Dear Dr. Killian:
We are transmitting herewith a report of a Panel of the President’s 
Science Advisory Committee concerned with the problem of surprise 
attack. This report is entitled, “Some Technical Aspects of the Problem 
of Surprise Attack.”
Since July 15 when you initiated the work of our Panel, we have 
given as intensive study to the problem of surprise attack as we were 
able to give in the time available. Our report discusses some of the 
technical aspects of this extraordinarily complex subject, and has bene­
fited materially from briefings which were heard jointly with the Inter-­
Agency Working Group studying this same subject.
We especially wish you to note that our study has indicated sev­
eral problem areas, both technical and military, that will require further 
intensive study. Some of these problems could not be carefully consid­
ered because of the limits of time. Others, it was felt, went beyond the 
charter of our activity.
1 Source: Transmits the Panel’s report (not included). Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower 
Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assist­
ant for Science and Technology.
