It should further be pointed out that this Government could not consider itself bound by
any such provision as that included in the penultimate paragraph of Article Thirteen,
which states: “In cases where a violation has been duly proved, no further transit
license shall be granted to the offending State without the previous consent of the
Council of the League of Nations.”
With respect to the question of maritime supervision, the question would naturally arise
whether this Government could recognize the right of the High Contracting Parties to
visit and search on the sea outside of territorial waters.
The Department understands from Article Eighteen that the supervision contemplated
applies to “native vessels of less than five hundred tons.” From the foregoing it appears
unlikely that vessels flying the American flag would be affected. As far as the
Department can judge from the facts before it, it would not be disposed to object to the
exercise of supervision of this character by other Powers within certain specified zones
adjacent to their own territories with respect to native vessels of the tonnage suggested,
but it would not undertake to participate in any such supervision.
As already suggested the Department is inclined to believe that it would not serve any
useful purpose for this government to become a party to a convention comprising
provisions similar to those in Articles 9–24. However, as this government is a party to
the Brussels Act of 1890 which contains somewhat similar provisions the Department
would be prepared to give careful consideration to the question in the event that you
should affirmatively recommend the signature of such a convention.
ARTICLE 25
“In time of war, Articles 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 shall be considered as suspended
from operation until the restoration of peace so far as concerns any export
and transit of arms, munitions or implements of war to or on behalf of any of
the belligerents recognized as such by the exporting country and the countries
of transit, provided such recognition has previously been communicated to
the other High Contracting Parties.”
You may wish to consider a modification of this Article similar to that suggested in the
case of Article 3, paragraph 1, namely the substitution for “the exporting country” of
the phrase “one of the High Contracting or Adhering Powers”.
It is further suggested that “and the countries of transit” be eliminated from Article 25.
It is felt that this question of the right of the third State to stop munitions in transit
destined for a recognized belligerent should be dealt with according to the applicable
principles of international law. A third State, because it does not recognize the
belligerent in question, should not be placed under any special obligation by this
Convention to stop arms in transit.
