International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
51
weaker economies and governments too shaky to resist protectionist
pressures) to follow suit. The liberal trading regime that we have nur-
tured since the end of World War II may not be able to stand the strain.
If the US cannot hold the line against domestic pressures, we can
hardly expect the Italians, British and others with payments problems
to do so.
—Import restrictions will hit the developing countries in East Asia
and Latin America hardest. These are the newest entrants to the US
footwear market. They took seriously our advice to diversify exports
and seek out new product lines to promote their development. Now
that they have done so, and quite effectively, we threaten to shut the
door. Our credibility in the North/South dialogue will suffer as a re-
sult. Since we are about to renew important discussions in the CIEC,
the timing would be most unfortunate.
—(If it is argued that there would be no cutback in Italian exports,
and only a slight cut in imports from Brazil, Spain and other LDCs.)
This misses the emulation point. Also even if our restrictions are rela-
tively mild, they will be seen as a blow to key industries in these coun-
tries, and will stimulate other countries to impose restrictions which
will have a more severe impact on the shoe exports, and other exports,
of these countries.
—We cannot ignore the impact that trade restrictions will have on
our own export sectors. By limiting imports, we are not only asking our
consumers to pay higher prices, but also to the extent that our trading
partners retaliate or demand compensation we are forcing other US in-
dustries and workers to bear the financial burden for protecting the
shoe industry.
—Also, the supposed gains in domestic jobs in the shoe industry
may be less than expected. The lawyers representing the Mexican foot-
wear manufacturers have gathered data showing that there is a high
correlation between Mexican shoe production and movement of illegal
aliens into the US. They assert that if we limit Mexican shoe exports, the
workers will simply move across the border and market their skills in
Los Angeles and elsewhere. A certain percentage of domestic jobs sup-
posedly gained by import restraints would thus be lost to illegal aliens.
