166  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
I am really going to need help and guidance if and when it comes 
to a discussion of “no force”. In this regard, I note from recent Tai­
pei Weekas the Nationalists are still carrying out attacks on shipping 
and various other minor actions, as well as over-flying the mainland. 
Frankly I just don’t see what my reply is going to be when after I raise 
the question of no force they raise the question of these Nationalist 
actions carried out with equipment we have supplied them. Also when 
I raise our treaty and supplementary understandings with the Nation­
alists on offensive action, I do not see what I say when they allege this 
simply goes to prove that these Nationalist actions are being taken with 
our approval. I hope you all will have some good ideas for me.
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
133.	 Memorandum from Dulles to Phleger1
Washington, August 25, 1955
I have looked at Johnson’s 607 of August 24. I do not like the idea 
of making our authorization of the Government of India dependent 
upon an agreement of the PRC as to American civilians.
It seems to me that the right position for us to take and the most 
effective position from the standpoint of world opinion is that having 
learned that there exists question in some minds as to the practical abil­
ity of Chinese in this country to return to the China Mainland if they 
so desire, the United States voluntarily asks the Government of India 
to serve to assist them and to transmit funds to them to finance the 
expenses of their return.
If this is the right thing to do, then I think we should do it. If it is 
not the right thing to do, then I do not think we should do it merely 
because the Chinese Communists want us to. I think we should keep 
whatever we do on a purely unilateral basis of ourselves doing the 
right thing even though we are willing to make a joint announcement.
Therefore, if we are to break or have a recess, I would like to see us 
announce unconditionally that we intend to invite the Government of 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2555. Confidential. A copy 
was sent to Sebald. Dulles initialed “JFD” above his typed signature.
