World Hunger and Food Policy
695
Tab B
Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to the Members of the World Hunger
Organizing Committee9
Washington, July 7, 1977
SUBJECT
World Hunger Initiative
The following are my views on Ms. Tuchman’s discussion paper
on the President’s interest in developing a World Hunger Initiative.10
I. The Mechanics of the Study
A. Process. The PRM process is an appropriate policy review mech-
anism for the National Security Council. It is not clear that this process,
in the absence of early public involvement (i.e., a Washington Confer-
ence on Food and Nutrition), is the best approach to deal with com-
peting domestic and international interests, both within the gov-
ernment and the private sector, and promote high-level attention and
the attendant constituency in the development and execution of a U.S.
policy. Therefore, I would propose that this initiative not be viewed as
a study, but instead, a policy review which includes involvement by
the private sector.
B. Participants. Several other agencies should be included in the
process. Suggested additional agencies would include: Department of
Transportation which effects domestic price and therefore distribution
of international food commodities; the Department of Labor; and
perhaps ERDA.
In addition, I believe it is sufficient to mention HEW and not also
the National Institutes of Health. Also, I believe that mention of the
State Department is sufficient and that special consideration of the U.S.
representative to the United Nations which falls under the organiza-
tional framework of the Department of State is unnecessary.
With respect to the Executive Office, my view is that the Office of
the Special Assistant to the President for Health Issues should be in-
cluded in the consideration of the institutional entities included as
major participants in this review. The Office of Drug Abuse Policy
(ODAP) is not relevant to this issue. In addition, and transcending my
9 No classification marking.
10 See footnote 3 above. Reference is to an earlier draft of Tuchman’s PRM proposal,
which has not been found.
