International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1035 food, housing, education, health care, and job opportunities for all its citizenry.8 It has been essentially against this background that some of the most densely populated countries have applied or are now considering applying a range of incentives or disincentives to motivate people to have smaller families. Incentives have usually taken the form of inducements or rewards for those accepting sterilization. Disincentives have usually taken the form of administrative measures which have the effect of penalizing those with large families. Incentives and disincentives have been effectively used, but they sometimes lend themselves to abuse. AID funds are not involved in the direct payment of incentives or disincentives. Several countries are now launching, or are considering launching, programs of community incentives. For example, Indonesia has recently started a program, with World Bank support, of rewarding those villages (within certain designated districts) most successful in lowering fertility rates. Ideally, the rewards would take the form of providing prize-winning villages or communities with whatever the residents of those villages had collectively decided in advance they most wanted, meanwhile having that potential prize kept constantly before public attention. This type of incentive has particular merit both in terms of increasing flows of assistance to villages and in terms of stimulating motivation, including peer pressures, for lowering birth rates. Although less subject to abuse than individual incentives, community incentives will require careful administration to be equitable and effective. D. Population and Food Assistance. As brought out in Section I of this Report, we recognize the likelihood of a growing gap between food and population in certain parts of the world, and therefore the need for actions, additional to those currently being taken, to increase food production and to lower population growth rates. The United States has a particular responsibility to support efforts to maintain a viable balance between food and population. We are the largest food exporter of the world and by far the largest supplier of food assistance, currently providing twelve times as much food aid as population assistance. Clearly, it is in our interest as a major food and population assistance donor to help ensure that (1) our food
