National Security Policy 677 aircraft; five minutes of indecision cost us 200 bombing aircraft; every SAC base covered with snow costs us about one aircraft per min­ ute. A complete failure of BMEWS—­perhaps because of jamming or spoofing—­would cost us about 450 bombers. It is worth noting also that, especially in the early period, as we respond to the immediate warning that an attack is in progress, those aircraft which escape destruction do so by winning a race against the attacker. The force that escapes, therefore, is not exactly of our choosing, but is selected by the fortunes of war. It may not therefore conform in its structure to a pre-­determined war plan; it may have to be regrouped and re-­directed to targets for which it is adequate, according to information and a plan developed during the attack. It may be felt that the emphasis in this chart upon warning is unrealistic because the chart assumes an attack which, apart from the last minute warning we get from BMEWS or a bomb burst, takes us completely by surprise. But the situation postulated here is really quite otherwise. In fact, this chart assumes a great deal of strategic warning; indeed a background of international tensions so ominous that the United States has undertaken to bring the whole of SAC to a peak of readiness. There remains only enough equivocation in the picture of Soviet intent to keep us hopeful that war can be avoided. In such a situation, we cannot respond freely to possible false alarms, lest we on the one hand fall victim to a feint and get caught on the ground after our forces are recalled, or on the other hand provoke an otherwise avoidable attack upon us. We must then await a clearly overt act by the Soviets to remove our doubts. This act could be the penetration of BMEWS, or the burst of a bomb on one of our bases. In sum, the assumptions here about our readiness seem to be favorable to us rather than otherwise. A second important feature of our position is that we are greatly sensitive to the mass, coordination, and technical excellence of a Soviet missile attack. Sensitivity to mass hardly needs more emphasis than the difference between the upper and lower curves already gives it. Let us also recognize that the lower curve does not call for a Soviet attack as large as the national estimates leave room for. Sensitivity to coordina­ tion prevails throughout the period. To see the sensitivity of these estimates to the coordination of the Soviet attack, we have tried to estimate what would happen to our air­ craft if the Soviets mounted a perfectly coordinated missile attack—­by perfectly coordinated, I mean an attack in which 100 to 300 missiles arrived in the first five minutes. In mid 1960, the lower blue curve would be depressed to about 130 aircraft. In mid 1961 it would go vir­ tually to zero. In late 1963, even with the full operation of BMEWS, the curve would go to less than 200. At the other extreme, of course, in a
