616
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
conflict and tension. The last day will see a private meeting and the
SALT and other document signing and this should provide a positive
conclusion to the summit.
In effect we have something of a drama—at first things are good,
then they turn tense, then finally there is a positive resolution. The
toasts and your remarks at the signing ceremony will be the key indi-
cators of what is transpiring and they must be carefully crafted with
that in mind. At the outset of the talks we must be careful to moderate
expectations. The theme of SALT plus serious consultations, as we
agreed previously, is the best note to strike before the summit begins.17
U.S. Strategy and Objectives
This wary and uncertain setting makes it important that we con-
centrate on those objectives that have the greatest potential for longer
term impact on the U.S.-Soviet relationship. I would define the central
strategic objectives of the Vienna Summit in the following terms:
1. To consummate SALT II and to initiate SALT III;
2. To give additional impetus to further U.S.-Soviet arms control
measures (such as ASAT, MBFR, CTB, CAT, etc.);
3. To make not only Brezhnev but also the Soviet leaders who
stayed at home more aware that the U.S. sees the Soviet Union as insen-
sitive to our vital interests or concerns in such regions as the Middle
East, Southern Africa, Cuba, and Vietnam.18
In effect, your objective is to demonstrate that the United States
can successfully manage the contradictory positive and negative tend-
encies in our relationship. To do that, you must articulate a conception
of a reciprocal and realistic detente, based not only on the common in-
terest in avoiding nuclear war, but also on genuine respect for each
side’s security concerns.19 This requires that you be candid with the So-
viet leaders about our deep dissatisfaction with Soviet performance on
a whole range of security-related issues. They must be made to under-
stand that to move in a constructive direction now, U.S.-Soviet relations
must involve positive Soviet behavior on key security issues of para-
mount U.S. concern.
At the same time, Soviet leaders must be convinced that our com-
plaints do not derive from a desire for bad U.S.-Soviet relations, or from
17 The President underlined “SALT plus serious consultations.”
18 The President underlined “our vital interests.” He also underlined “Middle East”
and “Southern Africa” and wrote “ok” under each. He underlined “Cuba” and “Viet-
nam” and placed a question mark under each. In the right-hand margin next to this point,
he wrote “W. Europe, S. Asia, N. Africa, Mediterranean.”
19 The President underlined the phrases “common interest in avoiding nuclear
war” and “respect for each side’s security.”
