the idea expressed to me in German. I trust that the Department, in view of
the Austrian difficulty, will see no real objection to it. It is possible,
however, that the Department may prefer to stop with the word
“retroactively”. Under our practice “estimated duties” are always imposed
by collectors on merchandise cleared through the customs, and it sometimes
happens that these “estimated duties” do not always agree with the amount
of duties ascertained to be due several months later on final liquidation. I
frequently encountered such cases in my former practice. It might be wise
on this account, in order to avoid diplomatic complaints against the United
States, to stop with the word “retroactively”, though if the entire wording as
proposed by the Department be preserved, the addition of the words “but it
is understood that prohibitions on importations existing at the time the
imports are cleared through the customs may nevertheless be applied” will
not, I think, weaken the principle for which the Department is contending.
As to paragraph 4 of this article as proposed by the United States, the
Austrian Government objects to the words “with respect to commodities,
formalities and otherwise”. The word “commodities” does not appear
anywhere in the International Agreement of November 3, 1923, and the
words “and otherwise” are thought to be too vague. The sentence
beginning: “In the event of rations and quotas being established, etc.” is
objected to as suggested by the United States. There is no objection in lieu
of this sentence to adopting this phraseology, to wit: “In the event of rations
or quotas being established for the importation or exportation of articles
restricted or prohibited, the formalities required by the importing or
exporting country shall not be such as to prevent an equitable allocation of
the quantities of goods of which the importation or exportation is
authorized”. This is in conformity with the language found in article 3 (e) of
the International Agreement of November 3, 1923. This sub-paragraph 3 (e)
was a French proposal. It will be observed that it simply stipulates that the
formalities shall not be such as to prevent an equitable allocation, etc. This
language is somewhat limited and the Department may regard it as
unsatisfactory. My attention is drawn to the fact that at the recent World
Economic Conference at Geneva in its final report there was a
recommendation that there should be a new definition of the most favored
nation principle, and Dr. Schüller tells me that the American delegates were
prominent in advocating this. The Austrian delegates make the point that
