September 18–December 16, 1978 293 After discussion, Brzezinski outlined a memo5 which he asked Quandt to prepare to be ready for the President by no later than Monday6 night. This is to contain our strategy for the negotiation with much fuller emphasis on how we bring in the West Bank/Gaza framework and engage the Palestinians, the latter in a way that “doesn’t blow the Israelis right out of the negotiation.” Quandt will do a first draft as directed by Brzezinski and bring it to the meeting7 scheduled with all of you for 11:00 Saturday. Brzezinski noted that Sanders had announced at a breakfaster with the press that the question of an exchange of letters with the Israelis on settlements is dead. He asked if this were true and answered his own question aloud by saying Begin seems to understand that if he sends us a letter, we will send ours and it will be much stronger than he wants. We may be alright if Dayan confirms to us that he will hold to the public statements he made following his return to Jerusalem after Camp David. If we can trust the Israelis, “those are good enough.” Brzezinski thought we should not say anything about Blair House8 until we have the President’s approval. He is going to Camp David (2:00 p.m. Friday and will not be back until Monday night). The issue can wait until then. Pending the President’s decision, Blair House should not be mentioned in telegrams. The Egyptians and Israelis have no need to know just now; it is sufficient that we have invited them to a site in Washington. There was agreement that Murray could best represent DOD on the U.S. delegation and that Lawrence would be available in a supportive, more technical role. 5 Quandt and Saunders drafted the memorandum, “Launching West Bank/Gaza Negotiations: A Proposed Course of Action,” on October 9. The paper set out four main objectives for U.S. policy: 1) “to continue developing the concept of the Palestinian self-governing authority;” 2) “to explore concrete proposals for engaging some moderate Palestinians and the Jordanians if possible” in negotiating an agreement that will “call elections and establish the self-governing authority; 3) “to persuade the Saudis and a cluster of moderate Arabs that we have created an opportunity for a Palestinian solution that they cannot afford to dismiss;” and 4) “to persuade the Israelis” to “move quickly and dramatically to demonstrate that they are prepared to live at peace with Palestinian neighbors who genuinely govern themselves” and that “we will work with them to assure enough controls through the transitional period so that there will be no threat to Israel’s security.” (Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 4, unlabeled folder) 6 October 9. 7 No record of this meeting has been found. 8 See footnote 4, Document 78.
