United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 79 PARAGUAY In March 1956 the Paraguayan government made its first real effort to cope with an inflation which had raised the cost of living nine-­fold between 1950 and 1956. The Paraguayan currency unit, the Guarani, was devalued to 60 to the dollar from the multiple rates previously existing and a move was made to reduce internal monetary expansion. This program was not successful and in August 1957 a more complete stabilization program was put into effect in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund which made available a standby of $5.5 million. Since then this standby has been twice renewed and now expires in August 1960. To date Paraguay has drawn a net amount of $2.75 million under the International Monetary Fund standby arrangements, making available a total of $2.75 million which can still be drawn. Under its agreement with the International Monetary Fund Paraguay devalued the guarani to about 12C to the dollar and set up a unified free exchange system. Internal stabilization measures were put into effect involving a limitation on Central Bank advances to the government and the private sector and the curtailment of credit by the commercial banks. As a result of these stabilization policies the rate of monetary expansion was reduced from an average of about 70% per annum from 1946 through 1955 to about 20% in 1958 and about 3% for the first nine months of 1959. The cost of living only increased by about 3% in 1958. Production and investment have shown moderate increases since 1957 as compared with the stagnation of the pre-­stabilization period. Expert income has increased and there has been a modest improvement in the foreign exchange position of the country. Gold and dollar reserves which were virtually non-­existent in 1956 are now at about $3 million. In the past few months, however, there has been some deterioration in the internal financial situation owing to an undue expansion of Central Bank credit. An International Monetary Fund Mission is now in Paraguay discussing this matter with Paraguayan officials in an effort to bring that government to closer conformity with the stabilization objectives. The United States Government has not participated in this program directly on a financial basis although it has made available economic development credits through the Development Loan Fund. Under Public Law 480, Paraguay has received $2.9 million of agricultural surpluses by an agreement signed in May 1956.
