Arms Control and Disarmament 1513 well as to advance the state of the art in this field. The Panel should indicate the extent to which nuclear tests would be required in this test program.” Mr. Herter asked how airtight a control system was necessary. Mr. Irwin replied that we would be fairly well protected by a method of random inspection under which the Soviets would not know when a particular event would be inspected. Mr. McCone asked whether the new data would cause any difficulties with Annex 1 which is based on the Report of the Conference of Experts. Mr. Keeny replied that Annex 1 on the control system as drafted should cause no difficulties, since there is provision for inspection of all unidentified events above 5 KT regardless of number and 20% of those below this figure. In fact, he thought that when it became apparent to the Soviet Delegation that the number of unidentified events would rise considerably from the figure anticipated in the Geneva Report, they would probably be quite willing to carefully examine possibilities of reducing this number of potential inspections by various techniques including perhaps establishment of a threshold. In response to a question by Mr. Herter as to our tactics should the Soviets reject the new data and maintain the continuing validity of the Experts’ Report, Mr. Farley said we could then stand fast on the require­ ments of inspection. He felt, however, that the Soviet politicians would be quick to realize that the implications of the new data would have to be considered now, rather than after they had signed a treaty commit­ ting themselves to a large number of inspections. Mr. Herter noted that since we are committed to monitoring underground tests, we seem to be faced with the necessity of either an increased number of inspections of unidentified events, establishment of a threshold or improvements in instrument techniques or number of control posts. Ambassador Wadsworth said the Soviets would surely answer any suggestion for a threshold with heavy propaganda that this showed the U.S. had never been sincere about wanting to stop nuclear tests. Dr. Killian, however, suggested that the Soviets them­ selves might find a higher threshold advantageous. General Loper said that Secretary Quarles felt a threshold might be the best solution to the problem. Mr. McCone said he wished to express the concern of the AEC about the effect on our testing program of overly prolonged negotiations which involve de facto suspension without an agreement. He urged that thought be given to alternatives and to what action we might take should the Soviets resume testing.
