it would impel them not to do anything about the treaty until the purposes
and conditions had been agreed upon. A lengthy discussion ensued
particularly on the subject of purposes and Mr. Oudendijk pointed out that
the purposes which the Conference should agree upon would be exactly the
same for the 2½ per cent surtaxes as they would be for the surtaxes of the
interim period. Mr. Oudendijk also said that he concurred with Mr. Hioki’s
view that the Japanese proposal would accelerate the work of the
Conference. Count de Martel also shared this view. However, the chairman
remained obdurate. In the course of the discussion Mr. Strawn expressed the
view that the purposes and conditions connected with the 2½ and 5 per cent
surtaxes were likewise applicable to the interim surtaxes and that there was
no difference in principle as between the two. Count de Martel then pointed
out that if they proceeded to levy the surtaxes without having agreed upon
the purposes, they were no longer within the scope of the Washington
Treaty. Mr. Hioki continued to press his resolution and said that there was
no better evidence of the bona fide intentions of the foreign Delegates than
the discussions about the 90 million dollars; that this controversy showed
the difficulties under which the foreign Delegates were attempting to do
their work. Failing to arrive at an understanding on this point, the sub-
committee passed on to a discussion of the provision relating to custodian
banks. The chairman opposed the Japanese proposal on the grounds, as he
had said before, that he did not wish to prejudice a future case by discussing
a question then which ought only to be discussed later. He considered that
this question belonged exclusively to Committee III, which Committee, Mr.
Oudendijk pointed out, had not then been created. Mr. Oudendijk concurred
in the suggestion that the question properly belonged to Committee III, if
and when appointed, and he suggested to Mr. Hioki that the paragraph
should not be insisted upon at that time. On the understanding that the
question would be taken up and discussed in another Committee, therefore,
Mr. Hioki said that he was willing to defer the question. In summing up the
action taken by the subcommittee, the chairman said that they had
practically agreed on everything except the proviso and the period of three
months’ notice.
Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of the Washington
Surtaxes, Fifth Meeting, March 18, 1926.
