880 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement weaknesses in the continental air defense system. This system cannot be expected to counter completely an all-­out attack of the magnitude which the Soviets are capable of launching against the North American continent. Solutions to the following problems are being pursued on a high priority basis as funding permits: 1. Procurement, training and retention of the highly skilled per­ sonnel required by modern and increasingly complex defense systems. 2. Detection of airborne vehicles at very high and very low alti­ tudes, and development and availability of weapons which can be effectively used at these altitudes. 3. Development and implementation of measures to overcome or counteract enemy electronic countermeasures. 4. Development of a system which can be used in the defense against enemy ballistic missiles. 5. Development of an effective and integrated sea surveillance sys­ tem which will provide for detection, identification, and tracking of surface ships and submarines operating within missile launching range of the North American continent toward the goal of development of the capability to establish control over the submarine or surface ship prior to the launching of its missile. 6. Identification and engagement of hostile aircraft as far from our borders as possible. 7. Means to shorten the long lead time involved in the completion of programmed improvements to the systems. [Omitted here is the remainder of the report.] 212. Memorandum of Discussion at the 423d NSC Meeting1 Washington, November 5, 1959 SUBJECT Discussion at the 423rd NSC Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, November 5, 1959 Present at the 423rd NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; and 1 Source: Agenda item 4: Status of National Security Programs as of June 30, 1959: The Atomic Energy Program. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—5 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
