Bulgaria 269 between the US and Bulgaria and expressed the hope that contacts such as this would lead to the further development of relations. 9. On behalf of Foreign Minister Mladenov, Zhivkova invited the Secretary to visit Bulgaria at a time convenient to him. The Secretary thanked her for the invitation and expressed the hope that he would be able to accept it at some point. Noting that Bulgaria would celebrate its 1300th anniversary as a state in 1981, Zhivkova indicated that a visit to Bulgaria then would enable the Secretary to join in the celebration. Bulgarian UN Ambassador Yankov quickly added that if the Secretary could come sooner, then so much the better. Vance 93. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, October 29, 1979 SUBJECT Meeting with Lyuben Gotsev (U) Attached is the memcon of the meeting which Marshall and I had on Friday, October 26, 1979 with Lyuben Gotsev,2 Head of the North American Section of the Bulgarian MFA. As I suspected he would, Gotsev did raise the issue of a meeting between Lyudmila Zhivkova and the President and expressed disappointment that the President had not been able to see her. He also made a strong pitch for MFN, arguing that recent progress on family reunification and visas had removed any remaining obstacles to Sofia obtaining MFN. (C) I had the impression from the meeting with Gotsev that the Bulgarians do genuinely desire an improvement in relations and that they feel that they have met us more than halfway with the recent resolution of the family reunification problems, etc.—a view shared by George Vest as a result of his recent trip to Sofia. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security File, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 6, Bulgaria: 1/77–1/81. Confidential. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Brement, Blackwill, Rentschler, and Griffith. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum: “Let’s explore a single initiative as a test. ZB.” 2 Brzezinski had approved the meeting with Gotsev on October 24.
