310
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ganda. Dissident activity appearsto be confined to preparing statements
for release and reviving underground cultural activities. End summary.
2. Activities of Charter 77 supporters. It still appears as if the main
objective of human rights activists in marking the 10th anniversary
will be issuance of declarations reaffirming fidelity to calls for greater
freedom that distinguished the 1968 Dubcek regime. The declaration
stemming from recent meeting of Charter 77 and Polish human rights
activists near the CSSR-Polish border is a case in point (Prague 2096).3
But perhaps most interesting event this week has been commencement
of so-called “living room theatre” production of the Shakespeare classic
Macbeth, organized by playwright Pavel Kohout and starring Pavel
Landovsky and Vlasta Chramostova—all of whom are denied the possi-
bility of openly pursuing their professions as a result of identification
with 1968 reforms and Charter 77. On August 7 and 8, “rehearsals” of
the play took place in apartments of Charter supporters. Embassy
P&C Admin. Secretary and wife of PAO attended first session; DCM
and wife attended the second. In both cases, they were only non-
Czechoslovaks invited. Kohout told DCM those involved in the play
were trying to continue their professions in this way despite efforts of
the regime to deny them work opportunities. Kohout added that there
would be no more performances like these until after 10th anniversary.
In September, he expects such living room performances to occur on
a more or less regular basis. Meanwhile, as Embassy had expected
(reftel) he and other Charter 77 proponents plan to depart Prague this
week to remain in country homes until the end of the month.
3. Regime preparations. The Husak regime appears to be approach-
ing the 10th anniversary with increased confidence of being able to
cope with any contingency that may arise. Accent is on business as
usual, with major attention at the moment to formal opening of new
Prague metro lines on August 12. On the other hand, we hear security
forces have been put on alert until the end of the month. Efforts are
going forward to ensure that Charter 77 personalities will be generally
dispersed on August 20–21. And MFA is tightening visa controls, partic-
ularly with regard to non-accredited foreign journalists, who will prob-
ably be few and far between here for remainder of August. Austrian
DCM Karas say 3 Austrian correspondents have already been refused
entry to cover the anniversary. NY Times correspondent Andelman,
3 In telegram 2096 from Prague, August 8, the Embassy reported that members of
Charter 77 and the Polish Committee of Workers’ Defense (KOR) drafted a statement
on the ten-year anniversary of the Soviet invasion. The Embassy concluded that, while
the document was primarily interesting as evidence of direct contacts between Charter
77 and KOR, it would “presumably cause security officials in both countries some
additional heartburn.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780325–0650)
