sacred duties; and that if in fulfilling it, the teachers had been guilty of unbecoming
exaggerations, they should have been curbed according to law, but not in any other
way. The matter rested with this disagreement. There is no adequate disproof of the
grounds upon, which Chile acted and it does not appear that she misinterpreted her
laws, which cannot be regarded as being in excess of her authority. It should be added
that the record indicates that Chile has not failed to provide appropriate educational
facilities for the people of the territory. There are a few complaints in the record to the
effect that the authorities in the Chilean schools have discriminated against Peruvians
or endeavored to force Peruvians to elect Chilean nationality, but these complaints are
not sufficiently numerous or well sustained to be accepted as establishing any
deliberate policy.
The Expulsion of Peruvian Priests. Both Chile and Peru are Roman Catholic countries
and there is no question of an attempt to introduce an alien faith. The question is
essentially one of ecclesiastical patronage. As the Peruvian Minister said in his note of
November 14, 1900:
“In Peru, as in Chile, the Catholic Church lives and prospers under the
protection of the age-old system of patronage. According to the latter, the
Civil Government, in the territorial divisions which are permanently under its
control, intervenes in the creation and subdivision of dioceses, or parishes, in
the creation of apostolic or other vicarages, in providing ecclesiastical
benefices, and in all other functions closely related to the temporal attributes
of States. Patronage, furthermore, irrespective of the source from which it is
derived, is a prerogative intimately associated with the exercise of national
sovereignty. Its action upon certain churches continues until sovereignty over
the territories in which they are located ceases, and it is not transferred except
when sovereignty itself is finally and permanently transferred. In respect to
Tacna and Arica, neither has Peru ceded final control and sovereignty over
them, nor has Chile acquired either of these; the moment has not arrived,
therefore, to consider that the attributes of Peru, as patron in respect to these
churches, are at an end.”
 
The Chilean Foreign Minister in his answer of January 19, 1901, took issue with this
position. He said:
“Your Excellency recognizes that in Peru, as in Chile, the Catholic Church
lives and is developed under the auspices of the secular regime of patronage.
“This principle being established, it only remains to ascertain to which of the
two Governments pertains the exercise of patronage for the provision of
