Afghanistan also includes many other items including TNF and the Middle East, about which the Soviets also feel strongly. It is odd that our China policy has dropped out of this litany, for example as recited by Gromyko to me last week.4 It probably means that they think talking about it may be counter-productive, that we are too far along the road of working closely with China to be deflected by words. 6. Of course the great disadvantage of the Soviet system is that there is no built-in balance, no one to point out emphatically and publicly the fallacies in the skewed views of the old men in the Politburo. If they decide it is right to try to “teach the U.S. a lesson,” to show the U.S. electorate that failure to cooperate with the USSR will lead to a dangerous situation, there apparently is no one to explain to them that such a policy is highly counter-productive if not dangerous. Since they pride themselves on judging others by actions, not words, it is up to us by our actions to get across to the Soviet leadership that they have misjudged us: we are not trying to do them in, but we cannot be stampeded by a show of strength. 7. In these circumstances, the President’s cool but determined approach may have to continue for some time. We will want to show our capability for moving along lines that could hurt their interests on key sensitive points—China, international isolation, a possible new arms race. At the same time we must make clear that we are not trying to destroy the Soviet Union; we are prepared to talk arms control; and we are prepared for the present to move slowly on the above sensitive points to see if the Soviets will change their behavior. We may have to continue along these somewhat limited and constraining lines for several months, if not longer. My guess is that they will not show much desire to talk seriously until they become convinced of the inevitability of President Carter’s re-election. Meanwhile, it will be important not to move too quickly on matters they consider affect their vital interests, particularly China. 8. I want to offer a few thoughts on setting ourselves up for confrontations. A. There is an obvious danger that one side or the other will make a mistake about the other side’s determination and perception of its own interests. It is of course vital to communicate one’s own perception of vital interests, as the President has done with regard to the Persian Gulf region. A great danger arises however if we assume that the threat of direct military combat between Soviet and American forces will cause Moscow to back away and that therefore only token forces will be required to make the threat valid. 4 See Document 186.
