711.5112France/249: Telegram
[Document 16]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, April 10, 1928—3 p.m.
102. In response to the inquiry submitted to M. Briand through Claudel and
quoted in my 97 April 5, 1 p.m. to you,26 Claudel came in Saturday27 and
reported the receipt of a message from M. Briand which he said he
construed as a definite acceptance of our proposal as to procedure, namely,
the immediate submission of the entire correspondence to the other Powers
for their consideration and comment. I thereupon prepared the note of
submission which has been telegraphed to you. On Monday, Claudel having
in the meantime left Washington for the south, Count de Sartiges delivered
a textual copy of M. Briand’s message28 of which Claudel had only a rough
draft when he called on Saturday. The final and complete text of M.
Briand’s message as presented by De Sartiges leaves me frankly in some
doubt as to M. Briand’s precise meaning because the message opens with a
flat acceptance of the idea of submitting to the other Powers the entire
correspondence but in a subsequent paragraph speaks of reservations,
referring in that connection again to M. Briand’s note of March 30. I fully
appreciate that M. Briand feels obliged to proceed in this important matter
with quite understandable caution and am assuming that the reiteration of
his position in that part of his last message subsequent to the first paragraph
was intended only to guard against any possible misunderstanding of his
general attitude and not at all as an objection on his part to the submission
of the whole matter to the other Powers in the manner which I proposed.
In these circumstances it is my intention, already publicly expressed after
the conversation with Claudel on Saturday, and also explained to De
Sartiges yesterday, to transmit to the four other Powers for consideration
and comment the correspondence, together with the general form of treaty
which has been the subject of the correspondence. I consider that such
action is taken on the following definite understanding so far as France is
concerned:
