Romania 531 178. Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department of State1 Bucharest, April 8, 1977, 1015Z 2608. Subj: PARM—Annual Policy and Resource Assessment— Part I. Ref: A. Cerp 0001; B. State 38356.2 A. U.S. interests in Romania We define the principal long term U.S. interests as: —Maintenance and enlargement of Romanian independence from the Soviet Union. —Reduction of restrictions on human rights. These interests are not new. What I see as new is a willingness to pursue both of them with greater energy, despite some greater risks. They need to be seen in the context of a still broader U.S. interest, valid not only in Romania but throughout Eastern Europe, of undermining Soviet control—carefully, but consciously. B. Overview Current policies have helped promote these interests. The successes are there: Two way trade is up. Substantial numbers of family reunification cases are solved, useful high level visits take place, new agreements are signed. We are in for a rough period, however, as we try to promote simultaneously both our principal interests, with only one of which Ceausescu is in accord. Romanian-Soviet relations—For the past decade or so, Romanian leaders for their own reasons have pursued a policy of relative independence from the Soviet Union. They have shown themselves adept at sensing the limits of Soviet tolerance, while at the same time maneuvering adroitly to expand them. We do not foresee a basic change in this policy, in spite of a heavily publicized “rapprochement” with the Soviets beginning in mid-1976, nor do we foresee an internal economic crisis of such magnitude that Ceausescu would have no place to turn except to the Soviet Union, paying whatever cost in terms of Romanian independence the Soviets demand. A post-Brezhnev succession struggle would undoubtedly cause considerable uneasiness here, but we 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770123–0556. Secret. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Budapest, Moscow, Prague, Sofia, Warsaw, Bonn, Athens, Ankara, Tel Aviv, Paris, West Berlin, USNATO, USUN, and pouched to Munich. 2 In telegram 38356 to all diplomatic posts, February 19, the Department issued instructions for the format of the annual policy review and resource assessment. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770060–0449)
