466 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV the issues will be: timeliness of response, ALCM penetration capability, and flexibility, e.g., in other than a spasm-­type war. 2. Modernizing the ICBM force through MAP basing has some strong rationale: to enhance crisis stability and restore the more stable pre-MIRV situation in which an attacker could not expect to destroy as many missiles as he expended; to preserve the Triad concept of well-­ hedged forces against non-­silo targets and the unique contributions of the ICBM force; and, to discourage the Soviets from seeking strategic superiority. There are also a number of concerns with the MAP concept. Among the most severe are MAP verification (not addressed in this study) and the sensitivity of the system and its cost to a responsive threat. A SALT agreement limiting Soviet MIRVed ICBM throw weight and RV fractionation could go a long way toward ensuring that a MAP system would be affordable. Without a fractionation limit, 10-­ year system costs could rise above $40B. Without a SALT agreement, there would be no way to confidently bound the problem, i.e., the Soviets could continuously expand the threat and we would be forced to expand the MAP system for a given level of survivability. 3. [1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified] 4. Deploying MX in existing Minuteman silos would be by far the least expensive way to modernize our ICBM force. Among the potential advantages of this option are: (1) it would be a clear response in kind to Soviet acts, and might encourage them to accept more arms control and [14 lines not declassified] 5. [1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified] 6. Survivability “requirements” for a MAP system should not be based on throw weight or EMT, especially when comparing the adequacy of different concepts such as MX in MAP vs. Minuteman in MAP vs. the common missile in MAP. Retaliatory effectiveness against the current [2 lines not declassified] B. From the Cost-Effectiveness Analysis: 1. A minimum modernization force (i.e., a force with Trident SSBNs, the Trident I missile, and ALCMs on 169 B–52Gs, but without MX, Trident II or CMCs) would cost roughly $100B in constant 1979 dollars ($45B when discounted at 10%) through the year 2000. The cost of greater modernization would depend primarily on: (1) decisions regarding what constitutes essential equivalence, (2) our requirements for hard-­target capability, (3) the risks we were willing to accept regarding breakthroughs in ASW, air defense and pre-­launch destruction of bombers, and (4) the strategy we chose for influencing the Soviets on arms control. 2. All forces considered in this analysis, including the minimum modernization force, would provide more non-­silo retaliatory
