558 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX in the Middle East. We have no special interest, no strategic or economic interests in the Middle East. We do trade with the Arabs and with Israel but we have no special interests. Our main interest is in peace. We consider our security to be in danger if peace is not reached. We want peace and understanding in the Middle East and we are working hard for it but we are not mediators in the Middle East. We try to provide an open channel for the two parties to use, so that they can transmit ideas, can see each other’s point of view, and we sometimes add our own, but we are not mediators. President Ceausescu saw both Begin and Sadat, and now they have met each other.3 Our estimation is that this is an important step for peace and for understanding, but I have travelled many times between Jerusalem and Cairo and I know how deep the lack of confidence between the parties is. Now a first step has been taken toward building some confidence and we think it is a good step. The next main step is to go and convene the Geneva Conference, but the parties needed to help prepare it directly, and we think that has been done. There are now some differences in the Arab world. President Carter: I’ve noticed! Foreign Minister: We see a dramatic situation, and my President believes it is the right time to help Sadat. Sadat has support at home and support from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Sudan, Morocco, Jordan, and Tunisia. In fact, this represents a majority of the Arabs. Against him is Assad, and some others like Algeria and the PLO. I can say that President Ceausescu has sent a message through an emissary to President Assad and to Arafat. He sent Mr. Poungan, but we have no news yet of his meetings. If we receive news, we will tell you.4 Our interest is to try to calm the situation. We understand the Syrian and PLO position but we want them to calm down. Now is the right moment to go for peace. If we lose time, there will be dangers. 3 Ceausescu visited Egypt May 11–12 to hold bilateral discussions with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat. In telegram 8153 from Cairo, May 13, the Embassy reported that the primary purpose of the Ceausescu visit seemed to be bilateral and economic issues, and that there was little evidence that Ceausescu was carrying any special message from either the Soviets or the Israelis. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770170–0772) Begin visited Bucharest August 25–30. See Document 183. 4 In telegram 416 from Bucharest, January 19, 1978, the Embassy reported Aggrey’s conversation with Andrei. Andrei informed Aggrey that Ceausescu had decided to send Pungan to Cairo and Jerusalem, and that asked Vance meet with Pungan confidentially in either one of the two cities. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850101–2417) Vance responded in telegram Secto 1055, January 20, 1978, that a meeting in either city would be impossible and that he would prefer not to meet during the trip, but rather brief the Romanian Ambassador in Washington upon his return. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840148–1549) Vance and Pungan met January 24 in Washington. See Document 190.
