National Security Policy 1095 that aspect of the mobilization program relating to support for foreign economic policies in connection with the last item on the Council’s agenda. He then turned to survival and recovery planning. [text not declassified] This program, however, is presently being restudied. The $3.8 million in the FY 1961 budget to begin the protection program was not appropriated. Reliance, meanwhile, is being placed on the [text not declassified]. Governor Hoegh noted that construction would begin in December on the first of the underground regional control centers. He stated that $212 million in medical supplies were dispersed in 43 fed­ eral warehouses or pre-­positioned in the states and local communities. Studies indicated that these supplies had a high probability of survival. He referred to the President’s approval of a new plan covering require­ ments for medical supplies estimated at $723 million. Concluding his presentation, Governor Hoegh returned to the fall­ out shelter program. He stated that the basic elements underlying our present policy were sound and workable. It was too early to demonstrate their success or failure. He again emphasized the importance of federal example. Without it, he stated, a more forceful policy and one involving a greater degree of federal financial responsibility would be required. The President referred to Governor Hoegh’s description of the stockpiling program and asked whether the stockpiles, in particular those of strategic metals, were located outside the population centers. Governor Hoegh stated they were located in 240 communities. Much of the materiel, he said, was in the area in which it would be processed; much, of it was in or adjoining a city. The President expressed the view that the stockpiles ought to be away from the cities and that they did not constitute much of a reserve if they were in the cities. Mr. Gray pointed out that existing policy called for construction of fallout shelters in new federal buildings but that it excluded mili­ tary buildings. It was not clear, Mr. Gray stated, whether we had plans for inclusion of such shelters in military construction. In response, Governor Hoegh said that Secretary Gates had on July 28 issued a pol­ icy which was in line with the policy on non-military construction. It provides for surveys and for incorporation of shelters in military build­ ings as funds are available. Secretary Douglas observed that no funds have been available for this purpose although they had been requested. Governor Hoegh said that the new DoD policy was helpful and could be quoted in dealings with Congress. The President inquired as to whether Governor Hoegh thought it would be helpful if he were to build a shelter in his own home. He referred to previous discussion of this question and to the possibility that such action might just scare the American people. Governor Hoegh expressed the view that such action would be helpful in stimulating the people to take action. He noted that Prime Minister Diefenbaker is building himself a shelter and so are twenty-­five governors. Secretary
