World Hunger and Food Policy 733 contribute to one Agricultural/Food analysis.”; and TAB C 3) Peter Bourne’s memorandum of September 14, 1977 proposing that he chair the world hunger working group.4 While in many obvious areas there is an overlap between the world hunger issue and the development of a food and agricultural policy, both foreign and domestic, there are also marked differences. Thus, in developing a coherent national and international food and agricultural policy it seems clear to me that the Department of Agriculture should be the lead agency because of the technical issues involved—price supports, set-asides, international agricultural agreements, buffer stocks, import quotas, and the like. With regard to world hunger and Peter’s September 14 memorandum, I have no opinion on whether the world hunger working group should be co-chaired by Peter and NSC, as recommended by NSC and OMB, or simply by Peter. Peter makes a valid point in arguing that NSC leadership would be viewed by some interests as linking the issue to military security.5 It seems to me that this working group, perhaps under Peter, might serve as a subcommittee to the broader food and agricultural policy coordinating committee. This would permit Peter to run the world hunger study but would let the broader and more technical food and agricultural policy issues follow Secretary Bergland’s lead. It would also tie the two activities together. I have met with Peter6 and he agrees with the suggestion that you form a subcommittee on world hunger with the subcommittee reporting directly to you rather than through the overall committee. Also, I have checked this with Agriculture and they see no problem. 4 See Document 227. 5 In a September 16 memorandum to the President, Brzezinski indicated his support for creation of the Working Group on World Hunger and commented that the NSC Staff had collaborated with Bourne’s office concerning the proposals outlined in Bourne’s September 14 memorandum (See Document 227). He noted, “Since I desire to continue that collaboration most effectively, I do wish to reiterate my interest in seeing the NSC designated as the co-chairman of the Working Group. The Department of State as well as the Office of Management and Budget supports this view.” (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box HE–6, Executive, HE–3, 9/30/77–12/31/77) 6 According to a typewritten note attached to another copy of Eizenstat’s memorandum, Eizenstat and Bourne met on September 24. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger [1]) No record of this meeting has been found.
