(See page 15 of Minutes of November 17 for American draft of preamble of treaty relating to Tariff Autonomy.)97a Committee on Provisional Measures, Fourth Meeting, November 19, 1925. The Fourth Meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures was held on November 19 and the first business before the Committee was the Resolution on Tariff Autonomy adopted on November 17 by the Subcommittee of the Committee on Provisional Measures, the text of which may be found in the resume of the proceedings of the Subcommittee meeting of November 17. Mr. Strawn formally moved the adoption of the Resolution, but Mr. de Warzée, Count de Martel, Mr. Cerruti and Mr. Ewerlöf, while all expressing their personal pleasure that the subcommittee had evolved so satisfactory a formula, announced that if it was intended that the Resolution should be incorporated into a treaty it would be necessary, under the Constitution of their respective governments, to refer the instrument to their home governments for approval. Mr. Bianchi, Mr. Garrido, Mr. Michelet and Mr. de Kauffmann expressed their satisfaction with the terms of the Resolution and the chairman expressed his thanks on behalf of the Chinese Delegation and said that he felt that the Delegates should congratulate themselves on having set a milestone for fair and just dealing between China and the participating Powers. Dr. Wang thereupon declared the Resolution unanimously adopted by the Committee on Provisional Measures, notwithstanding several Delegates had given notice that ratification would be required on the part of their Governments before it could become effective as a part of a treaty. Dr. Wang suggested that while they were sitting as Committee II they might consider the Resolution as having been passed by both Committees I and II since the personnel of the Committees was the same. Dr. Yen expressed his appreciation of the work of the subcommittee and proceeded to explain in detail the Purposes to which the proceeds would be put. Dr. Yen said that since some of the Delegates not present at the Washington Conference might unintentionally give the word “purposes” a significance not intended by those who introduced it, he thought it well to give a brief historical review of its origin and significance. After reviewing the discussion which took place at the
