588 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX While both leaders want to proceed to wrap up the Treaty, both are having trouble with their respective political constituencies and this fact has increased the perceived advantages for both in bargaining hard over the remaining issues. In addition, events in Iran have probably caused both sides to stiffen as they have perceived increased risks in concluding a peace Treaty, resulting from potential area repercussions of what is happening in Iran. Israel is more concerned than ever about giving up Gulf of Suez oil fields without ironclad Egyptian supply commitments. It is also more determined than ever to ensure that Egypt will be firmly committed to peace and normalization regardless of developments elsewhere in the area, before giving up the security of its position in Sinai. The Egyptians for their part stress increasingly that the peace Treaty must not isolate Egypt and thus weaken its ability to play a leading role for stability in the area. They therefore want the Treaty package to include credible evidence that they are not making a separate peace. As a result of these perceptions, the “linkage” issue has taken on even greater importance for both sides, with Egypt determined to maximize, and Israel to minimize the linkage between their bilateral Treaty and implementation of the Camp David Framework for the West Bank and Gaza. Following Atherton’s trip, it is clear that both sides see all of the remaining issues, and not just the West Bank/Gaza side letter and ambassadorial-exchange question, as “linkage” issues which can only be dealt with and resolved together, if they are to be resolved at all. This, more than the intrinsic difficulty of any one of the three Treaty text issues Atherton tried to resolve, probably accounts for their unwillingness to make significant headway during his trip. The linkage question is fundamental to both sides, and they want to see how all of its parts will be dealt with before trying to resolve any aspect of it. It is also clear that, if these issues are to be discussed with any hope of success, this must be done at the political level. Begin must be intimately involved on the Israeli side, either through moving the talks back to the summit or through ministerial-level talks in the area where Dayan can have frequent direct access to him. It is also clear from Atherton’s talks that the Israeli Government is so locked into its rejection of the proposals5 I took to Jerusalem from Cairo last month that it cannot agree to any of them in their present form. It is equally clear, however, that Sadat cannot agree to any major departures from the substances of those proposals. The issues we confront, therefore, are twofold: (1) whether we can find new ways to 5 See Documents 157 and 158.
