Arms Control and Disarmament  1339
Strauss said that this would not be clean and his medical advisors con­
sidered too many air bursts would be dangerous. Mr. Killian said that 
his Committee had studied this question and had found that even if all 
the warheads of our estimated anti-­ICBM requirements were fired, the 
danger point in radiation would not be reached. He pointed out also 
that we would have a polaris warhead and thus have warheads for 
solid fuel missiles.
Mr. Dulles said that in considering these various technical judg­
ments it must be remembered that unless in the next few months we do 
something to show that we are for reducing arms, we may over the next 
few years lose Japan, Germany and the United Kingdom. Do we want 
further refinement of nuclear weapons at the cost of moral isolation of 
the United States? He pointed out that action on nuclear testing was the 
only real possibility in the areas that he had reviewed earlier. If there 
were other new ideas with the appeal of “Atoms for Peace” or “Open 
Skies” he would welcome them. We can push the surprise attack zones, 
but there are limits to what these can do for us especially in Europe. 
The outer space proposal was imaginative, but it appears now that the 
possible loss to United States national security would be greater than 
the psychological gains would justify.
Mr. Lovett said that he thought United States agreement to suspend 
nuclear testing would have a doubtful effect. We want an adequately 
inspected test agreement. Whatever the Russians may have said, they 
will not agree to what we consider adequate inspection. We will thus 
lead into another argument about how much inspection is needed, in 
which we may well not gain in world opinion, which will think we are 
putting obstacles. He thought also that the first question was not disar­
mament but whether there should be a summit meeting. General Smith 
said that he did not think we could avoid a summit meeting. Mr. Lovett 
thought that the foreign ministers meeting would be crucial and that the 
western position on an agenda should be carefully worked out and the 
intentions of the Soviet Union tested there.
General Gruenther suggested that an authoritative scientific study 
be obtained establishing conclusively that test fallout was not a danger 
to health. Admiral Strauss and Mr. Killian pointed out that the National 
Academy of Sciences and United Kingdom Medical Research Council 
had already done this. Ambassador Wadsworth said that a report on 
radiation by the United Nations Scientific Committee would be forth­
coming shortly. While it was overwhelmingly reassuring, the one or 
two sentences about the genetic danger would in his opinion get all the 
headlines, and be used against us.
Mr. Killian said that he was concerned that the fallout from HARD­
TACK, even though not dangerous in itself, will aggravate the situation 
and will give our opponents a chance to play up the health hazard.
