1368  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
11. Safeguards. Favorable results of the feasibility study of tamper-­
proof instruments to reduce manpower requirements are expected in 
June, but the numbers, recruitment, and training of sufficient person­
nel for a world-­wide inspection system remains a formidable problem. 
No difficulties have been encountered by Commission teams that have 
inspected the start-­up and initial operation of the six U.S.-­built reac­
tors now in use abroad, although the over-­all question of inspection 
remains potentially a serious political problem.
12. If the Agency is unable to acquire special nuclear materials 
on financial terms and conditions more favorable than are available 
to Members through other sources, principally the United States, the 
IAEA will have difficulty in competing with bilateral programs. By law, 
the U.S. can make special nuclear material available to the Agency only 
on terms comparable to those offered domestic users in the U.S.
13. Although the IAEA is progressing with the tedious tasks of 
organization, firm U.S. leadership will be required to assure that the 
Agency moves into its programmatic phase as soon as possible.
14. Bilateral Agreements. The United States’ bilateral program, inau­
gurated in 1954, is about complete; and it is not anticipated that many 
more important bilateral agreements will be negotiated. The emergence 
of regional groups and the International Agency will require a reassess­
ment and possible modification of the bilateral program in order to be 
assured that the institutional approach most beneficial to the interests 
of the United States is given priority. Such a re-­assessment will have to 
take into account the bilateral programs of other nations, such as the 
U.K. and Canada.
SUMMARY OF ACTIVITIES
15. United States Domestic Program. The power reactor development 
program of the United States has moved ahead on a broad front both 
from the standpoint of technology developments and industrial par­
ticipation. Progress has been made in the whole range of effort, from 
laboratory research on new materials and processes to construction 
and operation of large-­scale commercial nuclear power plants. Particu­
larly important is the continued promise of the boiling water and pres­
surized water family of power reactors. A new and promising type of 
power reactor is being developed which uses organic fluids for cooling 
the fuel elements, avoiding corrosion of fuel elements and the problems 
of induced radioactivity in the coolant.
16. As of this time there are seven power reactor experiments and 
one completed prototype power reactor in operational status in the 
United States. The prototype plant, the Shippingport Atomic Power 
Station, at its designed rating of 60,000 electrical kilowatts net, is pro­
ducing more electricity than any other individual reactor in the world.
