Options Identified US dollar as a reserve currency would cause difficult adjustments in the near term, but could prove beneficial over the long haul to the United States. [portion marking not declassified] Monetary and Trade Problems Theoretically, the US order blocking Iranian monetary assets should not impede international economic transactions with Iran. In practice, however, confusion on the part of the Iranian banks and general uncertainty over the present situation among Western traders and bankers—largely inspired by intemperate and ill-chosen remarks made by high Iranian officials—are creating problems for all parties concerned. As a result, oil revenues continue to flow into blocked accounts, and some foreign companies and banks are unwilling to accept letters of credit (L/C) for exports to Iran. [portion marking not declassified] The reluctance of international bankers to open new lines of credit with Iran stem from fears of not being paid. In particular, the banks do not wish to comply with the Iranian requirement that L/Cs be drawn on Iranian banks. They are afraid that possible massive loan defaults by Iran would trigger blocking orders by West European governments, tying up almost all of Iran’s official assets. Some of the L/Cs that are being opened apparently carry risk premiums. [portion marking not declassified] Chaos in the Iranian banking system has made it difficult for Tehran to sort out trade financing problems; inadequate—sometimes conflicting—instructions are being sent to customers, branch banks, and correspondent banks. Lack of management and direction as a result of the flight of key personnel are largely responsible for the chaos. Indeed with careful management, the solution to the US asset block would be relatively simple: the Iranian government need only maintain deposits exclusively in non-US banks and cancel outstanding letters of credit that would channel money into blocked accounts. However, given the erratic behavior and uncoordinated efforts of Iran’s government and banks, the process of establishing new, orderly relations with non-US banks is taking considerable time and depends heavily on assistance from foreign bankers and traders. [portion marking not declassified] Iran-US Financial Dispute Spreads Because of their dependence on OPEC oil, US allies are trying to remain neutral in the US-Iranian financial hassle while generally voicing support for release of the hostages. [1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified] Western Europe and Japan West European central banks and governments are attempting to maintain positions of strict neutrality on financial issues in the face of mounting difficulties. [9 lines not declassified]
