300 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 18. I continued that release of Americans in jail was something over which third power could have no control. It was something which only action by his government could resolve. I had asked him few, simple, straightforward questions on aspects of implementation on which I did not consider I had received satisfactory replies. I had asked for specific information whether each American in jail had been informed of terms agreed announcement. I understood there was general arrangement for giving news to people in jail by which they would normally have been informed. It certainly should be possible for his government to let us know and confirm whether this had been done with respect informing American prisoners of agreed announce­ ment. I had also asked for information on arrangements for such per­ sons to communicate with office UK Charge. It should certainly be possible for him to tell me whether these arrangements had been made, also whether arrangements had been made so that UK Charge could interview these persons. These were all matters which we considered very important in implementation of announcement. 19. I then said he had spoken of stalling. When we came here August 1, I had proposed arrangement which would immediately and quickly dispose of first item so that we could go on to second item. I proposed simply that his government take same action as my govern­ ment: that is, any action necessary permit Americans leave. This would have been simple, straightforward, natural way solve this problem. His government did not see fit accept this proposal. I did not intend go back over that argument, but delay was due entirely his government’s unwillingness accept that reasonable, simple proposal. Of 29 Ameri­ cans in jail August 1, who [all?] were still there. 20. Wang replied since we now have agreement, question is imple­ mentation of agreement. There was no question about fact that meas­ ures would be further adopted as provided in agreed announcement. He had made it very clear actions and measures his side had adopted to implement agreement, and they showed that his side was earnestly implementing agreement. This was a matter of common sense used in implementing agreement. He was not a machine like a gramophone to play the same record every time I asked. He wanted to point out clearly that there was no provision in the agreement that any particular individual would depart from China at a certain fixed year, month, day or hour. If we had been able to arrive at an agreement providing for a precise date and hour on which each individual would return, what would have been the use of an agreement of the kind we concluded? This agreement had concerned civilians and not the return of criminals or law offenders. He stated I had said that all Chinese who desired return could. However, how could they return in a matter of weeks? He again requested me for a complete list of names and addresses of
