206 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX not let him reply. Finally, I asked Prime Minister Begin to please let Barak answer. What Begin had asked Sadat was: ‘Do you think the Knesset should be under pressure when they vote? Sadat said, ‘No, I don’t think the Knesset should be under pressure.’ This was the total conversation. Begin therefore assumed that he could write any language he wanted concerning negotiations versus the Knesset vote. “I asked Barak to come with me. Begin excused him, and we went to my cabin. I checked their language very carefully and finally thought of a way to say it that was in the final letters and satisfactory to both Begin and Sadat. Susan [Clough] typed it up. I wrote a note to all our people: ‘This is the exact language to be used. Do not use any other language on or off the record.’ We firmed the issue up, literally at the very last minute. Only then did I realize that we had finally succeeded.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 243) The note referenced by Carter, and to which he appended the handwritten message quoted above, reads: “There is one major issue on which agreement has not been reached. Egypt states that agreement to remove Israeli settlements from Egyptian territory is a prerequisite to a peace treaty. Israel states that the issue of the Israeli settlements should be resolved during the peace negotiations. Within two weeks the Knesset will decide on the issue of the settlements.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, 9/10–27/78) Following this, the three leaders and their staffs departed Camp David by helicopter for Washington. At the White House, a nationallytelevised signing ceremony was held in the East Room from 10:31 p.m. to 11:04 p.m on September 17. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) The three leaders signed the final versions of the two “framework” documents, “A Framework for Peace in the Middle East Agreed at Camp David” and “Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel.” For the texts of these two documents, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pages 1523–1528. Accompanying the two framework documents were nine letters: a) a September 17 letter from Begin to Carter informing the President of his intention to submit the question of Israeli settlements in the Sinai to the Knesset; b) a September 17 letter from Carter to Sadat transmitting to the latter Begin’s letter; c) a September 17 letter from Sadat to Carter affirming the Egyptian position on Israel’s Sinai settlements; d) a September 22 letter from Carter to Begin acknowledging letter (a) and attaching letter (c); e) a September 17 letter from Sadat to Carter affirming the Egyptian position on the status of Jerusalem; f) a September 17 letter from Begin to Carter affirming the Israeli position on the status of Jerusalem; g) a September 22 letter from Carter to Sadat acknowledging letter (e) and informing Sadat that he intended to transmit it to
