1150 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 467. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany1 Washington, March 26, 1980, 1459Z 79756. Subject: Vance/Genscher Letter on Argentine Supply. 1. Entire text confidential. 2. We continue to believe that it is extremely important that the FRG not relax its safeguards conditions for nuclear supply to Argentina. The failure, thus far, of the FRG and Argentina to reach agreement on safeguards has increased pressure within the FRG for such relaxation, and we understand a decision was made at a meeting of the Nuclear Cabinet to go ahead with the reactor sale to Argentina, trying to obtain the best safeguards conditions possible. Accordingly, the Ambassador is requested to call on Genscher as soon as possible and deliver the following letter from the Secretary: 3. Quote: Dear Hans-Dietrich: I am writing you about our common goal of limiting the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation which remains an objective of transcendent importance. Since we last discussed this issue it has been the subject of continuing contact between our two governments, and I wish to underline my support for the strong position which I understand your negotiators have been taking in their discussions with the government of Argentina. However, I must tell you quite frankly that I am concerned over the information which Ambassador Hermes gave Ambassador Smith March 192 regarding the decision by the Nuclear Cabinet to weaken your position. Let me stress my conviction that your posture on safeguards conditions should remain firm. We believe that a policy of patient firmness is correct, realistic and in our common non-proliferation interest. I am asking Ambassador Stoessel to deliver this letter personally and to stress our desire to cooperate with you in this effort. We will also 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800153–0662. Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to Bern, Buenos Aires, and Ottawa. Drafted by Anne Stefanas (OES/NET/NEP) and Erwin Von Den Steinen (EUR/ CE); cleared by Pickering (OES), Allen Locke (S/AS), William Salmon (T), George Suchan (PM/NPP), Charles Van Doren (ACDA/NP), L. Paul Bremer (S/S), Ronald Bettauer (L), George Jones (ARA), Robert Galluci (S/P), John Whitman (ARA/ECA), and Ward Barmon (EUR/RPE); and approved by Vance. Stoessel delivered the letter on March 28. (Telegram 6079 from Bonn, March 28; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800157–0130) 2 The information Hermes provided Smith is in telegram 75515 to Bonn, March 21. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800145–0474)
