84  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
I said to the Secretary that I had looked into the matter and found 
there were two reasons for the low participation. Latin America had not 
submitted many worthwhile projects and the second reason was that 
they got a low priority since there was a general feeling that they were 
much more creditworthy than other areas and should have applied 
to the Eximbank. In any case, I stated, it was an unfortunate article to 
come out on the eve of the President’s departure to Latin America.
The Secretary stated that it should not be forgotten that Latin 
America gets a very high percentage of Eximbank loans. Was that not so?
I responded that normally Latin America does get a high percentage; 
about 40% of all Eximbank loans. However, the level of loans in 1958 was 
about $477 million (because it was a year of many stabilization loans) 
but had dropped in 1950 to some $233 million. I added that I thought 
the outlook was not good since the President’s Annual Economic Report 
shows that it is expected this decline will continue and the justification is 
that the Inter-American Bank will shortly come into operation. The only 
trouble with this is that it would actually take quite a long time for the 
Inter-American Bank to begin making a significant contribution to the 
economic development of the Hemisphere and thus we were faced with 
the immediate problem of securing a higher priority for Latin America in 
the operations of DLF.
ETA–30.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by Albert Post of the 
Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs1

Washington, March 18, 1960.
SUBJECT
Courtesy Call by Mr. Felipe Herrera on the Under Secretary.
PARTICIPANTS
The Under Secretary of State
Mr. Felipe Herrera, President, IADB
Mr. Robert Menapace, Executive Vice President, IADB
General Robert Cutler, U.S. Executive Director, IADB
REA – Mr. Albert Post
Mr. Herrera stated that he had come to pay his respects to the 
Under Secretary and that he had already made a courtesy call on the 
Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Anderson. He indicated that he and his 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 371.314/3–1860. Official Use Only.
