632
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
—In addition to the message to the Swiss last night,4 we asked the
lawyers to press hard for action on the transfer. At this writing, we do
not know whether Bourguet will join Capucci in Tehran, but the latter
could also be a helpful influence with the Iranians.
—At the suggestion of the SCC, we are looking into a suspension
of food aid shipments and revocation of visas for Iranians as a means
of additional pressure.5
—We sent a cable to Rome of individual messages from the families
for delivery to the hostages by Capucci should he have the opportunity
to deliver them at religious services.
In a telephone conversation with Bruce Laingen this morning, he
asked that we convey to you the following messages:
—He and his colleagues have the highest respect for the decision
that the President took to defer sanctions on Tuesday morning.6 They
fully understand the priority that has been placed on the welfare of
the hostages. However, Laingen and the other two believe there is a
limit to the flexibility that we can show and they debated among
themselves strongly whether it was a good idea to let the Iranians off
the hook one more time. We told Bruce we certainly appreciated his
point of view and shared his outlook, but there were considerations
that justified the steps we had taken. We had made plain to the Iranians
that our patience was limited. He agreed with that position.
—Laingen asked, if there was a transfer, whether he should seek
to join the 50 hostages. We told him that we should wait and find
out what new conditions would be arranged for them. If satisfactory
arrangements for them were made, we would want him to exercise a
leadership role with his staff. He said he very much wished to do that.
—We told Laingen that any idea of his colleagues to attempt to
escape from Tehran should be discouraged. He said he agreed with that.
—Laingen said that he had written a personal letter to Ghotbzadeh
urging a further Iranian gesture after the tranfer as a sign of goodwill.
Laingen proposed a release of the women, the two non-official hostages,
and any one requiring medical attention.
4 See Document 238.
5 See Document 236.
6 See Document 234.
