Afghanistan 139 48. Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1 Washington, April 6, 1979, 11 a.m.–noon SUBJECT Covert Action and Sensitive Collection Issues (S) PARTICIPANTS Vice President* OMB Randy Jayne, Associate State Director, Nat’l David Newsom, Under Secretary Security & Int’l Affairs for Political Affairs Justice Defense Attorney General Griffin Charles Duncan, Deputy Secretary Bell JCS NSA Lt. Gen. William Smith, Assistant Robert Drake, Deputy to Chairman Director CIA White House Admiral Stansfield Turner Zbigniew Brzezinski, Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director Chairman NSC Paul B. Henze, Notetaker Thomas Thornton** * Present only for first ten minutes. ** Present only through discussion of Afghanistan/Pakistan. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The Vice President’s views: The Vice President opened the meeting with a brief discussion of the situation in Afghanistan, underscoring the problems the Soviets are encountering there and the concerted effort they are making to obfuscate them and shift blame onto the United States. He stressed the need to defend our interests and commitments in this part of the world and expressed the hope that the group 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–020, Minutes—SCC 1979. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Henze. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. Attached but not printed is a covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, April 9, which summarized the meeting. Brzezinski noted: “the Attorney General opined that a Presidential Finding and report to Congress was not required at this stage. It was understood, however, that if the Pakistanis respond positively, you will be asked to execute a Finding that would authorize CIA to implement the most feasible and otherwise desirable options.” Carter drew a line in the left margin beside the first sentence and wrote: “Better expression than SCC minutes,” and underlined “if the Pakistanis respond positively.” Also attached but not printed is Henze’s April 4 memorandum to Brzezinski; see footnote 1, Document 47.
