Chapter 2, January–June 1989 223 limits. (Our verification standards for constraints on bombers and cruise missiles are much lower.) In effect, we require that we be able to detect virtually any cheating. This standard is a major reason why we have proposed a ban on all mobile ICBMs, and one of the reasons why we have chosen not to include SLCMs in START limits. Certainly we have the right to expect and to demand scrupulous adherence to treaty provisions. But we must be certain that near-­perfect verification is the standard which we should adopt for this treaty. Such a standard would put great demands on our intelligence systems, impose significant costs to develop new or additional collection and analysis assets, and open our own facilities to a potentially dangerous level of intelligence collection. Even then, the fact is that some of our START proposals cannot be verified with high confidence, no matter how much money we spend or how intrusive the inspections we conduct. An alternate approach is to assure ourselves that we can detect cheating of a magnitude that changes the military balance to a point where it results in an important military advantage to the Soviets, and that we can detect this level of cheating in time to develop an effective military reaction or safeguard. The most difficult element of such a standard would be the determination of what is militarily significant cheating—­in other words, what is the military risk acceptable in each of the treaty provisions? If we change our standard, we must do so very carefully. We cannot leave the impression with the Soviets or with the Congress that we have changed our expectations of Soviet behavior, that we are so anxious for an agreement that we are prepared to condone some cheating, or that we no longer believe that scrupulous adherence to every term in a treaty is the only acceptable standard of behavior. Ratification Verification has the potential of being the Achilles heel of treaty ratification. As the INF Treaty debate demonstrated, some in the Senate—­ the “verification maximizers”—­will demand near-­perfect verification, one that can be achieved only by the most expensive intelligence systems and most intrusive of on-­site inspection procedures (and perhaps not even then). Others—­the “verification minimizers”—­will not put up with these drains on our defense budget and intelligence risks to highly classified programs, arguing that arms control in general and START in particular just isn’t worth it. In brief, we face the possibility of an unholy alliance in the Senate of those who are simply anti-­arms control, the “verification maximizers,” and the verification minimizers.” The combination of these camps could well doom the prospects that any START Treaty we negotiate
