Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 5. Pungan said that Sadat had arrived in Bucharest in a good mood, mentioning the encouragement he received in his visits to Washington, London, and Bonn. He was pleased with the White House statement as well as President Carter’s other statements. He was highly pleased with his meeting with Peres, Pungan said, indicating that it had given him, Sadat, a better insight into the differing internal forces in Israel. 6. On the other hand, Pungan said, Sadat remained deeply concerned underneath his good spirits that useful progress would not be achieved as rapidly as he needed it. He made clear it would put him in a bad position, both internally and in terms of his relations with other Arab States. Ceausescu, impressed with Sadat’s arguments, believes everything possible should now be done to encourage Israel to agree to a declaration of principles acceptable to Sadat. This could open a new phase, permitting Sadat to improve his relations with other Arabs and possibly open the way to their joining the process. Pungan said that Sadat was in much need of other Arab gestures. 7. Pungan then conveyed Ceausescu’s concern that a declaration of principles might—implicitly or indirectly in references to withdrawal or the Sinai settlements—undercut Sadat’s need for undisputed sovereignty over the area. The Secretary said there was nothing in the proposed declaration which could affect the Egyptian position in this regard, and noted that five of its six general paragraphs had already been largely agreed by Egypt and Israel. 8. Pungan said that the Romanians were considering how they might be helpful. He mentioned the Waldheim idea (i.e., for a New York meeting), and the Secretary noted that Waldheim still held that option open. The question was not forums; it was all-important to move forward on a declaration of principles. Regarding the Romanian’s basic question, the Secretary added, we would be talking to Dayan on the 16th to explore what might be done about the remaining issues. Atherton would continue the efforts in his Middle East Mission. At the moment, the Secretary said, he didn’t know what else could be brought to bear on the problem or to convince Begin that time was short. 9. Pungan said his own idea was the U.S. should talk to the Soviets. The Secretary said he had talked with Dobrynin earlier in the day, had given him a detailed description of the Sadat meetings, and had asked that the Soviets remained open-minded and flexible about a declaration of principles. Dobrynin pressed for specifics of our thinking on an interim regime for the West Bank and Gaza. The Secretary said it was a good exchange and that Dobrynin appeared interested. Romania, he continued, could be helpful by also urging the Soviets to be openminded and flexible, and not to put obstacles in the present path. Pungan mused that Romania might consider encouraging the Soviets to ease up on the Arabs and allow them to make their own decisions
