544
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
had thought of an alternative. I then read to him the revised note on the
exchange of ambassadors, the key element of which was the exchange
of resident ambassadors one month after the establishment of the self-
governing authority. I explained that we felt this change was justifiable,
particularly in light of the fact that the Israelis had withdrawn their pre-
vious agreement to withdraw in sub-phases. Sadat reflected for a mo-
ment and said, “I think that solves my problem. You can consider it
agreed.” In brief, as of this evening, he feels that we have found an ade-
quate solution to the linkage problem. We will have to explore with
his advisors tomorrow to make sure that they understand fully that
Egypt would still be obliged to establish diplomatic relations after the
interim withdrawal, but that the actual exchange of resident ambas-
sadors could be delayed until the self-governing authority had been
inaugurated.
5. Turning to Article 4 of the treaty, I read him our interpretive
note,4 including an additional sentence which states that a review will
be held after five years. He said that this was acceptable and that we
could consider this issue closed.
6. On Article 6, I gave him a copy of our draft letter and our legal
opinion.5 I explained that Article 6 does not mean that the Egyptian-
Israeli treaty “prevails over” his other treaty obligations. I expressed
my opinion that we should only send this letter to Egypt, and that he
should confirm this as his interpretation. He said that he would have to
consider this further, but that it helped meet some of his concerns. I also
urged him to leave paragraph 2 of Article 6 as it now stands. Once
again, he seemed to understand my reasoning, but said that he would
need to discuss this with his advisors.
7. In conclusion, I urged him to leave the treaty text as it now
stands, relying on the interpretations of Articles 4 and 6 that we had
discussed. We could then focus all of our attention on the side letter. I
told him that this would help change public opinion, which has put
him on the defensive for not having agreed to the treaty. Sadat men-
tioned that he still hoped for some reference to Egyptian police in Gaza,
which I termed a non-starter. He asked me to raise it with the Israelis
again, but indicated that he would drop this if it does not work. He
clearly does, however, want some Egyptian presence in Gaza. He then
said that he thought we had the basis for an agreement, but that we
were in for a period of confrontation with Israel and we should be
ready for it. He said he wants to wind things up before the 17th, but we
4 The text of this draft of the U.S. interpretive note on Article 4 has not been found.
5 No copies of this draft letter and legal opinion have been found.
