1454 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement he would like to see the Secretary of Defense, with the agreement of his subordinates, come up with a recommendation. To do this a combined study would be needed, and the Army should be given an opportunity to state its case. Dr. Killian referred briefly to the Atoms for Peace meeting in Geneva. He said the U.S. performance and exhibit were first rate. He mentioned that the Russians had top-­flight scientists present, who went out of their way to be cordial. He mentioned that their top scien­ tist, named Topchev, invited him to visit Russia next spring. He said he has replied that he does not see his way clear to doing so because of his schedule; he commented that in the present state of difficul­ ties with the Soviet Union such a visit does not seem advisable. The President said he thought that if Dr. Killian had a chance to go, and if relations with the Russians improved, such a trip would be a good thing to do. Dr. Killian said that the study group is having a very hard time on the Surprise Attack project. It is very difficult to get prepared for the discussions. One key question is as to the scope of the project, i.e., as to what should be monitored, and specifically as to whether limita­ tion of arms and control of size of forces should be among the things being monitored. The President thought the first step is to determine what are the fields or areas wherein by certain actions we could limit or eliminate the danger of surprise attack. Then, what are the means of doing this, i.e., through observation or inspection; then what pro­ grams should be carried out to establish these means; then finally in what areas or in what respects could these measures be expected to be effective. Dr. Killian concluded by saying that the President may have to decide, before the matter is resolved, as to whether to include limitation of arms and inspection of such limitation in the Surprise Attack proposal. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA
