3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
726
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
CIA reported that about 40,000 Soviet troops are now in Afghani-
stan. They are encountering some resistance. The Afghan army is
shrinking rapidly through desertions. The rebel tribes will retreat in the
mountains and continue resistance, probably increasing in the spring.
Thus, the insurgency will continue, and Soviet forces will be the main
source of the counterinsurgency effort. (S)
[1 paragraph (2½ lines) not declassified]
It was asserted in the discussion that the degree of resistance in Af-
ghanistan will depend upon two factors: [2½ lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
Aid to Pakistan—Pakistan’s ability to support the insurgency and to
resist Soviet pressures, it was agreed, will be highly dependent on U.S.
assistance and commitment. It was argued that the small support we
can now promise Pakistan will be more confusing than reassuring be-
cause of the publicity about changing U.S. policy. It is essential, there-
fore, to address the non-proliferation issue with the Congress and find
a satisfactory way to make an exception in the Pakistani case. It was
agreed that this matter should be discussed at the National Security
Council meeting today and a decision taken on whether to seek an
amendment to the law or to seek Pakistani assurances sufficient to cer-
tify Pakistan’s intentions on nuclear proliferation to the Congress. (S)
Christopher’s Trip to the NAC—Warren Christopher gave a brief re-
port on his impressions from the NAC meeting. He added that Japa-
nese participation would be useful. He also argued that we need a
standing mechanism for coordinating any joint actions with the Allies
which may be taken in response to the Soviet intervention in Afghani-
stan. States are more likely to support actions as a group than alone
without the reassuring presence of other states in the group. (S)
NSC on the larger Strategic Questions Posed by Soviet Intervention in
Afghanistan—It was agreed to seek a meeting of the NSC later this
week to discuss the larger regional issues arising from Soviet actions
in Afghanistan as well as issues concerning our Allies in Europe and
Asia. (S)
