220  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
would be agreeable to having it in both sections but would not repeat 
not find acceptable having this word in U.S. section only.
Under present circumstances we would acquiesce, upon Wang’s 
request, in deletion of word “now” from both sections in order to come 
to agreement.
3. Believe foregoing provides basis for reaching agreement at 14th 
meeting September 10. You will be in strong position to press accep­
tance of “in any such case” on Wang, particularly with our concession 
on deletion of “now”.
4. You should make every effort to have announcement agreed 
upon and released September 10. Press for agreement then without 
further reference to principals. Immediately announcement released by 
you in Geneva we plan to issue Departmental press release here refer­
ring to your announcement in Geneva. Simultaneously background 
briefing of press here would be undertaken by Robertson. In order to 
schedule press release and background briefing at reasonable hour 
here, you should seek Wang agreement to release of Agreed Announce­
ment in Geneva at 3 PM local time (10 AM Washington time).
5. If agreement on text of announcement reached, you should 
notify Department by fastest possible means, using both Niact plain 
language telegram and international telephone. Have circuits open on 
stand-by basis if feasible.
6. Talking paper which Robertson will use in background no-attri­
bution briefing of press being telegraphed separately.
7. Cable your considered estimate of likelihood that agreement on 
foregoing basis can be reached and released on September 10.
Hoover
169.	 Letter 7 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 7
Geneva, September 7, 1955
Dear Walter:
I find that the second courier which arrives here Sunday evening 
with your mail does not go directly back to Frankfort and, therefore, 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
