876
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
10. The U.S. Government is putting cruel and unjust pressure on
faithful Islamic Iranian citizens who live in the the United States and
are therefore guests of the country. The most recent example for this
is the brutal attack by the police on the Islamic pro-Khomeini demon-
strators in Washington, which Rafsanjani condemned publicly in Parlia-
ment. The day before, that same police force had tolerated the demon-
stration by the exiled criminals who had insulted Iran’s “sacred
leadership.”
Returning to one of the basic arguments of the letter, Rafsanjani
asked how an atmosphere of understanding could possibly be created
in view of all that had happened in all these years and was still happen-
ing, and how could the Majlis understand it. Would it not have been
better for the United States to fulfill at least the minimal demand of
the Iranian people: the extradition of the corrupt Shah who had plun-
dered the country. The trial of this felon would at least have helped
soften the revolutionary anger. The non-extradition, however, was tan-
tamount to a flagrant insult to the people and the government. Rafsan-
jani continued that it had not been wise that the United States had
changed its motives vis-à-vis Iran. The U.S. was still dreaming, as in
the past, of an Iran under its control and colonial yoke.
In order to achieve an improvement in the atmosphere between
the two countries, it is necessary that the United States does everything
in its power to heal the unjustices of the past. However, if the United
States does not change its attitude and the old unfriendliness and
enmities are allowed to continue, how can the Iranian nation, which
is so forgiving, forget all the mistakes of the past and the injustice it
has suffered. With this, Rafsanjani concluded his comments.
2) Last night, after the ambassadors of the PLO, Lebanon, and
Romania, it was my turn to talk with Rafsanjani. The President of the
Iranian Parliament seems to be a very charming man. But in conversa-
tion or negotiations he clearly reveals himself as a hardliner of the
Beheshti circle in the IRP.
His monologue listed routinely—and as if learned by heart from
a catechism—the all too well-known charges vis-à-vis the U.S. His
doctrinaire fixation on this question made any factual discussion of
the matter, which was not sought by Rafsanjani anyway, appear hope-
less. His entire disposition makes it unlikely that he could be the man
who could or would at this point effectively preach understanding to
the Majlis moving in the dangerous direction of possible clerical-fascist
tendencies. Therefore it is most doubtful whether he should be
entrusted with any more messages for the time being.
While I myself did not have an opportunity to mention the hostage
problem (time for presentation), the Austrian Ambassador, who had
delivered a letter of the President of the Austrian Parliament to Rafsan-
