1978  265
war. In Asia, Soviet military superiority would permit the USSR to 
defeat Chinese military forces in a wide range of conflict situations. But 
it could not at the nuclear level assuredly prevent China from striking a 
limited number of Soviet urban areas; nor would it permit the USSR to 
invade and occupy central China.
6. The Soviets have made steady progress in building naval capa-
bilities to operate in the world’s oceans beyond the coastal defense 
regions traditionally dominant in their planning. While this effort was 
driven largely by the pursuit of strategic defensive objectives in the 
central nuclear competition, it has carried the Soviet Navy to a role of 
distant area operations where showing the flag in peacetime and a con-
tingent capability to disrupt US naval and maritime operations in the 
event of hostilities serve Soviet foreign policy interests.
7. Growing military aid efforts have served as the main conveyor 
of Soviet influence into the Third World. Under permissive conditions, 
Soviet military assistance and support to proxies have come to be an 
effective form of bringing Soviet power to bear in distant areas. Recent 
large-­scale support to Cuban expeditionary elements in Africa has 
shown Soviet willingness to press forward, and to explore the limits 
of the USSR’s ability to project military power short of direct combat 
involvement.
8. The irony of the Soviet military situation overall is that, on 
one hand, direct comparison between the USSR and its major oppo-
nents shows the USSR in increasingly favorable positions, but, on the 
other hand, Soviet military doctrine and security aspirations continue 
to present exceedingly heavy demands. Thus, in the strategic nuclear 
arena, Soviet doctrine posits the real possibility of a central nuclear war 
and of one side prevailing in such a conflict. This in turn sets to Soviet 
policy the task of providing effective war-­fighting capabilities, beyond 
those of pure deterrence, that are difficult to attain against a deter-
mined opponent. Similarly, unremitting Soviet defense efforts are seen 
as required for confident superiority over NATO and, in less degree, 
over China. The military policy of the USSR continues to be influenced 
by a deeply ingrained tendency to overinsure against perceived foreign 
threats and to overcompensate for technological deficiencies. But no 
less than these influences, the ambitious standards of Soviet military 
doctrine, deriving from tenacious notions of international competition, 
drive Soviet military efforts and sustain Soviet anxiety about prevailing 
military balances.
9. The Soviets see their growing military strength in general as pro-
viding a favorable backdrop for the conduct of foreign policy. It causes 
the USSR to be perceived as a natural and legitimate participant in 
the development of global and regional security arrangements. Soviet
