Chapter 5, May–June 1990  737
and your position, and ask you to consider the fact that what we have 
done with your representative involves more movement by the US than 
any other agreement on this question.
Karpov: This question has been raised and we want to reaffirm that 
this is a complex issue, not easily resolved. We appreciate that. This will 
be a 15-­year treaty. It imposes limits on US and Soviet forces, and we 
must be certain there is no loophole for transfer of equipment to third 
countries. Therefore, the treaty which we are negotiating must not open 
up a new channel for expanded transfer of strategic offensive arms to 
third countries. We do appreciate that the US made a statement to the 
effect that it does not have a pattern of transfering strategic offensive 
arms to countries other than the UK. However, we would like stated 
in no uncertain terms that there is no possibility of further expanding 
across the spectrum of treaty limited items.
That is the essense of our position. There is not an insurmountable 
problem here. We want existing practices not expanded, no expansion 
to other types and kinds of strategic offensive arms.
Burt: I have one question. What you have said now sounds differ-
ent from what you said earlier. Are you suggesting that the real Soviet 
position is that the US can provide SLBM technology to the UK indef-
initely, but not other systems? Is that the real position? Every time we 
meet Soviet concerns, the Soviet position changes.
Karpov: No, our position has not changed. I am talking about a 
point you brought up. There is one exemption from the ban on transfer 
of treaty limited items—­the pattern of cooperation regarding Trident II. 
There is an exemption for that pattern of cooperation. Otherwise the ban 
applies to all treaty limited items without exception.
Burt: Your statement about what we agreed to is not accurate. We 
said our program of cooperation is to maintain and modernize the 
independent nuclear deterrent of the UK. There can be no misunder-
standing, we are holding open the option for Trident III, Trident IV, 
Trident 24, any step necessary to maintain and modernize the indepen-
dent nuclear deterrent of the UK. It goes beyond Trident II, and goes 
beyond SLBMs.
Karpov: Let me make a comment. You refer to your December state-
ment. However, in addition there was also a statement that described 
the essense on your cooperation on the Trident system. If you were to 
transfer cruise missiles, that would represent an expansion of existing 
practices. Trident III, Trident 24 causes considerable doubt. You say the 
USSR must not modernize its heavy missiles, no 7, 8, etc. Yet you hold 
open the option to modernize and transfer missiles to the UK.
Bartholomew: Rather than respond, let me come back to the essen-
tials. I invite your attention to the carefully considered statement of our 
policy. We have been clear and open about this for a long period of
