848
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
may be those within the United States bureaucracy who argue that it
is in your interest to see the Soviets “mired down” in Afghanistan. We
had people like that in Moscow who made the same argument regard-
ing the United States during the Vietnam War. But the whole thrust
of our policy was nevertheless to end that war. We behaved as a
superpower should, Bessmertnykh said. You think that you will be
able to get these people to work together. But it cannot be done. We
had to deal with our own Basmachi rebellion, which lasted all through
the 20’s.3 These are the same people. One simply cannot trust them or
get them to work together. They will lie to you. They will take your
money and they will not keep a bargain. We know that. We could use
money to buy them out if we wanted to. But we do not intend to do
so because we have great experience with them and know they are
totally untrustworthy. We have told you repeatedly that our action in
Afghanistan is limited in time and in scope and that it is unrelated to
any other country or any other region. You should accept our state-
ments and work constructively to find a solution to the current impasse
between us. Afghanistan in no sense infringes on the interests of the
United States. (S)
What many observers, and not just those within the United States,
fear about the Soviet adventure in Afghanistan, I replied, is that if it
is successful, if it is regarded by the Soviet leadership, and the Soviet
military, and the Soviet foreign policy bureaucracy as having been a
great success, then it will inescapably become a precedent for the USSR
and an argument to encourage similar actions in other places. Several
Soviet officials have asserted in the context of Afghanistan that there
will be “no more Allendes.” Given the Soviet military buildup, the
marked increase in its ability to project its forces to distant places, and
the volatility of the world of the eighties, this type of irresponsible
statement must give any observer of the USSR pause. If Moscow could
contemplate taking the same kind of action in a place as far away as
Chile as it did in Afghanistan, then this will inevitably lead to the kind
of confrontation that neither of us desires. (S)
Soviet policy has been clearly enunciated, Bessmertnykh rejoined.
You should not place too much significance on isolated remarks taken
out of context. We realize, of course, that you have painted yourself
into a corner on Afghanistan and that it is very difficult for the Carter
Administration to take the kind of actions that will lead to a constructive
resolution of the problem of restoration of US-Soviet relations. This is
true for us as well. Nevertheless, we cannot remain isolated from each
3 See footnote 2, Document 275.
