1654 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 7. Need for further studies. The following matters relating to the conduct of future nuclear tests should be studied as early as possible so that an early decision on future nuclear testing policy can be reached well in advance of the expiration of the present one-year voluntary withholding of nuclear testing: a. Requirements for additional nuclear weapons testing. b. The feasibility and practicability of underground testing including the cost and timing of test programs. c. The problems of testing in the earth’s atmosphere above the detection limits of the Geneva System including the problems of radioactive fallout and the definition of the upper limits of the atmosphere in relation to the fallout problem. d. The organization and test program needed to explore the problems of underground test concealment, improvement of seismic detection, and system studies for detection of tests in the upper atmosphere and outer space. CONCLUSIONS On the basis of these factors it is suggested: 1. That proposing an extended uncontrolled moratorium on outer space and underground tests represents an undesirable course of action at the present time, and that the United States should adhere to the policy set forth in the August 29 and November 7 White House announcement concerning a voluntary nuclear test suspicion. 2. That studies relating to future requirements for nuclear test­ ing, the improvement of methods of detection of nuclear tests, the fall­ out problem, and factors of cost and practicability involved in testing underground and in outer space should be undertaken promptly so that decisions can be reached on future nuclear testing policy as soon as possible and well in advance of the expiration of the present one-year voluntary withholding of nuclear testing. 462. Telegram Supnu 382 From Geneva1 Geneva, April 22, 1959, 3 p.m. Supnu 382. For Herter from Wadsworth. Reference: Nusup 307. I think your message covers very well what we should do in response to various approaches the Russians might take. I personally think that what is most likely is that Russians will not give clear acceptance or 1 Source: Negotiating tactics at nuclear testing suspension talks. Secret; Niact; Lim­ ited Distribution. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/4–2259.
