“That no person serving a term of imprisonment after sentence for a non-
political offense involving moral turpitude … shall be allowed to register or
vote.”
It will be the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission to interpret and apply this provision
according to its letter and spirit to the facts of each individual case presented to the
Commission to which it is relevant. It is suggested, therefore, that any specific case or
cases which are thought to involve the interpretation or application of this provision be
presented to the Plebiscitary Commission.
In general, the Award makes the most ample provision for the consideration by the
Plebiscitary Commission of all questions involving the qualifications of voters and the
prevention of fraud, with a view to insuring to every qualified elector the right to vote.
Ample provision is also made for appeal from the Plebiscitary Commission to the
Arbitrator.
In conclusion it need hardly be said that only a desire to be of service in bringing about
a settlement of a long standing controversy between two great nations with whom the
United States enjoys the most friendly relations induced the Arbitrator to undertake this
arduous task and that so far as in him lies, acting always within the well defined limits
of the Terms of Submission, he will leave nothing undone which scrupulous care and
attention on his part can accomplish in securing a fair election and equal justice to both
parties.
The ruling which the Arbitrator has felt constrained to make, viz. that the Award is final
and without appeal, has rendered it unnecessary to afford opportunity to the Agents of
the Government of Chile to present the views of their Government. A copy of the
communication of the President of the Peruvian Defense Commission and of this reply
is, however, being furnished to the Agents of the Government of Chile.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
Arbitrator
By the Arbitrator
FRANK B. KELLOGG
Secretary of State
45 Francis White, Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs.
