1978  291
has been devoted to the next steps, i.e. what we do thereafter. For 
example, how do we assess the results of our attack on the USSR? We 
have these tidy criteria—[1 line not declassified] but no way to know if 
we achieved even part of that outcome. At what will we shoot reserve 
weapons?
[2 lines not declassified] They want an LNO capability without a war 
fighting doctrine. Their logical escape from this paradox is to accept an 
“assured destruction” doctrine, but they do not want that. Moreover, 
they are slowly beginning to realize that Soviet changing capabilities 
may be eroding a de facto “assured destruction” capability (e.g. a C3 
attack combined with a political and diplomatic gambit that undercuts 
both our capability retaliate and our desire to retaliate.)3
Thinking About LNOs
[1 paragraph (21 lines) not declassified]
IVORY ITEM Impact
The impact of IVORY ITEM drills has been far-­reaching. It has 
forced the CINCs at SAC and NORAD to take a very close look at 
the short warning situation, C3, and Soviet doctrine. General Hill at 
NORAD made me sit down in his chair at the NORAD command center 
and go through a drill to appreciate certain artificialities IVORY ITEM 
places on him in answering questions from the President. In working 
out his own role in such a personal way, he has, I believe, become aware 
that we are indeed on a threshold of change from the old view of the 
SIOP execution to4 a new view of a much more complicated world of 
command and control.
The same development has occurred at SAC in a different form. 
The new concerns with C3, less than SIOP exchanges, have derived in 
no small part from the IVORY ITEM experiences. Several of the gener-
als at SAC simply admitted that they have not worked into these areas 
sufficiently. They are breaking ground, but they are nervous about 
how far to go because of the enormous doctrinal, forces structure, and 
budget implications. They know that they cannot lead in the doctrinal 
development. That must finally come from the NSC and the Secretary 
of Defense.
NORAD Re-­organization
General Hill is terribly concerned that the Air Force will combine the 
[2 lines not declassified]. I know nothing of this proposed re-­organization, 
3 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this paragraph and 
one in the right margin.
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to the preceding sentence 
and this sentence up to this point and wrote: “What are they?”
