1308 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Department desires cooperate within limits U.S. law in attempting control revolutionary activity anti-Betancourt elements in U.S. Can GOV give us any leads which would facilitate our investigations here? You may in your discretion promptly inform Betancourt or Falcon Briceño of foregoing and include following additional points: (1) As indicated to Perez de la Cova yesterday Department thinks GOV should give urgent consideration to broadening terms of requested investigation so as to permit inclusion of subversive activities Communist elements directed from outside Venezuela. From Venezuelan point of view there seems to be little doubt that Communist and Castro elements were prime movers in recent disturbances in Venezuela. Betancourt himself has publicly described these disturbances as Communist attempt to overthrow constitutional government, and has privately informed Embassy of Cuban involvement (EMBTEL 460).3 It would therefore appear strange and illogical for any OAS investigation to be limited to only one aspect of recent difficulties. From U.S. standpoint GOV will understand that while we feel as strongly as anyone concerning Dominican Government aggressions and conspiracies we would find it difficult to understand or explain to our public a second time why Communist and Castro aggressions should not be included in investigation and remedial action, particularly if specific OAS action should subsequently be decided upon. (2) Although U.S. not member IAPC we will of course cooperate to extent feasible and appropriate with any investigation which that Committee may undertake. However, we suggest that in view of threat which conspiracy and disorders inspired from abroad pose to constitutional processes, Venezuela give consideration to invoking Rio Treaty and requesting convocation COAS as Organ Consultation in order obtain investigation under Rio Treaty procedures. As described DEPCIRTEL 7674 this could be done without fixing date for 8th Fonmin Meeting or indeed without finally committing governments that such meeting necessary. Purpose would be to obtain full and complete investigation of the facts after which governments could decide whether further action called for. Department doubts IAPC procedure would be as efficacious as Rio Treaty investigation. 3 The referenced telegram from Caracas, November 30, 1960, reported: “Wide agreement among responsible AD COPEI and independent political sectors from President down, that Communists and MIR are initiating incidents.” (731.00/11–3060). 4 Not printed (731.00/11-2360)
