238
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
74.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, May 21, 1952.
SUBJECT
Interview with the Ghashghais—May 20, 1952
At the request of State Senator David van Alstyne of New Jersey, I
met with Messrs. Nasser Ghashghai and Abdullah Ghashghai. It was
understood that we were not to discuss the oil situation but the inter-
view was for the purpose of advising me of what the Ghashghais con-
sidered to be dangerous trends in the army in Iran.
The interview was devoted to that activity with the fear expressed
by Nasser Ghashghai that much of our military equipment might be
building up military strengths only to fall into the hands of the enemy,
the Russians, if there were any overt action at all. It is their belief that
many of the young army officers are inclined to the Communists, will
not fight to defend their country, and that these young officers are sub-
verting many of the troops who are therefore not worthy of having
American arms given to them. They spoke glowingly of course of the
fighting spirit of the Ghashghai tribe and of the fact that the Ghashghai
tribe was attracting to it the support of other tribes, all of whom would
fight firstly to defend their country against any invader. Their partic-
ular warning was that our chief of the military mission should be ad-
vised to be careful as to the kind of equipment and to who obtained the
equipment since they were fearful that it would arm the wrong people.
One other question which they raised concerned the method of our mil-
itary mission’s operation in Iran. They said that in effect the mission
stayed in Tehran, sat mostly behind desks, talked only to those who
spoke English, and therefore really were not able to appraise the senti-
ment and feeling of the people of Iran. If they were able to circulate
more and talk to more of the people throughout the country they
would be aware of the dangers in the present method.
I stated only that in all of our aid programs of course we dealt with
the government in authority but that I appreciated their interest in
coming and that our meeting would be informal and off-the-record. No
reference was made to the oil situation other than that the people of
Iran were losing their income due to the current situation which they
1 Source: National Archives, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files, Office of Military Assistance,
Project Decimal File, Box 63, 091.3 MDAP Iran. Confidential; Security Information. Pre-
pared by William C. Foster, former Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Admin-
istration. Major General George Olmsted, Director, Office of Military Assistance, en-
closed this memorandum with a June 9 letter.
