722
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
But, in international life today there are many complicated issues.
I see a serious deterioration of the international situation at present.
What should be done to stop this course toward tension and strain
and to search, instead, to solutions?
Vice President: Mr. President, when we came into office, I doubt
that any Administration was more interested in detente than our own.
We worked on SALT, MBFR, CTB, and liberalization of trade with the
USSR. But it has proven difficult to maintain this policy. With the
invasion of Afghanistan, attitudes in our country were poisoned. If we
were to bring the SALT II treaty to a vote now it would be defeated.
I cite Afghanistan as the central problem in the world today. But,
your point is valid. We have to seek a more stable, secure world. The
independence your government has shown is important. The President
appreciates your advice. He asked that I meet with you and convey
his appreciation for the independence you have shown as a responsible
actor on the international scene.
President Ceausescu: The fact is that many problems have accumu-
lated in the world. If SALT II had been ratified last year, this might
have influenced a number of events. Of course, events in Afghanistan
have contributed to a worsening of the situation. Those events are only
part of a longstanding process. I believe that in Afghanistan a political
solution is necessary, not a course leading to further tension. A political
solution pre-supposes a cessation of force, with no more outside forces
and with withdrawal of Soviet troops. My view is that under present
circumstances efforts should be made to have contacts and talks, first
between the USA and the USSR. It is necessary to take care to observe
the independence of all peoples and the renunciation of force. I believe
that account should be taken of statements by the Soviet leadership
that they are ready to withdraw forces if there is a cessation of activities
by outside forces.
We have to prepare carefully for the European Security Meeting
in Madrid this year. In my opinion we should do everything possible
to overcome the present state of tension in the world. To be frank, I
have the impression that the United States and the Soviet Union have
engaged themselves in policies that further divide the two countries.
And, it is not for me to emphasize the important role the US and USSR
have in international life. It is also a fact that an increasing number of
states have equality and independence. My main concern is that the
current situation might get out of hand and reach a point where it
would be difficult to step back.
Vice President: Afghanistan is important, and we are trying to get the
Soviets to reconsider. They have used vague language on withdrawal,
language similar to that they used in Czechoslovakia 12 years ago. One
searches in vain for a single justification of the Soviet invasion. As
