764
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
they do have an ability to project their military power, and that is
serious.
The U.S. is prepared to respond to both threats. For the external
threat, we are willing to use military power if our vital interests require
it. An example of that was our sending of the carrier Constellation to
the Arabian Sea.
There are three basic principles which guide our approach.
—First of all, we want to work with those Arab countries that are
willing to work with us. We wish to have a consultative security ar-
rangement which would be nothing like an alliance; however, there
may be circumstances susceptible to bilateral or multilateral security
arrangements, depending on the situation.
—Secondly, we are ready to cooperate with all Arab states. It is not
our intention to split the Arabs. We wish to work closer with our
friends and moderates, and we are not excluding others. Iraq, for ex-
ample, has been helpful in Yemen. We see the Islamic resurgence as ter-
ribly important. It marks the rebirth of Arab vitality which is the best
bulwark against communism.
—Thirdly, we wish to promote a process of a comprehensive peace
in the Arab-Israel dispute.
The Israel-Egyptian treaty will be concluded shortly. We have pro-
moted it and we see no other choice. Trying to solve all differences at
once is, in fact, to solve nothing for a long time, or ever. Rather, we be-
lieve that setting in motion a process will establish the principles of
withdrawal and the dismantling of settlements. It establishes a prece-
dent. Maybe this will not be universally applied. However, if it is ex-
ploited intelligently it can help the Palestinians. The President has
made a public pledge to that effect, both in Cairo and in Israel. Once
that process begins, people will have to focus on clearcut issues such as
elections, registration, who votes, and other clear problems. That will
have an important political effect and help to mobilize world public
opinion on this issue.
We have been asked why do we not state clearly or precisely what
the final outcome of this process will be. First of all, we do not know the
answer to the question. Secondly, to state it would, in fact, be counter-
productive. If we state an outcome favorable to the Arabs, the Israelis
will not join. If we state an outcome favorable to the Israelis, then no
Arabs will join. And if we require major concessions of both sides, nei-
ther will join. Rather, we need to set in motion a process which is some-
what open-ended. Let the process shape attitudes. There have been
major changes, both among the Arabs and the Israelis. Mr. Peres now
speaks about the rights of the Palestinians. Begin once told me at Camp
David that he would rather cut off his hand than to see a settlement dis-
mantled. However, now he says that he will resign if they do not dis-
