Arms Control and Disarmament 1375 e. Technological and economic data produced in the program would be made available freely to the industries within the Commu­ nity and the United States and the widespread dissemination of the information would be assured; f. Under the terms of the program, the United States would sell to the Community, a net quantity of 30,000 kilograms of contained U–­235 in uranium to cover the fueling and other requirements of the program over a twenty year period. An initial operating inventory of 9000 kilo­ grams would be sold on a deferred payment basis. The balance would be paid for on a current basis. The International Atomic Energy Agency would have the right of first option to buy, at the announced fuel value price in effect with the United States at the time of purchase, any special nuclear materials produced in reactors fueled with materials obtained from the United States which are excess of the Community’s need for such material for peaceful purposes. If IAEA does not exercise this option, the United States would be prepared to purchase such materi­ als on the same terms; g. The United States and the Community would recognize their mutual interest in assuring that the materials received from the United States, as well as special nuclear material produced therefrom, are used only for peaceful purposes, and an arrangement to accomplish this objective compatible with the provisions of the Statute of the Interna­ tional Atomic Energy Agency would be developed; h. The United States will process in its own facilities, under the same terms and conditions as are offered to U.S. industry, spent fuel elements from reactors to be included in the program. 37. The Joint Working Party has finished its task, and the EUR­ ATOM Commission and Council of Ministers have approved the program. After final approval within the Executive Branch and after Congress has approved an international arrangement between the U.S. and EURATOM, the program will be incorporated in an Agreement for Cooperation under Section 123 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954. In addition, the following legislative steps will be necessary: a. Authority to enter into long-­term arrangements for the purchase of plutonium and the reprocessing of material; b. Authorization for the distribution of special nuclear material, for the joint research and development program, and for the fuel cycle. 38. It should also be noted that a Presidential allocation of addi­ tional U–235 to cover the requirements of the EURATOM program will be necessary. 39. A total of $140,000,000 in authorization and funding will be required. Maximum cost of the fuel cycle arrangements is estimated at $90,000,000 over a 10-­year period with the first expenditures proba­ bly coming in 1962. The first 5-­years of the joint research and develop­ ment program is estimated to cost the U.S. approximately $50,000,000 with EURATOM also making available approximately $50,000,000. In
