792 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 183. NASC Paper1 Washington, July 23, 1959 BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY (NSC 5906) PROPOSED REVISIONS Page 48, paragraph 55–­b: a. Delete the first sentence of the paragraph (including the split language), and substitute therefor the following: “The goal of our economic policy is the achievement, within a frame­ work of free competitive enterprise and reasonable price stability, of vig­ orous, orderly and sustainable economic growth and progress, including the efficient employment of resources at high levels.” b. In the first line of subparagraph b–­(1), substitute the work “could” for the word “would”. Page 49, paragraph 55–­c–­(2): Delete the first clause and the footnotes relating thereto, and substitute the following: “Strive for a vigorous, orderly and sustainable economic growth;”. Page 50, paragraph 55–­d, line 6: Insert the word “reasonable” before the word “price”, and the words “and competitive” after the word “free”. PROPOSALS FOR MODIFYING PARAGRAPH 62 OF NSC 5906 PUT FORWARD AT THE INFORMAL MEETING OF THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE COUNCIL Pages 54–55: a. Delete the first sentence of the paragraph and substitute therefor the following: “The United States should continue actively and with a sense of urgency to pursue programs to develop and exploit outer space capabili­ ties as needed to ensure the attainment of national objectives in scientific, military and political areas. These programs should be designed to secure and maintain for the United States a position of supremacy in outer space activities without requiring that the United States be the leader in every phase of space exploitation.” b. Delete section (2) of the paragraph and substitute therefor the following: “(2) a military space program designed to exploit the application of advancing space technology whenever that exploitation will sensibly extend U.S. military capabilities;”. 1 Source: Proposed revisions in NSC 5906. Top Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
