Chapter 2, January–June 1989 207 covertly deployed to augment the legal mobile ICBM force or could be refired from surviving mobile launchers. While current START provisions are intended to diminish this threat, our uncertainties increase as unmonitored missile production continues. Pre-START Portal Monitoring. [2½ lines not declassified] Establishing PM at the Pavlograd SS–24 final assembly facility, which began series production only about two years ago, would significantly reduce the growing uncertainty in estimates of non-­deployed SS–24s—­particularly while START is being negotiated. If MIRVed mobile missiles were banned in START, early PM would increase confidence that all SS–24s that had been produced were declared and then eliminated. Missiles vs First Stages. Although the current US START position centers on the first stage as the treaty-­accountable part of a missile (primarily to accommodate a tagging scheme that has yet to be proven effective), there are several important reasons to establish PM now at final assembly facilities instead of motor production plants: — PM has already been established at the SS–25 assembly facility; capturing the SS–24 would require PM at only one other facility (and, for reciprocity, at one other US facility). — If such monitoring focused on motor plants, at least two, and probably three, would have to be monitored (and an equivalent number of US plants). — While the Soviets could divert production to alternate plants to avoid the monitored portal in either case, evading PM of final assembly facilities would have to be much more elaborate. The Soviets would have to divert all stages, post-­boost vehicles, canisters, and many other components to the alternate assembly facility, affecting numerous other plants and increasing significantly the risk of detection. With PM only at first-­stage motor plants, a considerably smaller number of components and suppliers would be affected. No US “Final Assembly Facilities”. While the Soviets integrate their missiles at final assembly facilities, the US ships the individual stages to deployment sites for assembly. Thus, there are no direct US equivalents for PM when the Soviets ask for reciprocal PM rights. The precedent was set in INF to monitor a US motor/stage plant in exchange for PM at the Votkinsk final assembly facility. The same precedent could be applied, exchanging a US motor plant for the SS–24 facility at Pavlograd. Sooner is Better. Most of the major US verification concerns with non-­deployed mobile missiles are directly related to the number produced. The quick establishment of PM would reduce uncertainties in missile production estimates and improve confidence in the overall mobile missile verification regime. The Soviets could be approached on the margins of START for such an agreement, through diplomatic channels, or at the September ministerial.
