1146  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Enclosure
Statement of Policy
EVACUATION AND PROTECTION OF U.S. CITIZENS IN DANGER 
AREAS ABROAD
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
1. Every reasonable effort must be made to protect U.S. citizens 
abroad in the event of imminent or actual general hostilities, localized 
hostilities or civil disturbances; including the evacuation of such citizens 
to relatively safe areas, and provision for their welfare if such evacuation 
is not possible. Primary factors influencing any decision to implement 
emergency plans for the protection of U.S. citizens abroad are:
a. The imminence of danger.
b. The capability and willingness of local authorities to provide 
adequate protection.
c. The effect of an evacuation on the local or international situation.
d. The availability of evacuation facilities and relatively safe hold­
ing areas.
e. The essentiality of reducing the numbers of U.S. noncombatants 
in probable combat areas in order to:
(1) Avoid impairment of the combat effectiveness of U.S. and allied 
military commanders necessitated by their care, and to
(2) Minimize the hazards of their capture as hostages.
2. It is essential that flexibility be provided in planning for the pro­
tection and welfare of U.S. noncombatants in danger areas overseas, 
since the probability of successful evacuation of such persons to the 
United States or their movement to relatively safe holding areas could 
be substantially reduced by:
a. Political considerations prior to actual outbreak of hostilities, and
b. The disruption of transportation, port and airport facilities inci­
dent to a massive attack.
In view of these factors, emergency planning should provide for 
the disposition and welfare of U.S. citizens overseas within their host 
countries as well as for evacuation to the United States or movement to 
relatively safe holding areas. This “standfast” planning is applicable to 
the eventualities of localized hostilities and civil disturbances as well as 
general hostilities.
POLICY OBJECTIVES
3. In the event of imminent or actual general hostilities, localized 
hostilities or civil disturbances:
