318 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII made to understand that this was a very expensive invasion and that it should not set a precedent for future action. The American people and the Congress should be sympathetic to tough responses by the President, especially if the Soviet actions in Afghanistan are cast in the proper light, i.e. the Soviets have kicked us while we were down, and we do not intend to stand for it. 113. Hotline Message From President Carter to General Secretary Brezhnev1 Washington, December 28, 1979 Dear President Brezhnev: I want to insure that you have fully weighed the ramifications of the Soviet actions in Afghanistan, which we regard as a clear threat to the peace. You should understand that these actions could mark a fundamental and long-lasting turning point in our relations. Taken without any previous discussion with us, they constitute in our view a clear violation of the Basic Principles on Relations, which you signed in 1972.2 My Government can in no way accept the Soviet Government’s explanation, conveyed to Ambassador Watson on December 27, that Soviet military forces were sent into Afghanistan at the request of the leadership of that country.3 The facts of the matter clearly show that these same Soviet forces were employed to overthrow that established government of Afghanistan and to impose a new government, which has brutally executed the former President and, reportedly, his family. Large-scale movements of military units into a sovereign country are always a legitimate matter of concern to the international community. When such military forces are those of a superpower, and are then used to depose an existing government and impose another, there are obvious adverse implications both for the region and for the world at large. We note with the utmost seriousness that this is the first time 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meetings File, Box 70, USSR: Brezhnev-Carter Correspondence: 7/79–2/80. Secret; Sensitive. This message was sent via the Direct Communications Link between Washington and Moscow. In the top right corner, Brzezinski wrote: “Sent 12–28, received by Moscow 29/0153, ZB” 2 See Document 87. 3 See Document 101.
