766
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I had the privilege of meeting President Carter, who gave me more
time than any previous President. I know that he desires peace and sta-
bility and I respect that. Unfortunately, to the pain of myself and others,
we have lost touch with each other. From a good beginning, we went
our different ways. In the beginning we spoke of mutual problems.
Then the President was the first to speak of Palestinian rights, then of
going to Geneva.3 We began to prepare to go to Geneva, then came the
surprise visit4 of Sadat to Israel.
This is a chance for me to express the feelings of the people as a
whole. The visit to Jerusalem under occupation had great religious sig-
nificance. My grandfather is buried there.5 He was involved in the Arab
revolt against colonial rule and he died because he would not compro-
mise. We lost Jerusalem in 1967 under Egyptian command. We knew
we would lose, but we went into that war anyway. Under Egyptian
command and responsibility, the West Bank was lost. The Sadat visit
was a very, very big shock. Yet we chose to take the moderate path and
describe the visit as a courageous move. Sometime later, I asked Sadat,
“Why did you not tell me. Why not ask what you could get for 242.” I
never got a positive answer. Also in 1973, there was no consultation.
Egypt has given much to unity, but it cannot be a unity of one. The
losses and expenses since 1973 are losses that we suffered.
The real peace process was derailed by Sadat. We were close to Ge-
neva. We were all getting ready to go. Sadat wrote me about Camp
David and reiterated his determination to demand Israeli withdrawal
from the West Bank and Jerusalem. I wrote to President Carter also.6 I
told him that if Israel was intransigent, to consider going to the Security
Council. I talked to Sadat while he was at Camp David and reiterated
that position. Then came the agreement, a very limited agreement. We
were told that the vagueness was intentional. The role provided for
Jordan under the Camp David agreements was that of a policeman, to
ensure the security. Of whom—the occupied? We tried to keep as quiet
as possible. But that is not a role that we could play. What we wanted to
know was what was the final object. Perhaps if we knew that, we could
work it out.
The Arab view about Egypt is that it has been an abnegation of
moral responsibility for those who took risks and suffered. Egypt is the
largest of the Arab states, but they cannot first take in the Soviets then
throw them out—make war, then make peace—without regard to our
3 See footnote 5, Document 24.
4 See footnote 3, Document 4.
5 Hussein’s grandfather, King Abdullah I, was assassinated in July 1951 while
visiting the Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem.
6 See Document 17.
