20 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII agency (1951–52); Press Attaché at the Afghan Embassy in Washington (1952–53); translator/interpreter for the ICA USOM/A Mission at Kabul (ca. 1958); translator for the American Embassy at Kabul (1962– 63); became General-Secretary of the Communist Party of Afghanistan (ca. May 1965); editor of “Khalq” (“Masses”), the far-leftist newspaper (April–May 1966); General Secretary of the Taraki group of the Communist Party of Afghanistan (April 1967); chairman of the Central Committee of the Unified Khalq-Parchamist Party (June 1977). 3. Taraki was married in 1942, but has no children. He has been described as “a shaven-headed, bulky man of almost commanding ugliness.” He visited the Soviet Union for medical treatment in 1965 or 1966, travelling extensively in the USSR during his 42-day sojourn. Taraki speaks Dari and English, in addition to his native Pushtun. Fuller biographic details will be reported later.2 4. Upon announcing the appointment of Taraki, the Radio Voice of the new DRA has proclaimed that tomorrow, May Day, will be a national holiday. Embassy officers have noted the appearance of some red flags throughout Kabul this afternoon. 5. Comment: Many Afghan and foreign observers at Kabul were surprised that the Communists have taken over complete power openly, discarding so early in the game their initial veil of “Islamic nationalism”. This could represent a serious miscalculation on their part however. The devout traditionalist majority of this society hardly seems ready to accept the leadership of what is, relatively speaking, a minuscule Communist elite. This reaction could also include those elements of the rebelling armed forces who thought they were fighting for broader nationalist and progressive goals. Additionally, the regional security implications will undoubtedly be clear to the Iranian and Pakistani Governments. With reference to the latter, we note that the long collaboration between Afghan Communist leaders and Pushtunistan nationalists appears to be continuing into the coup era. The red, black, and white flag of Pushtunistan still waves today over Pushtunistan Square in downtown Kabul. During coming days we will be able to provide a more thorough analysis of these events as we see the new Communist regime become established. The discipline we saw displayed during the anti-American demonstration before our Embassy only a few days ago, on April 19, has already translated itself into 2 Not found and not further identified.
