Options Identified
195
on the Libyan response, explanation and willingness to compensate,
this can be reviewed later.10 (C)
5. Next Steps. The SCC tomorrow will consider a scenario for the
diplomatic efforts over the next two or three weeks. It will also examine
the longer range objectives and strategy of our relations with Iran. (S)
10 Carter checked the disapprove option and wrote in the margin: “Call Libyan
Chargé in—give Khadafi 24 hours to reply satisfactorily to a Presidential demand. Then
suspend (not break) relations.” On December 2, the U.S. Embassy in Tripoli was attacked
in what Vance called a “government-inspired demonstration.” At the bottom of a Decem-
ber 3 memorandum to Carter from Vance, Carter wrote: “Cy—a) prepare to declare
Iranian diplomats PNG. They can have either a bank or very small financial staff handle
student money. b) prepare to inform European allies this week that after UNSC vote
we will call for them to embargo trade with Iran and then (or simultaneously) seek
sanctions thru UN. We will inform them in advance of any military action (or if you
prefer I can send a separate emissary). J.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14)
78.
Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 3, 1979
SUBJECT
Mid-Range and Longer-Range Strategy
A checklist and possible structure for your meeting on Tuesday.2
A mid-range negotiating strategy is not incompatible with a longer-
range strategy aimed at replacement of Khomeini or other strategies
which seek a fundamental change in the political situation. The key
decision to be made is whether or not we will place all our eggs in the
negotiating basket and let ourselves be carried along by events or whether
we will consider negotiations as one arm of a more activist strategy aimed
at transforming the situation.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 35, Subject File, Iran [Cables & Memos] 11–12/79. Secret; Eyes Only.
2 December 4.
