1122
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
454.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Heavy Water Production Technology to Argentina
With reference to your August 7 memorandum to the Secretary2
on Canada’s recent decision not to go along with our request that it re-
quire Argentine deferral of reprocessing for the supply of heavy water
production technology, we agree it is important to move ahead quickly
to seek the strongest assurances the traffic will bear against possible
misuse of the technology. We also agree that the Canadians would not
likely reverse their decision and, therefore, that our approaches now
should focus on other key elements on which we wish to see a common
supplier position for supply of this technology.
We have already informed the Canadians, Germans, and Swiss
that we attach considerable importance to continuing supplier discus-
sions to ensure common supplier positions on measures in addition to
requiring Argentine acceptance of NPT-type safeguards. We have also
asked the Canadians whether they would require the reprocessing con-
trols noted in your memorandum. We expect to discuss these matters
in detail with the Canadians, Germans and Swiss later this week.
In our strategy for these follow-on discussions and demarches, we
consider it important to emphasize those additional elements which
are most realistically achievable recognizing that we have already
spent considerable leverage and that our leverage among the three sup-
pliers varies substantially. Their willingness to support stronger meas-
ures also varies substantially. As will be noted, we are particularly con-
cerned that pressing the Canadians hard on reprocessing controls now
could further drive the sale to the Swiss and Germans under less strin-
gent controls and, thus, adversely affect US-Canadian relations without
any non-proliferation gain. At the same time, we are concerned that
pressing the Swiss and Germans hard on the matter would not only
have very little chance of success but also diminish our chances of get-
ting their agreement to key supplier controls.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 4, Argentina, 1/79–1/80. Confidential.
2 See Document 452.
