March 27–December 31, 1979
853
celebrated the transfer from Egyptian military to civilian control on Sat-
urday. Today’s events were really an exchange of visits—Begin to El
Arish and Sadat to Beersheva—to dramatize the new relationship
across the now “open border, on top of the exchange of visits was the
inaugural flight in President Sadat’s aircraft with Sadat, Begin, Secre-
tary Vance and colleagues aboard opening the new direct air corridor
between Israel and Egypt.
5. One of the decisions made during the talks today was to an-
nounce that the Egyptian-Israeli border would indeed be “open.” Al-
though Begin and Sadat had announced this during Begin’s visit to
Cairo shortly after the treaty signing, the Egyptians in the past week
had told the Israelis they felt it would be premature to open the border
at this point.4 Thus it took another one of those decisions by Sadat to
overrule his staff to produce the announcement in El Arish that the
border is now proclaimed to be open. Having made that proclamation,
no one is sure exactly what will happen at the border tomorrow since it
is still possible that any workers who might want to cross into Israel to
their jobs on the Egyptian side might be stopped until border-crossing
procedures get sorted out. Indeed, news broadcasts this morning from
Cairo quote Khalil as indicating that many “technical” details need to
be resolved before the open borders policy can be implemented and no
one expects more than a trickle at the outset. Similarly, the air corridor
is now “open” and any government aircraft wishing to go back and
forth will use it, but for the time being most commercial carriers will
avoid it because of the probable Arab boycott.
6. Perhaps the most moving of the day’s events was also the sim-
plest. On their way to depart El Arish, Begin and Sadat with Secretary
Vance stopped in a meeting hall in El Arish for a brief ceremony with
wounded war veterans from both sides. The statements by Sadat and
Begin were very short and primarily on the theme of “no more war.” It
was plain from the expression on their faces that, to the veterans, this
was a most meaningful experience. Begin’s statement was used as the
platform for proclaiming that the borders would be open, that Presi-
dent Sadat had invited him to visit Alexandria the first week in July,
and that Israel would release a number of Ari’s prisoners in honor of
the occasion.5
7. The main exchange of public statements began when the party
moved by helicopter to Beersheva. There were two separate events—
one at the town hall and a second at the Ben Gurion University of the
4 See footnote 4, Document 256.
5 Telegram 11583 from Tel Aviv, May 30, reported that sixteen Palestinian “security
prisoners” in Israeli custody were released subsequent to Begin’s statement. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790245–0488)
