126
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Consideration must also be given to South Asian regional relation-
ships before deciding how closely we wish to involve ourselves with
the GOP. Although the question of supporting the Afghan insurgents
was originally raised by the Pakistan side, the GOP might later demand
a high price in return for its cooperation in terms of security guarantees
and economic assistance. Increased cooperation with the GOP must
also be considered in light of our relations with India, although there
is intelligence which indicates India shares our and Pakistan’s concern
over developments in Afghanistan.
COVERT ACTION OPTIONS
CIA representatives have been instructed not to delve too deeply
with Afghan sources into the theoretical possibility of clandestine sup-
port for the rebels, for fear of giving them false signals regarding U.S.
intentions. Much specific information is therefore not now available.
Listed below are a number of options, rough cost estimates and a
summary of pros and cons for each.
1. Radio Broadcasts from Pakistan
Radio Pakistan has several stations which broadcast regularly into
Afghanistan. Assuming GOP cooperation, these stations could be used
for propaganda purposes, with CIA assisting in the programming.
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: Communications are very poorly developed in Afghanistan,
and radio is the best means quickly to reach a large Afghan audience.
Costs would be moderate as we would be using existing broadcasting
facilities and existing staff including linguists. The U.S. hand would
be hidden.
Cons: GOP cooperation would be required. Pakistan would be
openly identified as opposing the Afghan regime; this would provoke
Soviet/Afghan wrath and possible retaliation. In extremis, the Afghans
might even attempt to bomb or sabotage the radio stations. More subtly,
the Afghans could stir up trouble for Pakistan in Baluchistan and
Northwest Frontier Provinces.
2. Insurgency Support—Direct Financial Aid
CIA is in contact with a number of Afghan emigres who could
serve as conduits for funds to the insurgents. These funds could be
used to buy arms, supplies, etc., as the dissidents saw fit. Because a
unified military command has not yet emerged, at least initially we
would consider providing several groups with relatively small amounts
and then evaluate which uses the funds most effectively.
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: This would be the easiest way to supply badly needed encour-
agement and support for the anti-communist rebels. Direct funding
