Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Their voices sound a note of fear, rather than hope, when they speak about the world. They have cried out against our efforts to strengthen the center in Nicaragua and to pursue prudent arms limitation agreements. Above all, these voices suggest that our defense of freedom should be concentrated almost exclusively in arms. We do need to revitalize our military. And we are. America can and will do all that is necessary to maintain its military position, to counter aggression, and to deter war. America is and will remain a global power, second to none. But I believe the American people understand that a foreign policy premised on a renewed arms race is a foreign policy of folly, not wisdom; of weakness, not strength. I believe the American people will rightly refuse to write a blank check for belligerence. America’s purpose is not a new cold war but a realistic peace based on a solid foundation of deterrence. We must seek security not only in arms but also in a diplomacy that is generous, that is willing to cope with inevitable change, that is faithful to decent human values. If we do that, we can be in the 1980s not only as strong as steel but as resilient and enduring. We can be not only a fortress of arms but a fortress of hope and freedom as well. 154. Editorial Note On August 21, 1980, President Jimmy Carter delivered remarks at the annual convention of the American Legion, taking place in Boston, Massachusetts at the John B. Hynes Veterans Auditorium. The President began his remarks by outlining the efforts of the Veterans Administration in providing support for veterans, especially those who served during the Vietnam war. He then described the four specific objectives of his administration’s national security policy: preventing war, sharing in the protection of industrial democracies in Europe and Asia, safeguarding and strengthening links to nations in the Middle East, and defending America’s vital interests if threatened anywhere. After a brief summary of the administration’s efforts to enhance U.S. strategic forces and deterrent capabilities, the President explained the relationship of this effort to projections of American force: “Our strategy, now modernized to take advantage of Soviet planning and Soviet attitudes, must leave them no room for the illusion that they can obtain any advantage over the United States of America by the
