310 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 93. Memorandum for Record of Meeting Between Eisenhower and Gray1 Washington, September 12, 1958 On September 10, I departed Washington at 5:50 a.m., by special mission aircraft in the company of General Goodpaster for a meeting with the President. The President came to his office on the BARBARA ANN, and after General Goodpaster had completed his business, I discussed four items with the President. 1. The amended draft of “Instructions for the Expenditure of Nuclear Weapons in Accordance with Presidential Authorization dated May 22, 1957” which was transmitted to the President from the Secretary of State and the Deputy Secretary of Defense on 23 August 1958. After recounting the history of this document to the President, I suggested that it might not be profitable for him to go through it paragraph by paragraph but for me to indicate in what respects it deviated from the “Authorization for the Expenditure of Nuclear Weapons approved by the President on May 22, 1957.” I used as a basis for my discussion, Mr. Lay’s memorandum to me of September 3, which is attached. I indicated to the President that the concern of the Secretary of State with respect to whether authority to expend nuclear weapons for defense of U.S. forces in foreign territories should be made subject to future agreements and understandings with the country or countries involved, had been met in the draft document. I also pointed out to the President that the draft document when finally approved, would be the basis for subsequent preparation and submission for Presidential approval of separate implementing instructions to each appropriate commander. I pointed out what appeared to be a change of some consequence in paragraph 4 a (3), which originally read: “Subject to the consent of the country sovereign over the territory involved.” It was indicated that under the new wording whether we obtained the consent of the sover­ eign country would depend upon any applicable agreements or under­ standings. The President found no difficulty with this change. There follow the other points I made with the President: Paragraph 5 c, last sentence. The President felt the new limitation, which is designed to limit hostilities, was an improvement. 1 Source: Expenditure of nuclear weapons; NSC structure; Taiwan Straits. Top Secret. 6 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up.
