Venezuela 1275 while in Caracas last year, had, in response to a press question, indicated that the United States would grant a request for extradition if made by the Venezuelan Government. Mr. Rubottom recalled that the Vice President had actually said that the United States would give full consideration to any such request in accordance with the terms of the Extradition Treaty. The people of Venezuela would be unable to draw that fine a distinction, retorted the Foreign Minister. The Secretary said that he wanted to direct the discussion toward Cuba, which probably looked on Venezuela as its closest friend among her Latin American neighbors. Castro seemed to be slipping rather badly and leading Cuba into difficulties, and be hoped that the Venezuelans would be able to have some influence on Castro whom he hoped to see sometime next month, possibly stopping off in Cuba en route to the meeting of the General Assembly. Mr. Rubottom described the deterioration of United States-Cuban relations and the futile efforts in which Castro seemed to be engaged in trying to separate the U.S. people from U.S. Government, an impossible task in the name of a democracy like the United States. Repeated attacks on the U.S. Government, with nothing substantial to back them up, had gradually alienated most United States public opinion and would redound to Cuba’s great detainment in the long run. Castro had gained widespread public support in the United States, especially after his trip last spring, but this had been frittered away. VE–31. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, August 23, 19591  Washington, August 23, 1959. SUBJECT Extradition of Pérez Jiménez PARTICIPANTS Minister Counselor Armando Rojas, Chargé d’ Affaires of the Venezuelan Embassy Mr. José Gil-Borges, Counselor, Venezuelan Embassy Assistant Secretary R. R. Rubottom, Jr. Mr. William T. Briggs, EST Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges called on Sunday, August 23, at 3:30 p.m. at Mr. Rubottom’s office to present a note requesting the 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/8–2359. Confidential. Drafted by Briggs.
