862  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Options
1. Maintain current U.S. position; no RV destruction.
2. Propose to require the destruction of a number of RV shells 
equivalent to the net number of RVs deployed on missiles that are 
reduced. There would be no commitment to destroy the RVs actually 
on the missiles removed from the force.
3. Propose to require the destruction of RV shells or RVs from 
the missiles that are actually removed from the deployed force under 
START.
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council6
Washington, September 17, 1990
Non-­circumvention
We and the Soviets have agreed to texts of a treaty article and an 
agreed statement which would ban international obligations or under-
takings which would conflict with the treaty, and ban transfer of ICBMs, 
SLBMs, heavy bombers and nuclear ALCMs, except for existing pat-
terns of cooperation. The Soviets made a unilateral statement that they 
have no programs of cooperation involving the transfer of strategic 
offensive arms to third countries. The Soviets object to our unilateral 
statement that makes clear our pattern of cooperation with the UK is 
essentially open-­ended, going beyond Trident II and beyond SLBMs. 
We need to decide what, if any, additional steps to take to resolve this 
issue with the Soviets, and begin high-­level consultations with the U.K. 
on any such steps.
The Soviets accept the Trident II program, but claim an open-­ended 
provision for transfers to the U.K. would cause them a ratification prob-
lem. Both Gorbachev and Shevardnadze have highlighted this “non-­
circumvention” issue in their meetings with Secretary Baker.
The U.S. at the summit took the position that U.S./U.K. coopera-
tion could not be constrained by START, and there is not a problem here 
because U.S./U.K. cooperation will not make the U.K. a nuclear super-
power. U.K. Foreign Minister Hurd subsequently wrote Shevardnadze 
making clear the importance of U.S./U.K. cooperation to the British, 
but assuring the Soviets about the relative small scale of future U.K. 
strategic forces.
6 Secret.
