680  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Brzezinski: At a minimum, we can enforce a situation in which he 
must disarm himself to attack M–X. In reality, we can do better than the 
minimum.
Jones: Today, if you want to believe in highly artificial attack 
threats, he can take out 100 percent of our bombers with 100 percent of 
his ICBMs in an area overpressure attack.
Perry: The more realistic depiction of the threat is the one used by 
the Air Force to configure the base-­line. If he puts [number not declassi-
fied] percent of his hard-­target-­capable weapons against [less than one 
line not declassified] percent of the M–X missiles will survive.
Brown: Let’s move on to verification. We have an overhead photo 
here4 which [2 lines not declassified] There are, of course, other means to 
verify than photography. Stan, do you want to comment?
Turner: There are two problems: The Soviets verifying us, and we 
verifying the Soviets. [13 lines not declassified] Our confidence in verify-
ing a Soviet version is bound to be less than theirs because we face a 
closed society and shall have less confidence in cooperative measures.
Brown: But we have better resolution and real time imagery.
Turner: By the late 1980s these advantages may not be so great. 
[9 lines not declassified]
Brown: How many SS–16s might they hide this way, in your view?
Turner: [3 lines not declassified]
Brown: Why not hide them elsewhere, away from multiple aim 
point confinements? They’ll have more chance of getting away with it 
where we are not looking hard.
Turner: [5 lines not declassified]
Brown: Wouldn’t they do better to deploy SS–16 type missiles in 
SS–20 deployment areas?
Turner: [1 line not declassified]
Brown: But we shall be looking closely at both possibilities for 
cheating, and using all types of intelligence.
Vance: [1 line not declassified]
Turner: [1 line not declassified]
Jones: Adjacent confinements could be opened simultaneously to 
assure no escape of an illegal missile from one to another.
Perry: In our scheme, we would be able to open a whole valley of 
several adjacent confinements to protect against this problem.
Brzezinski: In my view, it’s hard to see them building the multiple 
shelter system unless they are planning to cheat.
4 Not found attached.
