Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
375
Asian Neglect
I have received recently a letter from a colleague who summarized
for me some criticisms of our Asian policy, which are shared by a
number of Asian specialists.
In summary form, his key points are these:
—Pacific Asia has been accorded too low priority.
—The Korean troop withdrawal has been unsettling; the timing
was precipitate.8
—Our naval posture is inadequate to deal with the growing Soviet
presence.
—U.S. weakness vis-a-vis Moscow justifiably causes China to view
us as a less attractive partner.
—We have not pursued our bilateral relations with China with
sufficient vigor.
—Our emphasis on normalizing relations with Vietnam makes
little sense, compared to the need to strengthen our ties with ASEAN
countries.
—Our human rights policy has been poorly implemented, particu-
larly its emphasis on punitive measures against the violators rather
than providing incentives to those with improving records.
—We have failed to use the China card against the Soviets.
—Our weakened relations with Japan concern the entire region.
—In the absence of confidence in U.S. policy in Asia, normalization
becomes more difficult, for our assurances to Taiwan of our continued
commitment to its tranquility become less credible.
We will be correcting some of these shortcomings shortly: the
meeting with Fukuda and the Economic Summit9 ought to improve the
economic relationship with Japan and infuse new political vitality into
the Alliance; the adjustment of combat troop withdrawals from Korea
should be welcomed by the Koreans; the Vice President’s trip to the
ASEAN countries10 will properly place higher emphasis on collabora-
tion with our friends than on our earlier (and in my judgment prema-
ture) efforts to normalize relations with Vietnam; we hope to activate
8 See footnote 3, Document 53.
9 Fukuda visited Washington May 1–3. Documentation on his visit is scheduled for
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIV, Korea; Japan. The next economic
summit was scheduled to take place in Bonn July 16–17. For the minutes of the meetings,
see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Documents 142–145.
For the President’s remarks at the conclusion of the summit, see Document 92.
10 Reference is to Mondale’s trip to the Philippines, Thailand, Indonesia, Australia,
New Zealand, Guam, and Hawaii April 29–May 5. Documentation on the visit is sched-
uled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXII, Southeast Asia and the
Pacific.
