722
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser, State Department
William Quandt, NSC Staff Member
Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President
Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Richard Viets, Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy, Israel
Menachem Begin, Prime Minister
Yigael Yadin, Deputy Prime Minister
Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior
Simcha Ehrlich, Minister of Finance
Shmuel Tamir, Minister of Justice
Moshe Nissim, Minister Without Portfolio
Gideon Patt, Minister of Industry, Commerce and Tourism
Eliezer Shostak, Minister of Health
Chaim Landau, Minister of Transport
Moshe Dayan, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
Yitzha Modai, Minister of Energy and Infrastructure
Zevulun Hammer, Minister of Education and Culture
Ariel Sharon, Minister of Agriculture
Aharon Abu-Hatzeira, Minister of Religious Affairs
David Levi, Minister of Immigrant Absorption
Israel Katz, Minister of Labor and Social Betterment
Mordechai Zippori, Deputy Minister of Defense
Yitzak Zamir, Attorney General
Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the U.S.
Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman
General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Eli Rubenstein, Assistant to Director General to the Foreign Minister
General Avraham Tamir, Assistant Minister of Defense for National Planning
Jossie Chiehanover, Director General, Foreign Minister’s Office
Dr. Eliahu Ben-Elissar, Chef de Cabinet, Prime Minister’s Office
Arye Naor, Cabinet Secretary
Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor
Schlomo Nakhdimon, Advisor to the Prime Minister for Press
Ilan Tehila, Military Secretary to the Minister of Defense
Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister
(The Prime Minister begins the meeting by introducing all of the
members in his Cabinet).
President Carter: I want to thank you for your hospitality and seri-
ousness with which you have addressed the treaty. I deeply appreciate
your having met all last night in order to accommodate my time
problems. It was very gracious of you. We have very close ties to Israel.
We value your strength, and your democratic form of government.
They are matters of deep admiration to us, and are a great benefit to the
United States. I believe the benefits are mutual.
We are close to an historic achievement. This could be the first of
many steps to establish even more securely peace in Israel. Israel can
defend herself. But we want your security to be based on peace with
