1979 661 continuation of established US defense spending policies, including budget increases currently projected, will lead the US into a clearly inferior position in the 1980s. The trends and magnitudes depicted in this analysis have to be radically in error for any other conclusion to be reached. It follows naturally, to quote from the draft, “We will have to spend a lot more on defense if we are to remain a major power relative to the Soviets.” (U) The Marshall study considers various arguments advanced to soften or discount so stark a judgment. For example: —Methodological uncertainties in measurements of this sort may lead to an overly gloomy view. This may be so. Or the true picture could be even worse. CIA data probably understate Soviet defense investment somewhat because they do not measure all real investment in defense, e.g., construction for R&D facilities. At the same time, US projections of actual US defense investment in the 1980s may be optimistic. In any case, the gross picture of relative investment is not likely to be wrong. —The role of our allies compensates somewhat. This is true. But taking allies on both sides into account shows the Warsaw Pact out-­ investing NATO by 15–20 percent. Moreover, as Victor noted in our pre-NSC discussions, NATO defense efforts are a “dependent variable”; they depend on US strength and leadership. If the Allies see the overall trends against the West, they will not take up the slack, but seek refuge in Soviet good will, knowing that they cannot compensate for Soviet power. —Do we have compensating technological advantages? Yes, but they are dwindling. Our general level of military–technological innovation appears to be subsiding, and we put less of our available technological potential into deployed systems than the Soviets do. —The Soviets continue to fear our demonstrated capacity to ­mobilize our industrial base for defense when we get excited. But they probably also notice that this US capability has declined in recent years for various reasons: (1) Due to our shrinking overall defense effort, the defense industrial base for mobilization has shrunk, e.g., many subcontractors have left the business. (2) Modern weapons systems are more complex and, therefore, expanding their production takes more time than past experience would suggest. (3) We pay less attention to national mobilization as an aspect of defense policy than does the USSR. —In the 1980s, Soviet internal difficulties may persuade Soviet leaders to reduce defense effort. This is possible but not likely, and, according to CIA, not dictated by economic necessity. Soviet priorities are well entrenched. The opportunities and threats of the 1980s are likely to impress upon Soviet leaders the wisdom of past emphasis on defense. Defense is a “success industry” in the USSR from a political viewpoint. And, as Bialer keeps reminding us, today’s USSR is striking, not for the severity of its internal problems, which it has always had, but for its socio-­political stability and its ability to manage despite these problems. (U) It might be argued that investment is a measure of “inputs” to defense, but not necessarily a measure of useful military outputs. The investment imbalance may be thought to reveal Soviet inefficiency;
