Venezuela  1243
additional tax applied to only ½ of the excess income over the aggre-
gate of the taxes. Companies whose net income after the normal and 
surtax did not exceed 10 percent of the capital invested were exempt 
from the additional tax.
In practice the 50–50 principle has resulted in a somewhat greater 
share of revenues for the government than profits for the companies. 
It has been characteristic of the Venezuelan petroleum industry that 
a high volume of operations has been required before a profit could 
be realized. Therefore, until a level of production and profits has been 
reached allowing the 50–50 profit sharing tax to become effective, the 
division has resulted in favor of the government by reason of a rela-
tively high royalty and heavy exploration and development costs. An 
unofficial, although reliable comparison of the direct income of the 
Venezuelan Government from petroleum companies (other than from 
bonuses for new concessions) with the net profits of those companies 
over a period of ten years (through 1957) shows a ratio of 53–47 favor-
able to the government.
3. Decree Law of December 20, 1958
The decree law of December 20, 1958, increases the supplementary 
tax (No. 2 (b) above) to provide for a minimum of 2 percent on taxable 
income up to Bs. 10,000 and a maximum of 45 percent on net taxable 
income in excess of Bs. 28,000,000. As under the prior law, certain 
reductions may be granted for new investment in increased production 
facilities. Neither the “basic tax” (No. 2 (a) above) nor the “additional 
tax” (No. 2 (c) above) is altered. Although the additional tax remains 
unchanged in the new law, it is rendered ineffective so far as the oil com-
panies are concerned since the operation of the new surtax schedule in 
combination with the basic tax and royalty payments will, in all cases 
that can be envisioned, result in total revenue to the Government of con-
siderably more than 50 percent.
In view of public statements made by the Venezuelan government 
that the level of the Venezuelan income tax is still favorable when com-
pared to other countries such as the U.S.A. where the corporate rate is 
52 percent, it must be pointed out that this is not accurate in the case of 
a U.S. corporation producing oil in the United States. With the appli-
cation of the 27.5 percent depletion allowance, the level of U.S. income 
taxation is substantially below that of the Venezuelan law, i.e., about 
38 percent in the United States versus 47.5 percent in Venezuela.
While much study is needed to make a precise calculation as 
to the effect of the December 20 decree, preliminary estimates indi-
cate that most oil companies will find their payments to government 
for 1958, and succeeding years, increased from a 50 percent to a 
60 percent basis.
