128
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Meeting:
The Secretary first told Kamel about President Carter’s desire to
have a meeting2 this evening with President Sadat and three members
of the Egyptian side. Kamel said he would inform President Sadat.
Kamel noted that after this morning’s tripartite meeting,3 Sadat was
very relaxed.
Egyptian Paper:
The Secretary said that Sadat and Begin had begun to discuss the
Egyptian paper.4 They had spent three hours on the subject and will
discuss the paper further at their 5:00PM meeting.5 President Carter,
the Secretary noted, has a number of questions on the paper. Some he
has already raised, others he will want to raise. The Secretary was un-
certain whether a discussion of the paper can be concluded today.
Kamel said he was not sure how things will move forward. The ap-
proaches of Begin and Sadat are totally different. Sadat is searching for
essentials; Begin is concentrating on details. This difference of ap-
proach makes it more difficult for President Carter.
Kamel noted that the Egyptians had worked hard on the paper.
They believe it is the minimum that can be presented to the Arabs. The
Saudis and others will support the concepts set forth in the paper. Any-
thing less will place Sadat and Egypt in a bad situation. Sadat is willing
to agree to “everything on normalizing relations and security,” but on
territory and sovereignty he cannot do so.
On the West Bank, Sadat had mentioned the possibility of insub-
stantial modifications. Kamel insisted that Sadat cannot go beyond this.
There is no reason to give on this point. Egypt, he emphasized, wants
real peace. Egypt is sincere. It wants to deepen the human relationship
with the Israelis. If Palestinian rights are ignored or Arab territory is
not returned, Kamel insisted that there will never be a permanent
peace. He asked the Secretary’s views on the Egyptian paper.
The Secretary described the paper as an obviously serious effort
and one which had been carefully put together. As President Carter
had indicated, there is much in it with which we agree. On some
matters, we do have questions. President Carter will want to talk about
this and will want to make suggestions to overcome the difficulties.
Kamel later asked the Secretary how he saw the paper. The Secre-
tary reiterated his view that it is a serious effort. We will have to go
2 See footnote 19, Document 28.
3 See footnote 13, Document 28.
4 See footnote 8, Document 28.
5 See footnote 17, Document 28.
