North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 As illustrated by the attached compilation, the existing statutory constraints take many forms and address a wide range of subjects. However, from the standpoint of their effect on military and economic assistance as implements of foreign policy, they fall into three general categories. The first type consists of conditional restrictions—provisions of law which allow certain actions to be taken only if it is first determined that specified criteria are met and Congress is informed. (The statute which required your recent determination on assistance to Zaire is an example.)6 This type of restraint is intended to assure Congress that potentially controversial actions will be subject to high-level approval within the Executive Branch and that Congress will be informed of the decision in a timely way so that it can make its views known. These statutes may delay or impede action, but usually do not prevent you from carrying out programs you regard as important. The second type of constraint is the prohibition against providing assistance. Some of these name specific countries as ineligible for U.S. assistance. Others refer to types of conduct (e.g., severance of diplomatic relations) that result in ineligibility. In either event, they may operate to prevent furnishing of assistance which is otherwise within the scope of your general statutory authority. The third group is comprised of provisions for Congressional veto or approval of actions you propose to take. (Examples are major arms sales and nuclear exports.) Many statutory prohibitions either provide for the possibility of waiver, or are subject to your general authority to waive most prohibitions against programs under the Foreign Assistance Act. Some waivable constraints are enacted with the expectation that they will be waived and, as a practical matter, fall into the category of conditional restrictions described above. In some cases, however, even though a waiver would be legally possible the political cost would be very high. For example, the thirty-day Congressional review for major arms sale proposals may be waived and the sale made immediately in any case where “the President states . . . that an emergency exists which requires such sale in the national security interests of the United States.” In the four years that the Congressional review procedure has been in effect, this waiver authority has never been exercised. 6 In accordance with the International Security Assistance Act of 1977, Carter issued
