Afghanistan
835
Badghisat
A sudden burst of insurgency in Badghisat province in March 1979
caught the small government forces off guard. Since then the insurgents
have controlled much of the province, but not the major towns. They
apparently tried to advance on Meymaneh, in Faryab province, but
troops rushed from Mazar-i-Sharif stopped them near the provincial
border. A Soviet clearing operation in July 1980 appears to have won
some ground for the government, but the gain may be only temporary.
Herat
In March 1979, the city of Herat was the scene of the first major
urban uprising against the Afghan Marxists. Crowds using tactics pat-
terned after those that brought down the Shah were joined by part of
the local Afghan Army garrison. Although the rising was suppressed
in a few days, calm never returned completely to the city. Following the
Soviet invasion, it was reduced to anarchy by strikes, demonstrations,
assassinations, and armed clashes. Soviet troops have held important
installations there, such as the airport, but have moved into the city only
on a few occasions to prevent insurgents from gaining complete control.
Insurgency has been less a problem in the remainder of the prov-
ince. Small bands—some operating from Iranian territory—have
clashed with government forces, sometimes taking isolated posts, but
Afghan forces, with only some help from the Soviets, have prevented
significant insurgent success.
Farah
The Soviets have established a major military base at Shindand air
base, and have some degree of control in the central part of the province.
Nevertheless, insurgent attacks on convoys on the Herat-Qandahar
road have become so serious that most Afghan truckers refuse to use
it. Soviet control is more tenuous along the Iranian border, and Soviet
clearing operations in the eastern part of the province have met
strong resistance.
Nimruz
Sparsely settled Nimruz experienced almost no insurgency before
the Soviet invasion, but in March the insurgents—opposed mainly by
demoralized police—gained control of most of the countryside and
almost seized the provincial capital. The dispatch of a few companies
of Afghan troops and a smaller number of Soviets prevented further
insurgent gains. The Soviets apparently are planning a more ambitious
clearing operation, but it is unlikely they consider the province impor-
tant enough to spare enough troops to do more than relieve pressure
on a few posts.
