Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —The U.S. Government believes that this matter should not interfere with the steadily improving tone of US-Romanian relations. —We will refrain from publicly exploiting Pacepa’s presence in the United States. —Pacepa came to the United States of his own volition. No clandestine relationship existed between Pacepa and the U.S. Government before he presented himself to us in Bonn. —Extradition would not be possible in this case, and if Romania pursued extradition it would only lead to unfortunate publicity. —The only proper course, and the one best suited to maintaining our excellent relationship, is to close the book on this entire matter. —There are no indications that Pacepa’s family knew anything about his plans. We hope that treatment of his wife and daughter will not compel Pacepa to raise the matter of their treatment publicly, which inevitably would have an adverse impact on our bilateral relations. In order to signal to the Romanians that we were following a course of “business as usual,” Nimetz briefed them on a wide range of issues including the Middle East, China, US-Soviet relations, Southern Africa and disarmament. Nimetz also discussed bilateral issues and listed the positive economic decisions we have made since the Ceausescu visit (approval of a large number of export control cases, an ExIm loan approval, the Romanian fishing allotment, and CCC credits).4 Andrei, after consulting with Ceausescu, responded as follows, emphasizing that this was a personal and confidential message from Ceausescu to you: —President Ceausescu shares President Carter’s desire to maintain the dialogue between the two countries and the momentum of the developing relationship. —To eliminate this impediment to progress, it is necessary that Pacepa not be allowed to remain in the United States. Although extradition would be awkward, the United States is not required to permit Pacepa to remain in this country. —Pacepa has already created problems with his provocative and misleading information. This has been designed to injure Romania’s relations with the United States, Germany, and the West in general. Certainly there are other forces (he meant, but did not name, the Soviet Union) who are interested in the deterioration of relations among the US, FRG, and Romania. 4 The Embassy in Bucharest reported on Nimetz’s bilateral discussions in telegram
