136
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
I find the analysis of so-called “regional influentials” to be very in-
teresting, but the separate analysis does not deal with the status of
human rights and how the violation of those principles by some of
those countries affects our relations, which I think is the really tough
point. Unless we include that aspect in the approach, I fear we will be
pursuing improved relations and implying a disregard for human
rights at the same time—for example, Brazil.
44.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
PERSPECTIVES—Human Rights Worldwide (Approved by Department of State,
17 May 1977)
1. In recent months there has been considerable commentary on
the global nature of human rights violations, with emphasis that these
abuses have not been confined to any one geographic area or political
philosophy. The character of violations has varied from country to
country as has the degree of sensitivity vis-a`-vis U.S. policy interests.
U.S. and Western European leaders have registered increasing concern
over human rights abuses and have argued for a general campaign to
counter this phenomenon throughout the world. President Carter’s po-
sition on human rights has received world-wide attention, and U.S.
human rights policy is being advanced by various levels of the U.S.
Government in its relations with other countries.
2. Stations are encouraged to apply their regional expertise and
feel for the local scene to promote human rights locally and internation-
ally. [12 lines not declassified]
3. [1 line not declassified] it is suggested that you draw upon the fol-
lowing concepts, which have been approved by the State Department.
A. Mention legal and international commitments to honor human
rights. Most of the offending governments are parties to such United
Nations resolutions as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (ap-
proved in 1948), the International Covenant on Civil and Political
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Congressional Affairs, Job
81M00980R: Subject Committee Files, Box 27, Folder 13: Covert Actions. Secret; Sensitive.
No drafting information appears on the memorandum.
