84
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
28.
Draft Summary of Meetings1
undated
CHRONOLOGY
September 5, 1978—Tuesday
1430–14572
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Welcomes Sadat at helipad. No substantive conversation.
Secretary Vance accompanied Sadat from Andrews to Camp David.
1640–17163
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: Welcomes Begin at helipad. No substantive conversation.
Secretary Vance accompanied Sadat from Andrews to Camp David.
1 Source: Department of State, U.S. Embassy Tel Aviv, Principal Officer Program
Files, Lot 85F104, Personal for Ambassador Lewis—Sensitive Notes 1978. Secret. Unless
noted otherwise, no memoranda of conversation for the meetings listed in the summary
have been found.
2 In his personal diary, Carter wrote of this meeting: “Sadat, on arrival at Aspen
[Lodge], emphasized that he was eager to reach agreements, total if possible, not just to
establish procedures for future negotiations. He stated that Begin did not want an agree-
ment and would try to delay as much as possible. Sadat said he would back me in all
things and has a comprehensive proposal ‘here in my pocket’ that would include estab-
lishment of diplomatic relations and end the boycott against Israel.” Carter responded: “I
told him I would delay any U.S. proposals until after he and Begin explored all the differ-
ences. He said he would try to protect me by putting forward good proposals and make it
unnecessary for U.S. proposals. I told him he needed to understand Begin’s problems and
attitudes. He seemed to be somewhat impatient of Begin, distrustful of him, determined
to succeed, perhaps overly bold and inclined to acquire my partnership against Begin.”
(Carter, White House Diary, pp. 216–217) For Carter’s memoir account of this meeting, see
Keeping Faith, pp. 327–329.
3 In his personal diary, Carter wrote of this meeting: “The next conversation was
with Begin after his arrival—quite a different attitude. Begin was immediately interested
in the techniques of Camp David discussion: times, places, how many aides at the
meetings, and so forth. He pointed out that this meeting was historically unprecedented,
that there had not been an agreement between a Jewish nation and Egypt for more than
two thousand years.” Carter responded: “I told him we three principals could not expect
others to settle major issues if we couldn’t, that all issues should be discussed at Camp
David, and that Sadat had a concern about Begin’s preoccupation with details instead of
the major issues. Begin said, ‘I can handle both.’” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 217)
Carter also discussed this meeting, in which he described both Begin and himself as
“somewhat ill at ease,” in Keeping Faith, pp. 329–330. Following this meeting, Carter met
with Brzezinski and Vance at the Presidential lodge. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle,
p. 255) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found.
