September 18–December 16, 1978
289
the talks will be in immediate trouble if either side insists on a one-
sided approach.) Under this kind of format we would need to field a
delegation (see below) that can keep a member present in each of these
committees. We will also need, in addition to good general strength in
Arab-Israel affairs, expertise in two special fields—military and legal.
We see all the real work being performed in these sub-groups, with
the plenary convened for opening and closing sessions, or perhaps pe-
riodically to hear progress reports from the working committees. Our
delegation members will presumably serve very informally as chair-
men in the working committees but we envisage letting the two sides
get on with the work in their own manner as much as possible without
guidance from us so long as they are able to make progress in this
manner. Our role in the negotiations on bilateral issues will be to be
present so that we know what is going on, to be available for consulta-
tions, and to be alert to possible trouble spots which might require our
intervention, either with the ministers here or through our ambas-
sadors in the capitals.
Your Role
The President will open the proceedings on October 12 with a
short public speech, after which the meeting will go into closed session
and you will be in the chair. We suggest you use the remaining time be-
fore lunch that first day to outline our suggestions for a format for the
talks and to settle on procedural matters. After a working lunch, which
we suggest you host, we may wish to continue discussions in plenary
for a further afternoon session before breaking up, for the following
day, into working groups. The afternoon session might be the time for
you to make it clear we intend to use the talks here to tackle West
Bank/Gaza issues as well.
With the negotiations moving into its working group phase the
next morning, there would no longer be a need for you to maintain a
regular presence at the talks. Roy Atherton would take over as Chair-
man. We hope that you will keep time available in the first few days to
engage the two ministers in discussions about West Bank/Gaza issues.
The U.S. Delegation
We recommend:
Alternates:
Cyrus Vance, Chairman
Morris Draper
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr.,
David Korn
Deputy Chairman
Harold Saunders
William Quandt
Michael Sterner
William Kirby
James Covey
