Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 laboration among our monetary authorities in restoring order to foreign exchange markets. We have initialed an important new multilateral trade agreement that will establish fair trading rules for the next decade.5 It will have a direct and positive impact on our economy. We have agreed with the other industrialized members of the International Energy Agency to cut back our collective demand for oil by 2 million barrels a day. To fulfill this commitment—and to reduce our own costly and dangerous dependence on oil imports—the President has initiated a sensible program for achieving greater domestic conservation and production. For we must begin to deal urgently with a markedly changed global energy environment. We recognize that a well-managed foreign assistance program contributes to the economic performance of the developing countries. Their growth has become an increasingly important factor in the health of our own economy. Aiding that development is not only an investment in the future of others, it is an investment in our own future as well. The Path We Will Follow In the foreign policy choices we are now making, we are determining the path we will follow in a new era. In unsettled times, each of us has a responsibility to be clear about how we would deal with the world as we find it. Most Americans now recognize that we alone cannot dictate events. This recognition is not a sign of America’s decline; it is a sign of growing American maturity in a complex world. We are stronger today because we recognize the realities of our times. This recognition, together with an equally clear understanding that we remain the most powerful of nations, should make every American as staunchly optimistic about our nation’s future as we have always been. There can be no going back to a time when we thought there could be American solutions to every problem. We must go forward into a new era of mature American leadership—based on strength, not belligerence; on steadiness, not impulse; on confidence, not fear. We have every reason to be confident. For 200 years, we have prospered by welcoming change and working with it, not by resisting it. We 5 The Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations in Geneva concluded in mid-April. On June 19, the President transmitted to Congress the text of the trade agreements negotiated and entered into in Geneva and the text of the proposed Trade Agreements Act (P.L. 96–39). For the President’s transmittal message, see Public Papers: Carter,
