Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
607
laboration among our monetary authorities in restoring order to for-
eign exchange markets.
We have initialed an important new multilateral trade agreement
that will establish fair trading rules for the next decade.5 It will have a
direct and positive impact on our economy.
We have agreed with the other industrialized members of the In-
ternational Energy Agency to cut back our collective demand for oil by
2 million barrels a day. To fulfill this commitment—and to reduce our
own costly and dangerous dependence on oil imports—the President
has initiated a sensible program for achieving greater domestic conser-
vation and production. For we must begin to deal urgently with a
markedly changed global energy environment.
We recognize that a well-managed foreign assistance program
contributes to the economic performance of the developing countries.
Their growth has become an increasingly important factor in the health
of our own economy. Aiding that development is not only an invest-
ment in the future of others, it is an investment in our own future as
well.
The Path We Will Follow
In the foreign policy choices we are now making, we are deter-
mining the path we will follow in a new era. In unsettled times, each of
us has a responsibility to be clear about how we would deal with the
world as we find it.
Most Americans now recognize that we alone cannot dictate
events. This recognition is not a sign of America’s decline; it is a sign of
growing American maturity in a complex world.
We are stronger today because we recognize the realities of our
times. This recognition, together with an equally clear understanding
that we remain the most powerful of nations, should make every
American as staunchly optimistic about our nation’s future as we have
always been.
There can be no going back to a time when we thought there could
be American solutions to every problem. We must go forward into a
new era of mature American leadership—based on strength, not bel-
ligerence; on steadiness, not impulse; on confidence, not fear.
We have every reason to be confident. For 200 years, we have pros-
pered by welcoming change and working with it, not by resisting it. We
5 The Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations in Geneva concluded in
mid-April. On June 19, the President transmitted to Congress the text of the trade agree-
ments negotiated and entered into in Geneva and the text of the proposed Trade Agree-
ments Act (P.L. 96–39). For the President’s transmittal message, see Public Papers: Carter,
1979, Book I, pp. 1092–1094.
