March 27–December 31, 1979 823 quirements both for the agreement and for export licensing purposes. Both waivers are subject to Congressional veto by concurrent resolution, and the export licensing criterion can only be waived on an annual basis. We do not favor such waivers because of their adverse impact on our entire non-proliferation policy, as well as on our policy in the Middle East. Moreover, the law prohibits exports to any non-nuclear-weapon state found by the President to have engaged in activities since March 1978 involving nuclear material and having direct significance for the manufacture or acquisition of nuclear explosive devices, unless that state has taken steps which, in the President’s judgment, represent sufficient progress toward terminating such activities. If faced today with a proposed nuclear export to Israel, you might find it necessary, based on current evidence, to determine that the prohibition applied. Again, the law provides a waiver on non-proliferation or U.S. common defense and security grounds, which is subject to concurrent resolution Congressional veto, but we would be reluctant to recommend use of this waiver. We believe we should now approach Egypt and Israel with identical agreements, which have been revised in accordance with our new law. We expect that this will likely result in an agreement only with Egypt in the foreseeable future. Egypt’s longstanding and favorable attitudes toward non-proliferation and Sadat’s enhanced image in the U.S. appear to make it possible now for us to consider moving ahead separately on an agreement on the assumption that an agreement with Israel will not be ready at the same time. The Egyptian’s concern about “equal treatment” could be handled in the context of an explicit statement that they will receive treatment no less favorable than Israel would receive under any subsequent U.S.-Israeli nuclear cooperation agreement. Israel, or its American supporters, may oppose a nuclear cooperation agreement with Egypt for a variety of reasons, but especially if Israel sees little prospect for an agreement with us because of our new requirements. The consideration of a separate agreement with Egypt, therefore, could become a contentious issue on the Hill which we must be prepared to deal with if we are to fulfill our promises to Egypt. In addition, it is possible that criticism could come from other sources for initiating nuclear cooperation with non-parties to the NPT in a volatile region. The United States’ commitment to nuclear cooperation with Egypt has been reaffirmed on several occasions, along with assurances that we will move forward with the agreement as expeditiously as possible. In this latter regard we are behind schedule in providing the Egyptians with our suggestions for revising or re-negotiating the existing agree-
