National Security Policy 893 216. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Augusta, Georgia, November 18, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT General Twining, General White, General Lemnitzer, Admiral Burke, General Pate, General Goodpaster The President said he had wanted to talk with the Chiefs on the problems of the coming year and specifically on the military program. What he had in mind was an exchange of ideas with them. He com­ mented that he was deeply disappointed in General Taylor’s action in putting out a book, but was not going to let that keep him from speak­ ing frankly and meeting both formally and informally with the Chiefs whenever there seemed to be reason to do so. General Twining said Secretary McElroy had had the Chiefs and the Service Secretaries in to meet with him on his return to Washington the previous Monday. He said the main concern in the Chiefs is that expenditures are increasing for many things that do not give a return in combat capability today. The President said he realized this but felt that our military leaders must from time to time take a new look at things that have become simply a matter of habit. He had two or three specific items in mind. The first of these is the 6th Fleet in the Mediterranean. Admiral Burke said that there would be some advantage to put­ ting the 6th Fleet under SACLANT and deploying it in the Atlantic. There is need, however, to stabilize the situation in Greece, Italy and Turkey, and the 6th Fleet makes a great contribution in this regard. He felt that the fleet units had to be kept fairly well forward so that, when needed for an emergency, we could move them fairly fast into the trou­ bled area. He cited the wholly unsatisfactory British experience and performance at the time of the Suez operation. He added that the fleet does not involve much drain on our dollar reserves. The President said he is getting extremely annoyed with the Europeans who are tending to lean much too heavily on us. In fact, everyone is relying on us around the world. The British, for example, want us to maintain their interest in Kuwait. He said he saw the use for carriers in peacetime but thought they had no real value in an all-­out war. They would be hit in port. Admiral Burke commented that the carriers are moved at odd times, on no fixed schedule, so that an enemy 1 Source: General discussion of the U.S. military program: force levels, B–70, budget. Secret. 9 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
