Chapter 5, May–June 1990  711
129.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, May 19, 1990, 3:30–4:45 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross 
Files, US/Soviet Memos of Conversation—1989/1990. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took 
place in the Osobnyak Guest House of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Baker returned to 
Washington later that day.
2 See Document 128.
US:
The Secretary
Dennis B. Ross, Notetaker
Interpreter
USSR:
Eduard Shevardnadze
Sergey Tarasenko, Notetaker
Interpreter
Shevy: You’ve been working and we’ve been doing the same. I’ve 
read your letter2 and I have studied all the elements of the letter and 
our thoughts I think are very much working in the same direction. You 
do remember that we said that we were ready to make an exception 
on Tacit Rainbow, but we identified a number of points of concern: (1) 
We wanted a confirmation that they wouldn’t be nuclear; they would 
remain non-­nuclear; and (2) we wanted confirmation on what its range 
might be. Those two questions in particular have now been answered 
satisfactorily, and we appreciate that. As for the other three points that 
we formulated yesterday and for the remaining points of the other 
package, we’re ready to drop those. Therefore, I think we can note that 
we now have an agreement on the entire package.
On SLCMs and the entire package of ALCMs, we now are agreed. I 
think this shows that there is a spirit of cooperation and mutual under-
standing and that each side is taking into account the interests of the 
others, and it is significant because these are problems that have been 
out there for a number of years. And as I have said, I very much value 
your constructive approach.
Baker: Well, let me say I value yours as well. I am glad that we 
are finally able to wrap up ALCMs and SLCMs. It’s no small achieve-
ment at this Ministerial, but it is obviously an achievement at this 
Ministerial—­an achievement that is the function of quite a few ministe-
rials. I think we might also have non-­circumvention.
Shevardnadze: Well, let me try to sum up the status of questions on 
ICBMs.
First, you raised some other questions on the problems of heavy 
ICBMs with the President. As a matter of principle concerning the
