676  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
SS–17s, 18s, and 19s. They’d have to start testing overtly by 1986 and 
could have a 12,000 weapon ICBM force by, say, 1989. In this case we’d 
halve the separation distance between shelters to 3500 feet from 7000 
feet, doubling the number of shelters right off, and further expand the 
number of shelters as necessary. This would again enforce the exhaus-
tion of his force. In the first case, our costs would be the base-­line costs 
of $30B. The second runs us up to $38B; the third to $41B. In the third 
case, we’d have to make a decision around 1983–84 to respond.
Brzezinski: Can we see the threat that soon?
Brown: We can respond when we see the tests he has to conduct to 
give himself these high fractionation levels.
Perry: We can build shelters and expand the system as fast as he 
can expand RV numbers.
Brown: We’d build the necessary roads and mark out shelter sites 
from the beginning. This could “bluff” him out of going the high frac-
tionation route.
Brzezinski: Or it might provoke him to take that route, or give him 
an excuse. Whether they actually believe it or not, they could adopt the 
public rationale that they expect all our shelters to be full and hence 
have a right to cover them with weapons.
Brown: Of course, if the Soviets feel threatened by empty shelters, 
that would be an ominous development indeed. If they’re that para-
noid, how can we reassure them by self-­restraint? We could go to shel-
ter numbers capable of exhausting 20,000 RVs, but this becomes an 
unreal world. In my view it becomes unreal for the attacker before it 
becomes unreal for the shelter builder.
Perry: The Soviets face some limits on the amount of nuclear mate-
rial they have for these high weapon levels. They also face an exchange 
ratio of 3 weapons expended to kill one of ours. At the force levels pos-
ited here, moreover, [3 lines not declassified] but by running this kind 
of race they can assure that we could destroy their whole ICBM force 
in a first strike. It is this logic that may persuade them to go mobile. 
Remember, moreover, that these are limiting cases. In the real world, 
they would probably never put all their ICBM weapons against our 
ICBM targets. Hence, at the shelter numbers indicated, we would come 
away with respectable numbers of M–X survivors.
Brown: The point is that the multiple shelter approach to M–X bas-
ing can adequately respond to threat growth. There are many uncer-
tainties around, but they weigh most heavily against the attacker.
Perry: In the third case, we’d aim for about 400 M–X by 1990.
White: Do you see any cases to which we cannot adequately 
respond by expanding the shelter numbers?
