112  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
to act promptly in situations involving issues important in our foreign 
political and economic relations. On the other hand, agencies created 
as a part of our foreign aid programs have become restricted to the 
extent that in many instances they are not as free as is Eximbank to act 
promptly and with a flexibility of methods.
Only this week it was necessary to look to Eximbank to obtain 
promptly a credit which, according to the Department of State, was 
highly important to meet a serious political situation in Guatemala. 
Fortunately, Eximbank was able to find reasonable assurance of repay-
ment in dollars and can meet the situation insofar as the dollar portion 
of the credit is concerned. It appears, however, that procedural prob-
lems and others resulting from legislative requirements for documen-
tation may delay the availability from other sources of credits required 
in connection with the local expenditures for the projects proposed for 
Guatemala.
Delays and the effort involved in compiling new studies and doc-
uments required by other agencies to support the establishment of 
credits often result in irritations and ill will that are counterproduc-
tive in an assistance program. Such problems can be avoided in those 
cases in which the entire transaction can be handled by Eximbank 
because it can usually proceed on the basis of its years of experience 
in Latin America and through the use of procedures which are well 
established and generally understood. Funds allocated to Eximbank 
to finance the local costs of projects in which it is involved would 
make it possible for Eximbank, as an agency of the United States, to 
operate in the manner contemplated for the IBRD with the establish-
ment of the proposed IDA.
3. It is self-­evident that it would be preferable—both from the 
standpoint of the borrower and the lender—to have a specific project 
handled by a single agency where feasible so to do. It is recognized that 
this cannot be accomplished in every situation.
On the basis of the foregoing, it is suggested:
1. That funds appropriated for a program of soft loan assistance in 
Latin America be allocated to a particular agency—­either national or 
international—­after determination is made as to the specific purposes 
for which the funds will be utilized.
2. That in instances in which credits for local currency expendi-
tures are required in connection with loans which may he made out of 
uncommitted funds of Eximbank, funds be allocated to Eximbank to 
enable it to make and administer also the soft loan component.3
Samuel C. Waugh
President
3 According to a covering note from the Executive Secretariat, dated August 9, 1960, 
the Bureau of Economic Affairs was tasked with the preparation of a memorandum in 
reply to Waugh’s memorandum by August 12, but no copy of the reply was found in 
Department of State files.
