Chapter 6, June–December 1990 901 12. Kuznetsov said that in April the Soviet side had proposed elaborating a JDT of a PM agreement. Such an approach would be conducive to organizing work and making it more substantive. Regrettably, this approach had also been rejected by the U.S. side, which had posed a number of preliminary conditions. In view of this, the Soviet side had proposed discussing the sides’ drafts article-­by-­article. This would allow the sides to reevaluate their approaches and expand the areas of common ground. This proposal also had been rejected. ASAT and space-­to-­earth arms issues were directly related to the objective of enhancing strategic stability and security, and were within the mandate of the two delegations. The Soviet side offered during the last two rounds to begin discussing these issues. This, too, met with a negative response by the U.S. side. 13. Kuznetsov said the U.S. side recently began resorting more often to blaming the Soviet side for secrecy in the ABM area. This accusation was contrived. The U.S. side was attempting to place priority on openness as a precondition to reaching a PM agreement; this was a reversal of the mandate for the talks. The Soviet side had demonstrated openness by proposing to exchange data on all ABM activities, and by agreeing to meetings of experts and observations of tests. Soviet acceptance of voluntary invitations to a number of facilities, as a predictability measure, also constituted proof of readiness to display openness. Openness per se was good in terms of enhancing stability, but for the U.S. side the objective of CBMS was to facilitate a cooperative transition to future deployment of strategic ballistic missile defenses. 14. Kuznetsov said anything other than ABM treaty constraints would run counter to the 1987 summit agreement to commit the sides to comply with the ABM treaty as signed in 1972. In fact, the PM proposals tabled by the Soviet side corresponded to the letter and the spirit of this agreement. 15. In conclusion, Kuznetsov said, Soviet proposals gave evidence of the consistent efforts of the Soviet side to achieve progress. As for U.S. proposals—­such as the invitation of Soviet experts to two U.S. laboratories, providing an illustration of the data exchange based on specific projects, the briefing by Gen Monahan, and the proposal of pilot implementation—­the Soviet side appreciated them, but did not think they brought the two positions closer together. What was absent was an adjustment in the U.S. position of the kind that would contribute to progress and invigorate these talks. 16. Smith said the U.S. his side was trying to construct a regime that would make the future strategic relationship more stable, while capitalizing on the improvements in relations. In DST the two sides had an opportunity to design the force structure of the future in such a way that would create a much more stable situation. This task required creativity and new thinking. The U.S. side believed stability would
