1332 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX vance copy of the letter, and Atherton sent it to Washington in telegram 17872 from Cairo, August 14. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–1535) Atherton met with Egyptian Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs Osama el-Baz on August 15 to suggest edits to the letter, including replacing the phrase “summit conference” with “high level conference at an appropriate time.” They also discussed the timetable for the resumption of negotiations. El-Baz rejected the U.S. proposal for resuming talks in mid-September and stated that the earliest the talks could be resumed would be mid-October. (Telegram 17881 from Cairo, August 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P900086–1848) The final version of Sadat’s letter, which was 35 typewritten pages in length, proposed the resumption of talks after the U.S. elections on November 4 and the convening of a tripartite summit conference after that date. (“Sadat Asks U.S. Role in Autonomy Talks,” The New York Times, August 16, 1980, page 1) This letter was delivered to the Israelis on August 15 and the contents made public through the press. This, in turn, prompted a lengthy August 18 response by Begin warning Sadat that “if you persist in your negative attitude, the negotiations will remain disrupted for the simple and only reason that Egypt repeatedly suspends the talks.” On the summit idea, Begin stated: “I understand that President Carter was not consulted. Permit me to say that both he and I should have been consulted through a diplomatic, confidential exchange. Let us at least now, however, quietly consider the matter, the venue and the date should all three parties accept the principle itself. This should not, under any circumstances, preclude the renewal and the uninterrupted continuation of the autonomy talks.” The text of Begin’s August 18 response was sent in telegram 15450 from Tel Aviv, August 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800395–0629) Atherton met with Sadat on August 18, to discuss his most recent letter to Begin. Atherton stressed that Carter “understood the difficulties Sadat faces and that we were not pressing for immediate decisions, but that the President remains convinced the only way to make progress is through continuation of the negotiating process; it is important to demonstrate that the Camp David process is still alive.” “In this connection,” Atherton noted, “Sadat’s call for a summit after our elections could be misinterpreted to mean that the USG is unable to move in the meantime. This would not be a helpful impression to give.” Sadat responded that the “situation today was different from that which existed when he authorized Kamal Hassan Ali to agree to resume the negotiations during his and Dr. Burg’s visits to Washington. Prime Minister Begin was confronting both Egypt and the U.S. with challenges that could not be ignored—the Jerusalem bill, the pending move of his office to East Jerusalem and the recent announcement of three new settlements. The negotiations were stalemated and would remain so until
