1332
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
vance copy of the letter, and Atherton sent it to Washington in telegram
17872 from Cairo, August 14. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P870047–1535) Atherton met with Egyptian Under Sec-
retary of Foreign Affairs Osama el-Baz on August 15 to suggest edits to
the letter, including replacing the phrase “summit conference” with
“high level conference at an appropriate time.” They also discussed the
timetable for the resumption of negotiations. El-Baz rejected the U.S.
proposal for resuming talks in mid-September and stated that the ear-
liest the talks could be resumed would be mid-October. (Telegram
17881 from Cairo, August 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P900086–1848) The final version of Sadat’s letter,
which was 35 typewritten pages in length, proposed the resumption of
talks after the U.S. elections on November 4 and the convening of a tri-
partite summit conference after that date. (“Sadat Asks U.S. Role in Au-
tonomy Talks,” The New York Times, August 16, 1980, page 1) This letter
was delivered to the Israelis on August 15 and the contents made
public through the press. This, in turn, prompted a lengthy August 18
response by Begin warning Sadat that “if you persist in your negative
attitude, the negotiations will remain disrupted for the simple and only
reason that Egypt repeatedly suspends the talks.” On the summit idea,
Begin stated: “I understand that President Carter was not consulted.
Permit me to say that both he and I should have been consulted
through a diplomatic, confidential exchange. Let us at least now, how-
ever, quietly consider the matter, the venue and the date should all
three parties accept the principle itself. This should not, under any cir-
cumstances, preclude the renewal and the uninterrupted continuation
of the autonomy talks.” The text of Begin’s August 18 response was
sent in telegram 15450 from Tel Aviv, August 19. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800395–0629)
Atherton met with Sadat on August 18, to discuss his most recent
letter to Begin. Atherton stressed that Carter “understood the diffi-
culties Sadat faces and that we were not pressing for immediate deci-
sions, but that the President remains convinced the only way to make
progress is through continuation of the negotiating process; it is impor-
tant to demonstrate that the Camp David process is still alive.” “In this
connection,” Atherton noted, “Sadat’s call for a summit after our elec-
tions could be misinterpreted to mean that the USG is unable to move
in the meantime. This would not be a helpful impression to give.” Sadat
responded that the “situation today was different from that which ex-
isted when he authorized Kamal Hassan Ali to agree to resume the ne-
gotiations during his and Dr. Burg’s visits to Washington. Prime Min-
ister Begin was confronting both Egypt and the U.S. with challenges
that could not be ignored—the Jerusalem bill, the pending move of his
office to East Jerusalem and the recent announcement of three new set-
tlements. The negotiations were stalemated and would remain so until
