North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 Inter-American Foundation, and private voluntary organizations, which draw on official as well as private funds. Such organizations have had considerable success in reaching poor people directly through grass roots activities. A table showing major recipients of AID funds and PL–480 over the last several years is attached as Annex C.6 Multilateral concessional assistance has two major components: —The roughly $1 billion that the US contributes annually provides about 30% of the resources of soft-loan windows of international financial lending institutions, of which the largest is the International Development Association (IDA). These institutions’ aid is provided on concessional terms to poor countries. (The middle-income countries receive loans on non-concessional terms from the hard-loan windows of international financial institutions; the FY 1978 US foreign aid appropriation includes about $1 billion for callable capital for this purpose.) —The roughly $200 million that the US contributes annually to development programs of the United Nations is directed to all developing member countries, both middle-income and poor. III. Effectiveness Measuring the relationship between aid inputs and project outputs is complicated. Some progress has been made, however, in answering the basic question of what does and does not work in respect of individual development projects. Measuring the impact of aid on overall development programs is more difficult. As noted earlier, economic growth and social progress are determined mainly by each receiving country’s own resources and policies. Since concessional assistance usually provides only a small part of these resources, its impact hinges on encouraging the receiving countries to adopt improved policies. This leverage will vary according to the size of the recipient economy and its need for external resources. The potential for influence is thus greater in poor than in middleincome countries, and in small than in large countries. Trying to estimate this critical link between aid flows and policy reforms is difficult—not only because it requires sorting out the impact of concessional aid from other social and economic variables, but also because it must be attempted with inadequate data and relatively weak analytic tools. To overcome these constraints and build solid assessments of aid impact will take time. A few generalizations can be made, however, about the economic effectiveness of present programs. 6 Tab C, attached but not printed, is a table entitled “Major Recipients of U.S. Economic Assistance Ranked by 1976 Per Capita GNP.” In the margin at the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Table seems to lack logic in ’78 proposals.”
