Lee, Higginson & Company shall hold said pledged bonds as Trustees for the noteholders under an Indenture containing appropriate provisions for that purpose. During the term of said notes Lee, Higginson & Company shall retain from the monthly deposits to be made with them by the Dominican Republic for the payment of interest on the pledged bonds in accordance with the provisions thereof, the following sums: From the first of such deposits which shall be made on or before October 20, 1924, two-twelfths (2/12) of the annual interest charge on said notes, and from each of such subsequent monthly deposits one twelfth (1/12) of the annual interest charge on said notes which at the time may be outstanding. The sums so retained shall be applied in payment of interest on said notes and if said notes are not in default the excess of each monthly deposit over the amount so retained shall be placed at the disposal of the Dominican Republic. 2. Said notes are to be duly authorized by the Congress of the Dominican Republic, to be signed by the official or officials designated by law for that purpose. They are to be substantially in the form hereto annexed and marked Exhibit A.30 They are to bear the seal of the Department of Finance and Commerce of the Dominican Republic, and are to be signed for the purpose of identification only by Lee, Higginson & Company as Fiscal Agents for the service of this Loan and as Trustees. They are also to be certified by Farmers’ Loan & Trust Company of New York, Registrar. 3. The notes are to be dated September 1, 1924, and to be payable September 1, 1926. At the option of the Dominican Republic they may be called for redemption as a whole or in part on March 1, 1925, or on any interest day thereafter upon reasonable notice and in accordance with suitable provisions to be set forth in the Trust Indenture at a premium of one-half of one per cent. They are to be in coupon form, in denominations of $1000 and $500 each, in such proportions as Lee, Higginson & Company may designate.
