278
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
It was agreed that the Soviets have probably not yet told us the
whole truth, but that we will have some difficulty in establishing a vio-
lation of the terms of the Biological Warfare Convention related to
holding those stocks of biological warfare agents for two reasons. First,
the Convention provides a loophole by allowing stocks for public
health purposes. The amounts allowed under this provision were not
nailed down during the Convention negotiations, and the amounts
needed to produce the deaths in Sverdlovsk are uncertain because of
our uncertainty as to number and geographical distribution of the
victims, meterological conditions and the details of the release of an-
thrax spores. Second, we will be inhibited in the way in which we can
use our intelligence information, some of which is sensitive. (S)
It was agreed that our appropriate next step is to approach the So-
viets at a high level and tell them that their current stance is unsatis-
factory, that the problem will not go away unless they change, but it
is our desire to resolve this in consultation with them, and that we are
obliged to pursue the matter outside bilateral channels unless they are
forthcoming. (S)
It was agreed, ad referendum to Secretary Christopher, for Chris-
topher to give Dobrynin the political message tomorrow, July 10,
1980, with the detailed de´marche by Ralph Earle to Dobrynin as a
follow-up. (S)
It was agreed that: (1) we would not commit ourselves at this time
to approach the UN Security Council as provided by the Biological
Warfare Convention as a fall-back to bilateral consultation; (2) we
would focus our de´marche on the lack of consultation and coopera-
tion rather than any accusation of non-compliance; (3) we would pre-
pare a white paper for possible public use and circulation to other
parties to the Biological Warfare Convention if the Soviet response is
unsatisfactory. (S)
It was agreed that our objectives are to demonstrate our support
for arms control and to deter violations of even weakly verifiable arms
control agreements by demonstrating our willingness to raise ques-
tions of non-compliance when we have them. (U)
It was noted that our current efforts to publicize our concerns
about the possible use of chemical warfare agents by the Soviet Union
in Afghanistan and by their allies in Southeast Asia will inevitably be
coupled, by timing if nothing else, with our handling of this biological
warfare issue. It was nonetheless agreed that we should pursue the
course outlined above. (C)
