1272 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement if possible of action being taken and reasons such action essential in advance of agreement with Venezuela on possible broader hemisphere approach to oil import problem. Probable timing this action which amends President’s Proclamation of March 10 to provide exemption for crude oil, unfinished oils and finished products imported by pipeline, motor carrier or rail is that it will be approved by President April 29 and announced April 30 to become effective on or after June 1, 1959. The proclamation President proposes to issue in effect provides for exemption from U.S. restrictions of Canadian crude oil and derivative products imported by overland transportation. In discussing amended oil import program with Pérez Alfonso following major considerations should be emphasized: 1. Possibility that U.S. might have to take action along these lines has been subject informal conversations between U.S. and Venezuela for several months. 2. Although we had hoped through informal discussions with Canada and Venezuela to reach agreement on some form of hemisphere approach to oil import problem action concerning Canadian oil was necessary soonest because Canadian Parliament begins debate April 30 on national energy resources bill with broad policy-­ making and regulatory authority including control of imports and exports of oil and gas. Ultimately adoption of such policy probably would involve building uneconomic pipeline across Canada and imposing restrictions against foreign oil which now supplies Montreal refining area. 3. Since market for Venezuelan oil in eastern Canada is second in importance only to U.S. market we believe any action we can take that would tend preserve this market is in Venezuela’s long-­term interest as well as our own. 4. We do not expect exemption will result in important increase in imports of Canadian oil nor that it will cause any significant reduction in amount of oil imported from other supplying countries including Venezuela. Levels of imports established for allocation purposes shall not apply to crude oil and derivative products exempted from program and therefore no significant reduction is expected in allocations as result amendment. Allocations can be reduced under amended program only if President finds such action necessary to prevent total imports from attaining levels which seriously impair accomplishment purpose of program. 5. Canadian oil is high cost relative to that of other major producing countries and competes successfully only in Districts II and V neither of which is important market for Venezuelan oil. Present program announced March 10 already provides for what in effect is preferred
