1272  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
if possible of action being taken and reasons such action essential in 
advance of agreement with Venezuela on possible broader hemisphere 
approach to oil import problem. Probable timing this action which 
amends President’s Proclamation of March 10 to provide exemption 
for crude oil, unfinished oils and finished products imported by pipe-
line, motor carrier or rail is that it will be approved by President April 
29 and announced April 30 to become effective on or after June 1, 1959. 
The proclamation President proposes to issue in effect provides for 
exemption from U.S. restrictions of Canadian crude oil and derivative 
products imported by overland transportation.
In discussing amended oil import program with Pérez Alfonso fol-
lowing major considerations should be emphasized:
1. Possibility that U.S. might have to take action along these lines 
has been subject informal conversations between U.S. and Venezuela 
for several months.
2. Although we had hoped through informal discussions with 
Canada and Venezuela to reach agreement on some form of hemi-
sphere approach to oil import problem action concerning Canadian 
oil was necessary soonest because Canadian Parliament begins 
debate April 30 on national energy resources bill with broad policy-­
making and regulatory authority including control of imports and 
exports of oil and gas. Ultimately adoption of such policy proba-
bly would involve building uneconomic pipeline across Canada 
and imposing restrictions against foreign oil which now supplies 
Montreal refining area.
3. Since market for Venezuelan oil in eastern Canada is second in 
importance only to U.S. market we believe any action we can take that 
would tend preserve this market is in Venezuela’s long-­term interest as 
well as our own.
4. We do not expect exemption will result in important increase 
in imports of Canadian oil nor that it will cause any significant reduc-
tion in amount of oil imported from other supplying countries includ-
ing Venezuela. Levels of imports established for allocation purposes 
shall not apply to crude oil and derivative products exempted from 
program and therefore no significant reduction is expected in alloca-
tions as result amendment. Allocations can be reduced under amended 
program only if President finds such action necessary to prevent total 
imports from attaining levels which seriously impair accomplishment 
purpose of program.
5. Canadian oil is high cost relative to that of other major produc-
ing countries and competes successfully only in Districts II and V nei-
ther of which is important market for Venezuelan oil. Present program 
announced March 10 already provides for what in effect is preferred
