344
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Defense
NSC
Secretary Harold Brown
Colonel William Odom
W. Graham Claytor
Gary Sick
JCS
Admiral Thomas Hayward
CIA
Frank Carlucci
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
A restricted meeting of the SCC was called to discuss covert action
with respect to Iran. Mr. Carlucci opened the meeting by circulating
a paper entitled “Covert Action in Iran,” which is attached to these
notes as Tab A.2 The SCC discussed the following elements of the paper:
1. Maintaining the territorial integrity of Iran versus stimulating opposi-
tion [less than 1 line not declassified]. The SCC recognized the danger of
cooperating with and assisting regional separatist groups while aiming
at preserving the territorial integrity of Iran. [1½ lines not declassified].
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the continued rule of Khomeini would in
any event lead to the division of the country and a takeover by the
left. We prefer a unified, anti-Soviet Iran; but a divided Iran is preferable
to a unified, pro-Soviet Iran. All agreed with the formulation developed
in the paper [2 lines not declassified] making clear that our objective is
not separatism.3 (S)
2. All agreed with the paper that there is not a single leader identifi-
able at present and that we should continue to work with all potentially
viable opposition groups. (S)
3. [7 lines not declassified] Secretary Vance wondered about the status
of Shariatmadari—was he under house arrest in Qom? [5½ lines not
declassified] Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we should encourage Shariat-
madari to move. Secretary Vance said we want to have him safe. He
would certainly be safer in Tabriz or in Najaf than in Qom. Ideally,
Shariatmadari could announce a pilgrimage to Najaf; but thus far he
has avoided such direct actions in opposition to Khomeini. Mr. Carlucci
said [4½ lines not declassified]. SCC concurred.4 (S)
4. Impact on the hostage situation. Mr. Carlucci said that stimulating
opposition groups served to distract Khomeini from the hostage issue.
2 Tab A, December 31, is attached but not printed. Sick summarized the paper in
his memorandum to Brzezinski; see Document 129.
3 Carter approved items 1 and 2 with checkmarks, then initialed in the right margin.
4 Carter indicated neither his approval nor disapproval of this item. He wrote in
the left margin: “I think Bakhtiar is politically dead. He’s the Shah’s man. A Beheshti or
Shariatmadari is our probable best hope. On PR broadcasts we should point out that S.
is in virtual house arrest.”
