462  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
the air transportable system are probably overstated. Considerably 
cheaper airplanes and dispersal schemes are being considered for this 
application, but we are not yet certain that they will provide adequate 
base escape. Appendix B contains a portrayal of U.S. versus Soviet 
expenditures to strategic forces; Appendix C summarizes the principal 
variations on the basic plan.14
Harold Brown
14 Appendices A–1 “Summary Chart of Funding Requirements—MAP ICBM Bas-
ing;”, A–2 “Summary Chart of Funding Requirements—Air Transportable ICBM;” B, 
“U.S. versus SU Strategic Forces Expenditures;” and C, “Variations on the Basic Plan;” 
are attached but not printed.
103.	 Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense 
(Duncan) to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Enduring Communications, Command and Control and Intelligence (C3I)
Your recent memorandum requested my views as to how we 
should deal with the problem of providing a communications, com-
mand, control and intelligence (C3I) capability that will endure a pro-
tracted nuclear conflict.2 I share your concerns and agree that further 
improvement to our C3I systems to support general war is needed—­
particularly to support other than a limited set of pre-­planned retalia-
tory responses.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General 
Odom File, Box 14, Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (C3I): 7–11/78. 
Top Secret. Odom forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski under cover of a November 
17 memorandum in which Odom noted: “I see no need for a specific response to Dun-
can’s memo. You have accomplished your original purposes: Changing the focus in C3I 
to endurance (see the last paragraph of Duncan’s reply.); Giving the matter top priority 
attention.” (Ibid.)
2 In his memorandum to Duncan, September 30, Brzezinski expressed concerns 
about the C3I issue following his visit to SAC/NORAD in August. (Ibid.) See Documents 
80–82.
