228 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI proposing that these missiles and their Soviet counterpart programs be banned in START. In an era of tight defense budgets, arguments that we need to build these expensive systems in order to bargain them away may fall on increasingly deaf ears. Others will argue that we should maintain our current START position to ban mobile missiles at least until we are more confident that Congress will support rail-­garrison MX and/or the new road-­mobile ICBM on a sustained basis. They also assert that we should keep the ban in place until we have a devised an acceptable substitute that protects our modernization program and meets our verification requirements. Alternative START positions on mobile ICBMs. There are two broad alternatives to the current ban. One would permit both sides to deploy rail-­mobile and road-­mobile ICBMs (probably subject to numerical limits and other restrictions). This alternative would allow the Soviets to keep both of the mobile ICBMs they are now deploying, and would allow us to proceed with both of the mobile missile programs you have proposed to Congress. It would, however, pose all of the difficult verification problems noted above. The second alternative would permit mobile ICBMs that carry only one warhead, but would ban mobile missiles carrying multiple warheads (MIRVs). This option would allow us to proceed with our new road-­mobile “Midgetman” ICBM and the Soviets to retain their SS–25 missile. The rebasing of the MX missile from silos to trains you recently proposed to Congress would be prohibited, as would the Soviet SS–24 rail-­mobile missile. From an “effective verification” perspective, many argue that the military risks associated with MIRVed mobiles are much greater because for every Soviet missile that goes undetected, ten warheads could have been covertly added to the Soviet strategic force. They argue that permitting single warhead mobile missiles and prohibiting MIRVed mobile missiles is the best way to reconcile our competing objectives of enhanced ICBM survivability and effective verification of a START Treaty. They also believe that this alternative would strengthen support for the ICBM modernization program that is in trouble on the Hill. Others note that such an alternative would mean that the U.S. would not be able to deploy a mobile ICBM until the Midgetman was ready in the mid-­to-­late 1990s. They also worry about the affordability of a mobile ICBM force composed exclusively of expensive single-­warhead missiles, and about the credibility of our deterrent if budget constraints restrict us to a very small number. Finally, they fear that a START proposal to ban rail-­garrison MX will break apart the Congressional coalition and lead to the defeat of both mobile ICBM programs. START Initiatives. During his meetings last month in Moscow, Secretary Baker made clear that we reserved the right to make changes
