Romania 597 In doing so he could note that the U.S. seeks a continuing official dialogue on such questions rather than any U.S. involvement in Romania’s internal affairs. He could emphasize that if U.S. public debate on this issue is erroneous or ill-informed, such debate is still a legitimate consequence of the U.S. democratic process. The U.S. Government, however, would be better informed as to allegations of discrimination if there were a better bilateral discussion of the matter. (HA supports.) 2. The Secretary Raises Issue with the Foreign Minister If the President has not raised the issue during his general discussion of human rights and emigration issues with Ceausescu, he could note his concern about certain delicate human rights problems and indicate his wish that those be discussed at the Foreign Minister level. If the issue is left for the Secretary, we would try to have the Romanians raise it. In response to their presentation, the Secretary would explain the interest which exists in the Administration, Congress and the public domain for a fair and just solution to existing problems. If the Romanians do not raise it, the Secretary could ask the Foreign Minister to comment on the Hungarian minority issue as one of the human rights issues embodied in the Helsinki Final Act. In either case, he could stress that the U.S. strongly supports Romanian territorial integrity, opposes irredentism, and has no wish to see this issue troubling the relations among the United States, Romania and Hungary. The Secretary’s approach would serve to bring strong U.S. interest in this matter to Ceausescu’s attention. It would not fully address the concerns of the Congressmen that the President raise the matter. (EUR and S/P support, as does HA if the President does not raise it.) 3. Issue is not Raised by the President or Secretary Choosing this option signifies recognition that the Romanians and Hungarians have this issue on their agenda at a high level; that Ceausescu recently made recommendations to correct Romanian policy toward minority problems; and that the United States has little or nothing to gain from involving itself directly in an issue between two Communist governments. Recommendations: 1. That the President raise the issue with Ceausescu. (HA supports.) 2. That the Secretary raise the issue with the Foreign Minister. (EUR and S/P support, as does HA if the President does not raise it.)3 3. That the issue not be raised by the President or Secretary. 3 Christopher approved Option 2 on April 8, and wrote in the margin: “Suggest that President state that he has asked Secy of State to raise certain human rights matters. WC.”
