578 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I which furthers the well-being of all countries, in which all recognize the responsibilities of each to the others, in which the richer help the poorer for the benefit of all, in which international deliberations are focused as much on practical ways of serving human needs as on levels of resource flows among nations, and in which every nation dedicates itself to economic justice as well as economic growth. We can help build such a system in a number of ways: in our closer cooperation with the other industrial nations, constantly taking account of the effect on each other of our domestic decisions; in encouraging constructive involvement of Communist nations in the promotion of a healthy global economic system; in our positive participation in the current North-South dialogue, and in our search for practical programs that can best promote Third World development. North-South Negotiations Let me concentrate today on the negotiations that are taking place between industrial and developing nations and the practical focus on development itself that we hope can be achieved. The distinction between industrial and developing nations, between North and South, is clearly eroding. The industrial and agricultural performance of some of the developing nations now surpasses that of some of the industrial countries. But negotiations between North and South remain valuable. While we believe a broader global community is emerging in which rigid economic blocs no longer predominate, we understand the importance the developing countries attach to the Group of 77. The developing nations can use their cohesion to bring greater clarity and purpose to our negotiations. We face an unusually large number of important international conferences in the coming 18 months. These meetings provide an extraordinary opportunity for progress on issues of importance to developing nations—and to us all. As we prepare for them, we must first recognize the progress that already has been made. Last week in Geneva, for example, agreement was reached on most of the basic elements of a common fund to help finance international buffer stocks and other commodity development measures.3 This marks an important milestone in a process launched at the fourth U.N. Conference on Trade and Development in 1976. Over the past 2½ years of intensive negotiations, all participants moved from their original positions in search of common ground. The negotiations 3 Negotiations on the Common Fund resumed in Geneva on March 12. On March 20, The Wall Street Journal reported that “tacit agreement” had been achieved on the size of the Common Fund. (“Agreement Is Reached On Support Fund Size For Commodity Prices,” p. 38)
