Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ent with the “Framework for Peace27 in the Middle East” signed in Camp David. Nothing could be further from the truth, for the “Framework” does not contain one word that could weigh against such presence.28 The framework provided that the local police force will maintain a continuous liaison with Israeli, Jordanian and Egyptian officers.29 Furthermore, there is a provision concerning the participation of Jordanian forces in joint patrols and in the manning of control posts. There is another provision which allows the recruitment of Jordanian citizens in the local police. By analogy, the some (sic) concept could apply to the Egyptian presence in the Gaza Strip.30 Our responsibility with respect to Gaza is more sanctioned in legal and political terms than the Jordanian role in the West Bank. We have never claimed sovereignty over Gaza. No one questions our intentions there. In fact, a tangible Egyptian presence would reassure the Palestinian population, a factor which is certain to generate enthusiasm for the Camp David formula. Thus, we would be building a model which would be envied by Jordan and the West Bank inhabitants. In short, our presence in Gaza would facilitate the implementation of the Camp David formula.31 If we are to require an explicit mention of every detail in the Camp David Accord, why, then, is Israel insisting on many points which were never mentioned directly or indirectly in the “Framework”? Such points include the priority of obligations, the exchange of ambassadors one month after the completion of the interim withdrawal, setting a specific date for the conclusion of an agreement on trade and commerce, the conclusion of a cultural agreement following the interim withdrawal and the preservation of war memorials.32 Dear Friend, I have given careful consideration to your idea of treating the present draft of the treaty as final. I fully understand the reasons behind that, namely putting an end to limitless controversy that could go on indefinitely. However, I must confide to you that we have serious problems with certain provisions. It was for this reason that our delegation requested your assistants not to state that you considered the text 27 Vance underlined “they contend that such presence would be inconsistent with the ‘Framework for Peace.’” 28 Vance underlined this sentence. 29 Vance underlined “local police force will maintain a continuous liaison with Israeli, Jordanian and Egyptian officers.” 30 Vance underlined this sentence. 31 Vance underlined this sentence and the preceding sentence. He wrote: “good argument” in the right-hand margin next to it. 32 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence.
