September 18–December 16, 1978
491
if President Sadat remains silent, then others may make criticisms. We
think that this language allows Sadat to make a statement dealing with
the self-defense. I understand your problem.
Vice President Mubarak: President Sadat is very annoyed on this
point. We don’t want to add to your problems. Article VI, paragraph 2,
adds nothing, nor does paragraph 5.
The President: We spent so much time on this.
Secretary Vance: If you open it up, Israel will go back to the pre-
amble, and that is where you have the linkage, and they will reopen the
language on Gaza.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk to Weizman, but I’ll be going back
to Sadat to explain this to him.
The President: When the treaty is signed, Sadat can say that his obli-
gation to defend other Arabs from an Israeli attack is still binding. He
can say this. He can even quote me that this is the U.S. interpretation.
Vice President Mubarak: I won’t argue over these two points. But I’ll
tell Weizman that we do not agree to the letter and we do not agree to
Article VI. I will be very vehement with him.
The President: (To Secretary Vance.) What will the Israeli reactions
be?
Secretary Vance: The Israelis want to talk with us before the Cabinet
meeting on Sunday.6 On linkage, there will be problems with Begin and
Dayan. They will see this as an effort to split off Gaza and they are very
sensitive and suspicious on this point.
The President: When you see Weizman, I hope you won’t separate
Gaza from the West Bank in his mind.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk about the Palestinian problem and
the West Bank and Gaza together. I will take one line and I’ll pursue
this. It will be easiest for me to proceed this way.
The President: That seems to be your preference.
Vice President Mubarak: I will speak of the West Bank and Gaza and
the Palestinian question. I will let any separation between the West
Bank and Gaza be a concession only if you request it and it is needed.
The President: That is better.
Vice President Mubarak: I will leave Gaza as a concession for you.
The President: Don’t make it an Egyptian proposal.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk about the West Bank and Gaza and
the Palestinian question. I will not talk about Gaza alone. I will leave
that for the President.
6 November 19.
