Yugoslavia
753
236.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Belgrade, May 21, 1977, 11 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Yugoslavia
President Josip Broz Tito
Edvard Kardelj, Member, Presidency
Stevan Doronjski, Vice President
Milos Minic, Vice President, Federal Executive Council
Dimce Belovski, Ambassador to the United States
U.S.
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Assistant Secretary of State George Vest
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
A. Denis Clift, Assistant to the Vice President for National Security Affairs
President Tito greeted the Vice President; the Vice President gave
him a letter from President Carter;2 Tito read the letter noting the
reference to the Kardelj visit; and Tito said it was a very nice letter
from the President. The Vice President then gave Tito a letter from
Governor Harriman;3 Tito thanked the Vice President and said he
would read that letter later.
V.P.: Governor Harriman has sent you his best wishes. All Ameri-
cans respect you Mr. President, and we respect Yugoslavia’s independ-
ence and territorial integrity. We hope this meeting will mark improved
relations between our countries. We respect your role as a leader of
the non-aligned movement, and we hope that this meeting will be the
start of much improved relations.
Tito: Thank you, Mr. Vice President. I believe your visit is of great
importance to both our countries. I think this is a good opportunity to
exchange views on issues of interest to both sides. I think our relations
are, on the whole, good. There are no conflicts between our two
countries.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 34, Memcons: Mondale: 5/77–6/79. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place at the
White Palace. Clift forwarded the memorandum to Dodson on June 1 for distribution
to Brzezinski and Vance. (Ibid.)
2 In a letter dated May 11, Carter assured Tito of his administration’s commitment
to resolving the outstanding issues surrounding the building of the Krsko Nuclear
Reactor, reaffirmed U.S. support for Yugoslavia’s territorial integrity, and invited Yugo-
slav Presidency member Edvard Kardelj to Washington. (Carter Library, Brzezinski
Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 21, Yugoslavia:
President Josip Broz Tito, 5/77–5/79)
3 Not found.
