Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II is based upon this per capita requirement, however defined, times population. Unfortunately, need alone does not generate an effective means for obtaining the required food or allocating productive resources to produce food. Effective economic demand, on the other hand, implies that income or goods or resources are available to an individual or country to use in an exchange for food or for investing in production. Therefore, I suggest that one part of the solution to malnutrition and hunger would be to transform need to demand with employment and income creating policies and programs in the developing countries. The effective use of economic development assistance to alleviate hunger and malnutrition over the long run will depend upon the ability of donor and recipient countries to devise and implement development programs that effectively link food availability to investment in productive activity and employment generation which result in the improved nutritional status of the population. Additionally, I believe that U.S. development assistance should have the long term goal of complementing a developing country’s own efforts towards self-reliance. Development should be directed towards building a strong and self-sustaining domestic economy able to participate fully in international trade. The concept of self-reliance should not be confused with self-sufficiency. The strategy of self-reliance would be based upon comparative advantage and would allow a country to reap the benefits of trade. This would avoid the mistake of self-sufficiency regardless of cost which, in my judgement, is not sound economic policy. World Food Security Food security, a major problem area related to world hunger, is affected not only by the size and management of reserve stocks, but also by the degree to which barriers to trade prevent trade flows in response to market prices. In the food crisis of a few years ago, trade barriers constituted a major factor in causing the adjustment impact of a relatively small shortfall in world food production to be focused on the United States, a few other major exporters, and of course, the food deficit developing countries. We see that individual nations pursuing their own self-interests at times cause many uncertainties in world agriculture. Additionally, of course, agricultural production itself is subject to large variations given the unpredictability of so many of the key variables including weather, disease, pests, and the rate of technological advance. Political and economic realities make the fine tuning of agriculture an unlikely possibility. It should be recognized that excessive year-to-year instability in food grain supplies and prices can wreak havoc with progress toward development goals and solving the world hunger
