National Security Policy 891 deter any kind of aggression. There still may be substance to the argu­ ment that the continuing threat to employ nuclear force keeps down the risk of war. But with each passing month, this nuclear threat becomes less credible and the temptation to the communists to resort to limited force will increase if some supplementary deterrent is not developed. Certainly it will require a great wrench to our post-­war accus­ tomed manner of thinking about the role and nature of forces in free world defense to face a future without leaning so heavily on the crutch of nuclear weapons. Our great dependence on the nuclear deterrent has lulled Americans into forgetting that in the last analysis their security is no greater than their will to fight for their country. Nuclear weapons have obscured this responsibility. Nuclear weapons have also permitted budgetary rational­ izations, which in turn only increased our nuclear dependence. If we are to affect the trends which the Joint Chiefs and the Secretary of Defense find are decreasing our relative military power, we will have to find ways of breaking out of this blind circle. We will have to find the dynamism to support a different military policy. That same new dyna­ mism will be essential if we are to keep freedom alive in the rugged peaceful competition with communism which lies ahead. In view of our deep commitment to nuclear weapons, it will take a relatively long time to get away from excessive dependence on them. There will be many painful “withdrawal symptoms”. But the switch is within the bounds of possibility—and within a reasonable time span. A recent paper prepared at a high level in the Pentagon included the following statement: “. . . it would be at least five to ten years before the U.S. military establishment could be converted to a modem non-­ nuclear force capable of deterring or fighting a general war.” President Eisenhower’s great dedication to the cause of peace and his expressed wish to leave a legacy of constructive thinking for the future may offer the combination necessary to start the turn away from our present military stance. A “respectable” military posture not based almost entirely on the total-­war threat might in the long run be of even greater significance for peace than the major efforts which the President is now making in the international political field. There is still time during the last year of his Administration for a start to be made in a new direction. IV. CONCLUSION I recommend that if these views commend themselves, you pre­ sent them to the President and urge that the Secretary of Defense ask the Joint Chiefs of Staff to start a study to estimate the possibilities and cost of developing over the next decade a free world military posture which would reduce present dependence on nuclear weapons.
