Human Rights
11
situation. Congress will understand that because time is so short, little
concrete evidence of change can be expected, but the Administration
can make clear its intention to monitor the situation in the coming year,
and its determination to take more serious action next year if there is no
improvement.
2. Economic Aid.
The situation is very similar to that outlined above. Budget re-
quests must be submitted in March for economic aid under the Devel-
opment Assistance Act, and this Act contains language similar to Sec-
tion 502(b).5
In the case of more extreme violators, the Administration might
recommend that no new programs be initiated unless there is an over-
riding humanitarian consideration, and that existing programs be
phased out unless they can be shown to (a) be directly beneficial to
people in need, and (b) provide minimal support to maintaining a re-
pressive government in power. In a more positive sense, priority can be
clearly assigned to those governments in the third and fourth worlds
which respect international standards of human rights.
3. Food Aid.
Under the past Administration, the Food for Peace program
(PL–480, Title 1)6 was frequently used to bolster the foreign exchange
positions of several extremely repressive governments through the
congressional loan program. The worst instances were South Korea
and Chile which received disproportionate amounts of Title 1 aid. A
thorough review of this program, whose purpose purports to be hu-
manitarian, is needed.
4. International Organizations.
There are some immediate steps the United States could take in the
UN to signal its intent to take serious action on human rights. The first
would be ratification of the Genocide Convention of 1949,7 and the
second would be ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
5 Presumable reference to the International Development and Food Assistance Act
of 1975 (P.L. 94–161) and Section 116; see footnote 4, Document 1.
6 The Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act (P.L. 480), signed into
law by Eisenhower on July 10, 1954, established the Food for Peace program. Under the
provisions of the law, the United States could make concessional sales of surplus grains
to friendly nations, earmark commodities for domestic and foreign disaster relief, and
barter surplus for strategic materials. Title I authorized concessional sales.
7 Reference is to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1948.
(A/RES/260(III)A)
