August 8–September 17, 1978
195
Today the Vice President, Dr. Brzezinski and I met with Messrs.
Dayan, Weizman and Barak. I opened the meeting by saying there were
a number2 of items I wished to discuss. I suggested we first discuss the
outstanding issues with respect to the proposed Framework for a Sinai
settlement. We discussed these issues at length and concluded that we
would3 resume the discussion4 either later today or tomorrow.
I next stated that I wished to reaffirm the US commitment to the se-
curity of Israel and stated, as we had said on numerous occasions in the
past, that we would provide the assistance necessary to meet Israel’s es-
sential security requirements. I then asked how important Israel con-
sidered the possible negotiation of a mutual security treaty between the
United States and Israel to be. I added, as the President and I had both
said before, that if the negotiation of such a treaty would provide the
necessary linchpin to bring about a settlement of the Middle East
problem, that we5 would very seriously consider recommending such a
treaty to the Congress. Dayan responded that it was his personal view
that the negotiation of such a treaty was not desirable. He said that he
believed the negative aspects of the negotiation of6 such a treaty out-
weighed the positive contributions it could make. He noted that if
such7 a treaty existed, he felt that it might8 be used to try to get Israel to
compromise on the delineation of borders and other questions on the
basis that with a mutual defense treaty such concessions would be ac-
ceptable. I said that I was interested to hear that since Prime Minister
Begin had indicated on previous occasions that he was interested in the
possibility of such a treaty.
I then asked Messrs. Dayan and Weizman to give us their views as
to what the next steps should be based upon two assumptions—(1) that
we were able to reach an agreement at Camp David, and (2) that we
were unable to reach an agreement at Camp David. We discussed at
length the various possible scenarios. We both agreed that it was neces-
sary to provide safety catches in the event that the negotiations at
2 An unknown hand struck through “a number” and replaced it with “several”
here.
3 An unknown hand struck through “concluded that we would” and replaced it
with “and decided to.”
4 Two further meetings to discuss on the Israeli proposed textual changes to the
overall Framework paper took place at Ministerial level September 15–16. On September
15, from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m., Vance and Lewis met with Barak, Dinitz, Rubinstein,
Weizman, and Tamir. On September 16, from 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., Mondale, Vance,
Saunders, Lewis, and Quandt met with Dayan, Barak, and Dinitz. See footnotes 72 and
76, Document 28.
5 An unknown hand struck through “that.”
6 An unknown hand struck through the phrase “of the negotiation.”
7 An unknown hand struck through the word “if.”
8 An unknown hand struck through the segment “existed, he felt that.”
