368 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement and US would be more practically discussed between two govern­ ments at higher level. This did not mean that higher level confer­ ence would replace our talks, but simply that there were number of questions which could be more appropriately discussed in certain forums at certain places. He said an illustration was fact that before our talks started here, contacts were made between our consular representatives. The American side had proposed these contacts be raised to Ambassadorial level because it was found that there were some questions which could not be settled by consular representa­ tives and which could be resolved in a conference at Ambassado­ rial level. His side considered there were still other questions which could be more practically resolved in higher level conference. If I had full authority to resolve important and outstanding questions arising in Taiwan area, then he was ready discuss these questions with me. At next meeting when I made more detailed reply he would com­ ment further. 59. I said I had nothing more. 60. Wang proposed we meet again October 8 and I agreed. 61. I said I would like to issue the same press statement we had made after last meeting. 62. Wang said he had indicated he would not agree to issue any more statements similar to one after last meeting. He suggested a state­ ment saying we continued discussion on second item of agenda and omitting any reference to agenda item one. He added this form was exactly similar to press releases during discussion agenda item one and suggested we might use it for entire period of discussion agenda item two. 63. I said I did not want to go back over our substantive discus­ sion, this release was not entirely factual because we had also discussed implementation of agreed announcement. 64. Wang said implementation of agreed announcement was sup­ plementary question and not main issue. Furthermore implementation was not listed on agenda, therefore, no justification for including state­ ment on implementation item one. 65. I said I disagreed because I considered implementation agreed announcement as major item and whether or not he agreed in this posi­ tion, it was one I had taken at meeting. I was unable agree with his suggestion and if he was unable accept mine may be best follow his suggestion last meeting we say nothing about subjects discussed. 66. He agreed to release: “The Ambassadors of the United States of America and the People’s Republic of China held their 19th meeting today. The next meeting will be held at 10 am Saturday, October 8.” Gowen
