Panama  975
any way our treaties in force with Panama. The Secretary added that 
he believed Secretary Brucker, who would wish to speak to this point, 
thought the flag should be flown, if such was the President’s decision, 
only on national holidays. The Secretary went on to say that time was 
important since agitation was beginning to build up on the issue in 
Panama, looking toward their national holiday on November 3, and it 
was important that the decision on our part should not be announced 
under circumstances of any apparent pressure on us. The Secretary 
indicated also that we should simultaneously start flying our flag daily 
in front of our Embassy. He concluded by pointing out that the so-­called 
Gross Amendment to the Department of Commerce appropriations bill 
prohibited the use of such funds for the erection of flag poles for this 
purpose and recommended that the necessary funds for construction be 
provided from the President’s own special projects fund.
The President said that he thought only jingoistic criticism in this 
country would be aroused by this act on our part, and he saw no rea-
son for being deterred. He admitted that there was some merit to the 
argument that if we flew the flag the Panamanians would interpret this 
as a concession on our part and demand further concessions from us. 
He felt strongly, however, that it was the right thing to do and said he 
would welcome the opportunity to defend the decision under political 
attack. He mentioned, however, his strong belief that we should fly our 
flag daily at our Embassy and that the Panamanians should understand 
in this general connection that we would do so. On the question of fre-
quency of flying, he said he thought that if it were flown on holidays 
the principle was thereby established, and that there was no reason 
why it should not be flown on a daily basis.
Governor Brucker then launched a long argument against flying 
the Panamanian flag under any circumstances. At the outset he noted 
that in his view it would be undesirable to give them any implication 
that we would be trading our right to fly our own flag at the Embassy 
for the flying of the Panama flag in the Canal Zone since this would 
look like a reciprocal agreement and not a voluntary act of grace on 
our part. (The President agreed on this point.) The Governor stated 
that newspaper editorials throughout the country were running 20 to l 
against the flying of the flag. He referred to the Gross Amendment and 
Selden Resolution4 in the House. He thought that the injection of this 
issue in the campaign in this country this fall would be emotional and 
4 On January 18, 1960, Representative Armistead I. Selden, Jr., (D-Ala.) intro-
duced a Concurrent Resolution in the House of Representatives expressing the sense of 
the Congress that any variation in the traditional interpretation of the treaties between 
the United States and the Republic of Panama should become treaty items requiring the 
approval of Congress. After full debate in the House of Representatives on February 2, 
1960, the Resolution was approved by a roll call vote of 381 to 12. For the debate as well as 
the text of Concurrent Resolution 459, see Congressional Record, 86th Cong., 2d Sess., vol. 106 
(pt. 2), pp. 1798–1809.
