North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980 1097 “The conference . . . will be the forum for . . . conducting4 the negotiations . . . For the purposes of facilitating negotiations, the conference: (a) will establish objectives and provide guidance . . . ; (b) . . . entrust the detailed negotiations . . . to specialized fora . . . or ad hoc groups;5 (c) will receive the results of the detailed negotiations . . . and will take appropriate measures to enable the conference to result in a package agreement.”6 It will be understood that all important matters, including the features above, will be agreed on only by consensus.7 This text poses serious problems for us, because it implies that such issues as the nature of the international monetary system and the rules that govern international trade, now covered by the IMF and GATT respectively, are up for negotiation in New York, in a highly charged political atmosphere. Only “detailed” negotiations are reserved for the specialized bodies themselves. I strongly fear that negotiation of such issues in New York, even under a rule of consensus, may lead us to accept positions which are not wise and, more important, the fact of negotiating such important issues in New York will undermine the integrity of the specialized bodies. It is difficult for an institution to continue to function effectively and creatively if the principal action in its domain is elsewhere. The G–77 seems unwilling to accept any changes in this text. Britain, France and Germany, contrary to what McHenry says in his cable, do not find the present text acceptable. But, they are stymied in New York by European Community negotiating procedure, whereby the non-members of the European Community are represented by the Presidency, currently Luxembourg, and the European Commission. Since there are divided views within the European Community, the strength of feeling in the major European countries does not get reflected at the negotiating table. We, therefore, have to carry the main burden of negotiating and give the appearance of being isolated. The decision we now face is as follows: 1. Whether to go forward with a clearly undesirable agreement on procedures, but fight to a stalemate on the agenda, which has not yet been the object of serious discussion; 4 Muskie wrote “as appropriate” over the word “conducting.” 5 In the margin adjacent to points (a) and (b), Muskie wrote: “would like to see sentence in.” 6 Muskie underlined the word “appropriate” and highlighted the portion of this point that begins with “negotiations.” In the adjacent margin he wrote “strike Canadians.” 7 In the margin below this sentence, Muskie wrote “avoid amendment of results of detailed.”
