1146 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI exchange on the date of signature. Photographs slated for exchange prior to signature had been sent to Geneva, packed with the delegation records, and could not yet be located. Brooks and Nazarkin agreed they would exchange these photographs at the signing ceremony. 11. Nazarkin then summoned an unidentified army colonel who handed over the Soviet photographs specified for exchange on the date of signature. Brooks handed over the comparable U.S. photographs. Brooks and Nazarkin each verified that all required photographs were present, based on the letters they had just signed. 12. Nazarkin said he wished to raise one issue concerning the SLCM declarations. The format of the SLCM declarations included a series of statements “for the year beginning (blank), the deployments of nuclear sea-launched cruise missiles planned by the United States of America will not exceed (blank).” Nazarkin noted that the sides had agreed that numbers would not be inserted in these blanks until entry into force. Nazarkin asked if the declarations handed over that day would include the blank formats for exchanging numbers. Brooks said he was indifferent. Nazarkin noted that the Soviet declarations referred to the year ending 1990. It would thus be silly to exchange that page of the declaration. Brooks and Nazarkin then agreed that the declarations would be exchanged without the accompanying formats. 13. Brooks then provided Nazarkin with the English original of the December 1990 letter on ALCMs with multiple warheads. Noting that the original had never been handed over, Brooks said he was providing it for the Soviet files. Nazarkin thanked Brooks for the copy. Signing at Novo-Ogarevo: But for a Babushka . . . 14. The signing of the START protocols and the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) had been moved, by agreement between the sides on the previous day, from the Kremlin in the mid-afternoon to Gorbachev’s Dacha at Novo-Ogarevo in the early afternoon. Brown, Dalton, and Sutter, accompanied by Chief MFA Legal Advisor Yakovlev and Deputy Chief Sviridov, were scheduled to head to the Dacha at 11:00 a.m. in two MFA Black Volga Limousines for the signing of all the START documents except the treaty, the signing of all START-associated separate agreements, and the exchange of related declarations and letters. All this signing and exchanging was to occur during a scheduled break in the presidents’ talks at the Dacha. 15. Departure of the group for the Dacha was held up for approximately one hour due to last minute problems with the English “alternat” of the agreement on geographic coordinates, uncovered by Brezhnev look-alike Boyarshchinnov at 9:00 a.m. while both sides were still at the MFA. As the time approached 12:00 and the “alternat” had still not
