3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
290
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
6. Matzoh Packages. The Secretary raised with Dobrynin the ques-
tion of the Soviet postal ban against the shipment of matzohs for the
Passover, and said a repeal of the ban would be welcomed here. If this
were not possible, at least it would help if the Soviet authorities would
make a sufficient quantity of flour available for matzoh production by
the Jewish communities in the larger cities.
Dobrynin at first replied with a diversion about how many dissi-
dents, most of them Jews, received certificates from abroad which en-
abled them to purchase whiskey at the dollar shops. When he was
brought back to the matzoh issue, he suggested that Toon should raise
the matter in Moscow. He then added more seriously that when rela-
tions were good, such small issues could be more easily resolved, but
when relations were bad, people in Moscow tended to respond by
asking why they should accommodate us.
7. SALT. In a brief exchange, Dobrynin expressed concern about re-
ports that the US did not intend to proceed with the Treaty and its rati-
fication this year. He said the Soviet side had made all the concessions
since the Washington meeting, but there had not been a corresponding
action on the US side, and reports, including a conversation with Sen-
ator Cranston,4 indicated that ratification was not likely this year. The
Secretary replied that it was the President’s intention to proceed expe-
ditiously with the negotiation of the Treaty (which could be possible by
the end of May), and to send it to the Senate for ratification soon there-
after. Dobrynin commented that it would depend upon whether the
President chose to exert his leadership strongly on this issue. The Secre-
tary said he would do so.
8. Horn. Dobrynin made a side comment expressing regret that in
the State Department’s statement on 2/25 [27],5 responding positively
to the Brezhnev speeches, the effect was spoiled by appending a
warning on the Horn.
In the subsequent discussion of the Horn, Dobrynin asked: “What
else could we do? We have transmitted assurances from the Ethiopians
and the Cubans that they will not invade Somali territory.” He also
asked: “Why are the Somalis so resisting the idea of withdrawing from
the Ogaden?”
The Secretary pointed out that the large number of Cubans trans-
ported to Ethiopia and participating in combat was troubling to many
Americans. To this, Dobrynin answered by comparing the situation in
Ethiopia with the situation in Angola, where nothing had prevented
4 Senator Alan Cranston (D-California).
5 The text of press release 95 of February 27 is printed in Department of State Bul-
letin, April 1978, p. 43.
