Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: Did Egypt accept our proposal on a letter for oil or 2.5 million tons? Secretary Vance: It was rejected. President Carter: We also don’t approve of that approach. Prime Minister Begin: My impression was that you agreed. Secretary Vance: I agreed to raise it with them. Prime Minister Begin: Then I am right. They have rejected it. Minister Tamir: There are two aspects. I realize what you have said. We would be reintroducing the Arab boycott idea of an untouchable Israel. They won’t sell us oil directly. We have heard you, often make the point that we should not be stingy about the peace process, about the new relationship, and that we should have faith in the next steps. But this is the only tangible test that we can put to Egypt. You stressed the urgency because of the fall of Iran. Iran’s fall has hurt you, but it is a completely serious blow to our oil situation. Now we are asked to give up the oil that is under our own control. We have no oil of our own. We have a neighbor which refuses to consider us as a neighbor. In the oil market, the idea of free competitive bidding allows everyone to play tricks. It is then totally up to their discretion on whether they sell. We have to think of our security. Our whole war appartus depends on this. It is the only tangible test of the new relationship. This raises doubts of whether they really want peace. Prime Minister Begin: Let me call attention to the timetable. We don’t have agreement on oil with Egypt. Now you will have to go to prepare for your speech. At 11:45 you will leave for the Knesset. There are now thousands of children waiting on the road to see you. I suggest that we move on now. We do not have agreement on oil, and we will have to reach an agreement. The other issues I will bring to my Cabinet. President Carter: Will there be any further meetings? Prime Minister Begin: At noon, we go to the Knesset. That will last one or one and one-half hours. The speaker will greet you. Then you have a lunch with the Foreign Affairs Committee. We do not participate. During that time, we will sit with Secretary Vance. If there is agreement, we will now decide that the Cabinet will meet after the Knesset speech. Our delegations will hold talks. We will either have a full Cabinet meeting or the Defense Council meeting with Secretary Vance. We should hear Minister Burg. Minister Burg: Iran is a debacle for Israel. Another evergreen contract would hurt Israel. This is absolutely contradictory to peace. President Carter: The American assurance takes care of the problem. We also have no answer on the accelerated withdrawal. (The meeting ends at 11:20 a.m.)
