3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
893
In Moscow they expect to receive from the Government of the USA
prompt and comprehensive clarifications on this score, having in mind
the need—as was also emphasized by the Secretary of State—for the
USSR and the USA to have a precise and clear view of the position of
each other in connection with the Iranian-Iraqi conflict.
The Soviet position on this question remains just as it has been
stated by us, namely: no one should interfere in this conflict, be it a
large power or any other state. The Soviet Union will also in the future
adhere to this course on the understanding, of course, that all other
countries, including the USA, will act in the same manner.
We proceed on the basis that the far reaching consequences with
which any, especially military, interference of the USA or of anyone
else in the Iranian-Iraqi conflict, and in general in the affairs of the
countries of the Persian Gulf area, would be fraught must be clear to the
American side. End text.
4. After hearing the statement, the Secretary stated that he would
give a brief reaction now and that the statement would be studied to
see what additional response might be required. He stated first of all,
that with regard to the sea lanes in the Persian Gulf and elsewhere, our
only concern was that they be left open. In the first days of the war we
were concerned that the Iranians were going to seek to “regulate” ship-
ping in the Straits of Hormuz, and they in fact went so far as to hail two
ships transiting the Straits.
We were concerned that this might be the first step in an effort to
restrain shipping. The immediate effect was an increase in insurance
rates, and a second effect was that shipping was backing up in the
Straits area. If shipping and the flow of oil were to be seriously dis-
rupted, our vital interests would be so seriously affected that we would
need to consider what steps to take.
5. Recently, the Secretary continued, the risks appeared to have di-
minished. The Iranians have stated that they too want to protect the
open sea lanes; in fact much of their normal shipping flows through the
Persian Gulf. Nonetheless, we continued to discuss possible options
that would be available to us because of the serious consequences of a
disruption of shipping.
6. The Secretary said that it was not our desire to take sides in the
conflict and that it was important that we not be perceived by either of
the combatants to be taking sides.
7. With regard to AWACS, the Secretary noted that the aircraft had
no offensive capabilities. The Saudis had requested this assistance so
that they would have as much advance notice as possible of any “des-
perate” attacks by Iran. The AWACS deployment was thus a defensive
move made at the request of Saudi Arabia, and was not an attempt to
violate our policy of neutrality. The Secretary added that, when the de-
