686 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement President admitted that we may miscalculate and become involved in a general war. However, he questioned the effectiveness of any crash military measures to alleviate this current Berlin situation. He feels the measure of raising the levels of Army forces in Europe by 10,000 over that currently planned is useless, except perhaps as a psycho­ logical measure. He feels that this is primarily going to give General Taylor ammunition for avoiding his programmed cut of 30,000. General Twining confirmed that General Taylor desires to keep those 10,000 men in Europe. General Twining then referred again to the nature of the hearings. The President instructed him to caution the Joint Chiefs that the mili­ tary in this country is a tool and not a policy-­making body; the Joint Chiefs are not responsible for high-­level political decisions. General Twining agreed, and again expressed his displeasure at the idea of the Joint Chiefs being called as a corporate body to testify before Senator Johnson’s Committee. He is certain that Senator Johnson’s lawyer will ask policy type questions of the Joint Chiefs. He went on to say that he has his own lawyers working on the legality of the Joint Chiefs being called as a body before Congress. Legally, the Joint Chiefs as a body are required to advise only the President and the Secretary of Defense. General Twining is perfectly willing to walk out of the meeting; how­ ever, he has discussed the matter with his own lawyers and has con­ cluded that it is necessary to respond to this call to appear before the Johnson Committee. The Joint Chiefs well not discuss military planning or any other matters which are not Congressional prerogatives. He said again that Secretary McElroy is going to have a talk to the Joint Chiefs, while remarking that this procedure has not been uniformly successful in the past. As the meeting was coming to a close, the President philosophized briefly on the difficulties of a democracy running a military establish­ ment in peacetime. He reiterated his conviction of the value of mutual security and expressed as his greatest cause of concern the prospect that the Congress will twist the testimony of the Joint Chiefs as a pre­ text for cutting this vital program. John S.D. Eisenhower
