Chemical and Biological Weapons 305 OMB White House Edward Sanders, Asso. Dir., Natl. David Aaron (chaired) Security & Intl. Affairs NSC Robert Howard, AF Branch Chief, Victor Utgoff Natl. Security Division Gen Jasper Welch ACDA Jerry Oplinger George Ashworth, Asst. Dir., Weapons Eval. & Control Robert Mikulak, Staff Member The meeting began with a discussion of the basic objectives of the proposed binary chemical weapons program, as currently seen. This discussion included the following points: (1) The case for the $2B 30,000 agent tons JCS CW munitions requirement for Central Europe remains to be made; (2) A more modest stockpile of several thousand agent tons might cost a total of $300–400M to produce; (3) The binary CW program would accommodate a shift to a better mix of CW munitions, particularly more air-delivered weapons; and (4) Binary munitions offer the possibility of multipurpose artillery shells that could be normally configured as smoke or HE rounds, but with a quick change of inserts converted to CW munitions. (S) The Chair noted that the value of the binary CW program seems to depend significantly on forward-deploying some of these weapons in Europe and in particular, in Germany. Defense generally agreed, but stated that the binary program would probably be worth pursuing even if forward-deployment of binaries were to prove impossible. The Chair stated that the question still seems to be: Will we be able to deploy binaries in Europe? (S) State (after noting that the CW issue has not yet been addressed by the Secretary), argued that the problem of deploying binaries in Europe is manageable if approached correctly. State argued that presenting a major new CW program all at one time to our Allies wouldn’t work. On the other hand, a phased approach beginning with deployment of airdelivered CW munitions in the UK, and then leading to replacement of stocks in the FRG, perhaps using the multipurpose shell idea, could be worked out. (S) The Chair stated that if the value of binaries is strongly dependent on forward-deployment, we must know Allied—particularly FRG—attitudes. Defense argued that we should not ask the Allies to participate in this decision. State agreed, but said that the US should discuss the management of the CW problem with the Allies. JCS noted that we might point out the changed importance of a credible CW deterrent, given changes in the nuclear balance. State said any suggestion of a changed role for CW weapons would doom any hopes we have for modernizing the forward-deployed CW stockpile. State then argued that the program of improvements we are discussing involves a long
