30  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
and proprietary military technology as well as to exploit the US in 
international trade, commodity and monetary transactions.
Some counter actions have been underway for some time. The 
Ford Administration took action which denied the Soviets access to the 
communications of some government agencies, but nothing was done 
about the private sector where the Soviets are increasingly focusing 
their intercepts.
As a result you are faced with addressing politically sensitive 
and potentially long-­term decisions on telecommunications protec-
tion efforts. These decisions, coupled with previous actions taken and 
actions currently underway, have significant ramifications on the future 
course of (1) protecting the privacy of US citizens, business and indus-
try; (2) denying sensitive national security information to the Soviet 
Union; (3) nonetheless, maintaining US intelligence gathering efforts, 
particularly SIGINT efforts; (4) our diplomatic relations; (5) accelerat-
ing US plans for protecting up and down link satellite transmissions as 
well as mobile radio-­telecommunications systems and networks.
A national telecommunications protection policy is needed. Insofar 
as current leadership, guidance and direction are concerned, the entire 
program is at an impasse. Fractious, piecemeal ongoing actions con-
tinue out of their own inertia. The resolution of who’s responsible for 
deciding those issues is as profound as deciding the issues themselves.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve and sign the PRM at Tab A3 which directs devel-
opment of an integrated National Telecommunications Protection 
Policy and a framework for its implementation under the SCC. (It has 
been reviewed at the senior working level within the Executive Office, 
within the Intelligence Community, including Stan Turner personally, 
and at the State Department.)4
3 Not found attached. PRM/NSC–22, as signed, is printed as Document 8.
4 Carter approved this recommendation and initialed below it.
