National Security Policy 713 Moore-­McCormack and others from running ships to Poland with the result that this could aggravate the U.S.-­Polish situation in terms of eco­ nomic warfare. Mr. Dillon indicated that the Poles had not made a for­ mal request to establish services similar to Moore-McCormack, but that they had said that, as a matter of reciprocity, they might wish to make an application along these lines at a later time. Mr. Gordon Gray suggested that in the light of the discussion it appears that there was no need to change the language in the paper under discussion; that it appeared that a limited number of additional Polish vessels could be permitted to enter our major port areas under a liberalized interpretation of the policy; and that if this number exceeded reasonable proportions, the policy could be re-­examined. The President concluded the discussion by noting that if we did not have a better answer than the one proposed, it was best not to make mistakes in a hurry and accordingly we should keep the present pol­ icy, utilizing the exception procedure sparingly as regards the entry of Polish vessels. The National Security Council: a. Discussed the recommendations submitted by the NSC Plan­ ning Board on the subject, transmitted by the reference memorandum of April 8, 1959; in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff thereon, transmitted by the reference memorandum of April 22, 1959. b. Agreed that, subject to review following the conclusion of the forthcoming negotiations with the USSR, paragraph 19 of NSC 5802/1 and paragraph 33 of NSC 5808/1 and the operations of the exceptions procedure thereunder should not be revised; with the understanding, however, that the exceptions procedure for Polish flag vessels may be interpreted liberally unless undue numbers of Polish flag vessels take advantage of such procedure, in which case this procedure shall be sub­ ject to review. NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, sub­ sequently transmitted to all holders of NSC 5802/1 and NSC 5808/1. J. Patrick Coyne NSC Representative on Internal Security [Omitted here are agenda items 2–4.] 5. OVERSEAS INTERNAL SECURITY PROGRAM (Memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, dated April 2 and December 1, 1958; NSC 5810/1; NSC 5819, Part 2; NSC Action No. 2012; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, dated April 10, 1959). In making his summary of the report Mr. Harr related the conclu­ sions of the report to certain paragraphs in the Basic National Security Policy. When Mr. Harr had finished the President inquired whether the
