774 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement functions provided in agreement. This was situation highly dissatisfac­ tory their side. 80. Wang said Chinese Government and people very concerned about situation of 27 Chinese whose names he gave me in six separate lists with request that I look into cases and give accounting for them. Last meeting, without making any investigation, I had made casual remark that they all free depart. That remark not made with sense of responsibility. All these people being subjected obstruction, not able return. US side had every responsibility look into their cases in earnest, and give accounting for each individual. 81. Wang said this morning he would again hand me list of four Chinese whose return being prevented and request me look into their cases and give accounting of them. Particulars about their situation were set forth in papers he handing me. (Handed over list, transmitted by separate telegram). 82. I said I thought it was necessary to recall that we came here to discuss civilians who desired return. Wang would recall that we dis­ cussed subject of lists, and that when we began talks I had given him list of Americans who we had positive evidence desired return and were being prevented from doing so, including those imprisoned in Wang’s country. 83. I said it no part of terms of reference for these talks or of agreed announcement to investigate status all Chinese in United States. There was only one question between us, one question that is concern of Indian Embassy in US. That is, US has unequivocally and uncondition­ ally stated that Chinese in US who desire return PRC entitled do so. Sole question is whether US has and is carrying out that obligation. 84. I said I here and my government also had categorically with­ out condition stated that we have carried out obligation. In event that any Chinese in US desiring return feels he being obstructed, our agreed announcement sets up definite clear and simple procedure. US had even gone beyond terms of that announcement and invited anyone who even knew of any Chinese being obstructed in his desire depart, or who felt he being obstructed to communicate with Indian Embassy or State Department. 85. I said thus far, in more than 5 months that had passed since announcement issued neither these procedures nor any other source had given any specific evidence of any kind that any Chinese in US who desired return being obstructed from doing so. 86. I said raising demands and making requests entirely outside terms reference talks and agreed announcement did not obscure this fact. None of this could excuse continued failure Wang’s government carry out its commitments with regard precise Americans we were dis­ cussing at time this announcement issued. There nothing hypothetical
