Non-Proliferation
953
375.
Memorandum of Conversations1
Washington, August 21 and 30, 1979
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Gerard Smith, S/AS
Ambassador Henry Owen, White House
Mr. Robert Bowie
Mr. Abraham Chayes
Dr. Albert Carnesale
Mr. Phillip Farley
Dr. George Rathjens, S/AS
Mr. F.S.M. Hodsoll, S/AS
SUBJECT
Post-INFCE Nonproliferation Regime and 1980 Summit
The following ideas were expressed:
1. Smith should explore this Fall with key industrialized countries
(Japan, UK, France, FRG, Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, Italy, Can-
ada, and possibly Australia) views on the framework for a Post-INFCE
Nonproliferation Regime (including multinational arrangements).
2. It is understood that there will be organized this Fall a nongov-
ernmental meeting on post-INFCE institions; this would include key
developing, as well as developed, countries. Ian Smart (UK) could be a
principal organizer of this effort.
3. The purpose of these efforts would be to provide a basis for
(i) developing recommendations for the President on post-INFCE U.S.
policy, and (ii) talks next year leading hopefully to a consensus among
the Summit 7 plus Belgium, the Netherlands and Sweden on the basic
elements of post-INFCE civil nuclear arrangements. We would attempt
to achieve this consensus in time so that appropriate initiatives could
be undertaken in June 1980 at the Venice Summit; Summit discussions
and actions should avoid a developing country perception of the “Big
Boys” ganging up on them.
4. In parallel with the talks referred to in 3 above, we should ar-
range to begin a dialogue with key developing countries who have par-
ticipated actively in the INFCE TCC (Egypt, India, Philippines, Argen-
tina, Korea, Romania, Brazil, Mexico, and Yugoslavia). The purpose
would be to develop a degree of understanding, if not consensus, prior
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 52, Proliferation: Smith (Gerard) Initiative: 5/78–9/79. Se-
cret. Drafted by Francis Hodsoll (S/AS) on August 30. The conversations took place in
Smith’s office at the Department of State.
