620 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 200. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to Acting Secretary of State Christopher1 Washington, April 30, 1980 Problems Over the Next Several Weeks and Months REF: S/S Memorandum of April 292 1. Credibility of Policy. The human rights community and the public increasingly think the policy has been downgraded if not discarded. We need soon a strong Presidential statement similar to that of December 6, 19783 and an early address on the policy by the Secretary designate. 2. Over Identification with Repressive Governments. There is a growing tendency to permit other policy concerns to dilute our human rights principles and policy. I am apprehensive about the evolution of our relationships with Argentina, Zaire, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Philippines, Guatemala and Pakistan. We need to examine them carefully, in terms of our human rights policy and our long term interests. We are too “close” to these repressive and unstable governments. 3. Asylum. The massive influx of Cubans and Haitians into Florida is placing tremendous stress on HA’s ability to review asylum requests. We have over 10,000 from Haitians that will have to be re-evaluated once litigation in southern Florida is resolved. All Cuban cases require case-by-case asylum review. We will be swamped. Over 175 other asylum cases (mostly Iranian) are received each week, further straining our understaffed capacity. 4. Human Rights Conventions. Passage is urgent to attenuate the criticism we will receive in Madrid for our failure to ratify. 5. CSCE. In view of the recent arrival of key players in the Madrid exercise, you personally should provide broad policy guidance for our delegation head. 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D180, SHUM Policies 1980. Confidential. Drafted by Salmon and concurred in by Palmer. Derian did not initial the memorandum. Christopher served as acting Secretary of State April 28–May 2 and May 4–May 8. 2 Tarnoff, in a memorandum dated April 29 and addressed to the regional and functional bureaus and other Department of State offices, circulated Christopher’s request that each Bureau prepare “a list of eight to ten problems which it faces over the next several weeks and months. These issues should be described briefly and could be stated simply in cases when the Bureau is confident that the Acting Secretary is fully familiar with the question. In any event, papers should not exceed two pages.” (Ibid.) 3 See Document 176.
