Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks 11 —responsive world-wide command and control capability8 —battlefield surveillance Strategic Operations —targeting data9 —early warning of attack by SLBM’s and ICBM’s10 —delivery of the Emergency Action Message to nuclear capable forces11 —precise navigation for strategic weapons delivery systems12 —post-attack damage assessment (S) The entries in Table One are realistic rather than speculative plans. It follows that satellites may, in the future, have a significant effect on warfare—they may even determine the outcome of certain wars, especially wars short of a full nuclear exchange. Relative Dependence and Vulnerability (TS) The U.S. is likely to remain more dependent on space systems than the Soviets in several important functional areas. However, the U.S. and USSR have differing needs and are dependent on space in correspondingly different ways. The U.S. space program tends to have a small number of expensive, long-lived and sophisticated multipurpose satellites. As space systems have been integrated into military operations, the U.S. has changed its operations, plans, and uses of terrestrial forces. Space is now an integral part of U.S. military, tactical, and strategic planning. The Soviets tend to have larger numbers of simpler systems and have launched additional satellites during crises (e.g., prior to the invasion of Czechoslovakia and during the 1973 Mid-East war). The Soviets may be emphasizing tactical use of satellites [less than 1 line not declassified] A given U.S. satellite will often represent a higher value target than a given Soviet satellite. However, some Soviet satellites are very valuable and unique [2½ lines not declassified] 2. Current and Projected ASAT Systems (S) The U.S. currently has no operational ASAT system, but did have a single-pad system deployed at Johnston Island from 1964 until 1975. The system employed Thor boosters and a nuclear warhead, and operated in a direct-ascent mode against low-altitude targets only. The Johnston Island system was initially a response to Soviet threats about 8 Ibid. 9 Ibid. 10 Ibid. 11 Operational now or in the near future—U.S. [Footnote is in the original.] 12 Ibid.
