North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
839
On the basis of this analytical exercise, the Group will produce a
series of action/decision papers for consideration by the PRC throughout
the coming six months.
274.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
US Relations with the Developing Countries: The Next 12 Months—Report by
the PRM 8 Working Group
The PRM 8 working group’s report of 13 September (PRM 8–III)2 is
a good review and analysis of the North/South relationship as it affects
the US. The report also identifies “key specific issues” on which US ac-
tions will be required over the next year. These issues are discussed in
an annex (Tab B).3 However, the report does not request immediate
PRC guidance on many of the problems which are identified as critical.
Presidential guidance will have to be sought on trade policy, commod-
ities and common fund issues, foreign assistance, and agriculture, to
name a few.4 Furthermore, please note the judgement (pp. 2–3) that the
North/South environment could deteriorate if negotiations bog down
on trade, a common5 fund, etc. I concur. Yet, only one6 of the issues for
immediate PRC decision is directly relevant to sustaining, in the
short-run, the relatively constructive North/South environment: The
request for a PRC meeting on common fund issues. Hence, I attach
great importance to eventual PRC consideration of the annex at Tab B,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 65, PRC
038 9/22/77, North/South Issues—PRM 8. Secret. Sent for action. Erb did not initial the
memorandum.
2 The September 13 Working Group paper, entitled “PRM 8–Track III, US Relations
with the Developing Countries, The Next Twelve Months,” is ibid.
3 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Key Issues for the
Next Year.”
4 Brzezinski underlined the words “trade policy, commodities and common” and
“issues, foreign assistance, and agriculture” in this sentence.
5 Brzezinski underlined the words “on trade, a common.”
6 Brzezinski underlined the words “only one.”
