United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  7
II. Financial Assistance.
As dollars earned by Latin American exports decline, it will be even 
more important to increase aid through the World and Exim-Banks and 
through the Development Loan Fund. ARA and E are jointly working 
on collecting and appraising projects with a view to determining which 
ones are eligible for DLF financing.4
4 A note from Rubottom to Howe, dated January 31, attached to the source text, 
reads as follows: “I concur in substance, but I would like to discuss one or two parts of 
the paper with Mr. Mann himself.”
A handwritten notation from Mann to Howe on Rubottom’s note reads as follows: 
“I think R[ubottom] will want to leave open the possibility of a quota instead of a tar-
iff & other details that can very well be decided until we have the report of the Tariff 
Commission.”
ETA–4.	
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Inter-
American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
(Rubottom) and the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Economic Affairs (Mann).1
 
Washington, March 26, 1958.
SUBJECT
Transmittal of Task Force2 Paper on U.S. Economic Policy Toward Latin America
1. Yesterday the Secretary called for the memorandum on a 
revised U.S. economic policy toward Latin America. The assignment 
was made on January 24 just before the Secretary went to the Baghdad 
Pact Meeting and the delay has been caused by two things: (a) rapidly 
developing petroleum situation, and (b) frequent absences of key per-
sonnel from Washington.
2. The Task Force feels that its work has been completed so far 
as possible. Supporting papers on lead-­zinc (Tab A), copper (Tab B), 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA Files, Lot 62 D 302, “Latin American Task Force.” 
Secret. Drafted and initialed by Turkel.
2 On January 31, Assistant Secretaries Rubottom, Mann, and Gerard Smith of the 
Policy Planning Staff (S/P) agreed to establish a task force to review the entire range of 
U.S. economic policy toward Latin America. Representatives from the two geographic 
bureaus and S/P staffed the Task Force, and drafted the report and all supporting papers. 
Documentation relating to the work of the Task Force is in several Department of State lot 
files, including ARA Files, Lot 62 D 302, ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 60 D 371, and 
Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553.
