320
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
would distort its balance. Dayan thought this might be overcome by
having Sadat put whatever the Egyptians wanted in his letter, while
Begin, without repudiating Sadat’s letter, would stress the points that
Israel wanted in his reply. They also talked about Egypt’s desire for
gradualism in the normalization of relations, which Dayan, even before
seeing the text for Annex III, clearly found disappointing and not in
keeping with Camp David understandings.
5. Dayan took a firmly negative position about putting compre-
hensive peace language in this treaty beyond the single agreed pream-
bular paragraph. When I asked him whether he did not recognize that
Sadat had a political problem about this and that it was in our joint in-
terest to help strengthen him in Arab world, as well as to find language
that might help bring Hussein and moderate Palestinians into negotia-
tions, Dayan expressed impatience over Israel’s constantly being asked
to worry about Sadat’s problems when in fact Israel had taken the ex-
traordinary step of returning all of Sinai to Egypt and had difficult
problems of its own.
6. President met separately in afternoon with senior members of Is-
raeli4 and Egyptian5 delegations, which will be reported separately.6
Purpose was to review status of negotiations, identify problem areas
and talk about ideas for dealing with them. We will be meeting bilater-
ally Wednesday7 morning with Egyptians and then with Israelis to
follow up on these ideas, and are tentatively thinking of scheduling a
trilateral drafting session for late morning or afternoon to see if we can
resolve some of remaining differences in treaty text.
Christopher
4 See Document 88.
5 See Document 89.
6 The substance of Carter’s October 17 meeting with the Israeli delegation was re-
ported in telegram Tosec 120114/265618 to Cairo and Amman, October 19. (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department Out,
Box 113, 10/17–22/78) Telegram Tosec 120113/265619 to Tel Aviv, Cairo, and Amman,
October 19, provides a summary record of Carter’s October 17 meeting with the Egyptian
delegation. (Ibid.)
7 October 18.
