National Security Policy  915
and Defense Mobilization (Patterson). Also present at the meeting and 
participating in the Council actions below were the Acting Secretary of 
the Treasury (Scribner); the Director, Bureau or the Budget; the Attorney 
General (Item 1); and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission (Item 
1). Also attending the meeting were General Thomas S. White for the 
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the 
Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Special Assistants to the President 
for National Security Affairs, for Security Operations Coordination, 
and for Science and Technology; the Deputy Director, Bureau of the 
Budget; Mr. Howard Furnas, Department or State; Mr. Haydn Williams, 
Department or Defense; Mr. Charles Haskins, NSC; the Executive 
Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. EMERGENCY RELOCATION PLAN—­NATIONAL SECURITY 
COUNCIL
(NSC 5521; Cabinet Paper 59–98/1, June 12, 1959; NSC 5917)
Mr. Gray briefed the Council on NSC 5917. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s 
Briefing Note is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and another is 
attached to this Memorandum).
In connection with Paragraph 3–­(b) of the Briefing Note, Mr. Gray 
referred to inter-­agency disagreement as to whether blast protection 
was to be provided for the State Department relocation site. Mr. Stans 
said this issue would shortly be resolved. OCDM would soon submit a 
request to proceed with construction for blast protection at Front Royal 
and at that time the Bureau of the Budget proposed to get the interested 
parties together for a discussion.
After reading the Briefing Note, Mr. Gray made some observa­
tions on war-­gaming. He said that in the last seven years there had been 
very little “play of the problem” by the National Security Council in 
OPERATION ALERT. Indeed in the last two years the Council had not 
met at all during OPERATION ALERT. For very good reasons, such as 
security and “cover”, the President had dealt with OPERATION ALERT 
through the Cabinet and had decided not to make it an NSC operation. 
However, the result is that we have little idea how the NSC mechanisam 
would function under emergency conditions. We have only a limited 
idea of the role of the Planning Board in an emergency. OPERATION 
ALERT in the past had been largely a resources exercise and the par­
ticipants had been resources agencies which did not deal with the kind 
of problems that would need to be dealt with by the NSC under the 
Presidential concept of the Council as a war cabinet. The difficulty of 
visualizing the exact working of relocation had led to the suggestion that 
national security policy-­making in a crisis be tested by war-­gaming, as 
outlined in the attached paper dated December 16, 1959 which had been
