244 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 88. Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Mark) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, December 16, 1979 SUBJECT Internal Situation in Afghanistan Overall Situation and Outlook The Amin Government (DRA), because of factional feuding and disillusionment within party ranks of both civilian and military personnel, rests on an even smaller and shakier basis than its predecessor, the Taraki-Amin regime. Furthermore, despite its total dependence on the Soviet Union’s military assistance for its existence—which should have implied, but has not brought, extensive subservience, rumors persist of Soviet intentions to replace Amin, perhaps with leaders of the rival Marxist group, the Parchamists, in order to get a more pliant and effective regime. The country-wide insurgency has confronted the government with a steadily increasing threat throughout this year. Although split geographically, factionalized, and thus unable to mount a major coordinated offensive against a large city, the cumulative effect of the pressures of the many insurgent groupings has caused a steady deterioration of the DRA’s military strength and of its capability to exert its authority. The Soviets have clearly hoped that an incremental build-up of military advisory personnel and materiel could turn the tide in favor of the government. But they have been unable to compensate for the major military problem, an increasingly acute manpower shortage. Because of casualties, large-scale defections, desertions, and recruitment problems, the army is, by some estimates, down to a force of 50,000 from a norm of 90–100,000. It has seemed almost inevitable that, because of the critical military manpower shortage, the USSR would eventually be faced with the choice of bringing in its own troops or of retiring from the scene. The present build-up of a Soviet combat force in Afghanistan may indicate that the Soviets have concluded that that point has now been reached. The very serious situation in northeastern Badakhshan, where rebels 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West, Brement, Subject File, Box 46, Afghanistan: 10/79–1/80. Secret; Noforn; Nocontract; Orcon. Drafted by Van Hollen (INR). A copy was sent to Packman (INR).
