March 1952–February 1953
255
to making of US decision this respect. In my opinion this attitude
would be determined by manner in which Iranian Government ap-
proached oil problem. I was convinced that if US public and Congress
should obtain impression Government Iran trying energetically and
sincerely find fair solution on oil dispute they would not (rpt not) like
to see that government fall merely because it could not (rpt not) obtain
temporary financial aid. Another factor which would influence US de-
cision of financial aid would be attitude UK Government and public.
US would not (rpt not) of course like to take action which would fur-
ther inflame UK opinion against Iran and at same time injure US–UK
relations. Government of Iran by approaching UK Govt in genuinely
conciliatory spirit and with obvious desire find fair solution could
greatly improve atmosphere British-Iranian relations and prepare way
for necessary financial aid as well as solution oil problem.
It might be helpful if Shah could get in touch at once with Mid-
dleton and talk to him with same frankness as to me. Shah said he
would see Middleton before latter departed for UK next week for con-
ference in London but he hesitated talk to him so openly, not (rpt not)
because he did not (rpt not) trust Middleton but because he afraid of
gossip in London with subsequent fatal leak to press. He had had un-
fortunate experience in this regard last autumn. He could have no (rpt
no) objection, however, if I should outline to Middleton what he had
told me about oil problem and financial aid.
8. I said British had made it clear they preferred settle oil problem
by direct negotiations and did not (rpt not) relish dealing through third
party. Although I would inform Middleton of some of Shah’s worries
as expressed by him to me, I hoped he wld also talk with him frankly.
9. Shah said he had been giving considerable thought to problem
of successor to Mosadeq. Seemed to be three approaches this problem:
(A) New Prime Minister to be either member National Front or
someone closely associated with it. Saleh outstanding candidate this
category. Saleh seemed to have progressive ideas, integrity and com-
mon sense. Saleh had made mistakes in past including experiment of
collaboration with Tudeh. He thought Saleh had become wiser. Saleh
might be able mold national movement, strength of which could not
(rpt not) be ignored, into constructive force. If Saleh should go off
wrong direction it would not (rpt not) be difficult remove him. Busheri
also possibility. Busheri, however, sometimes showed opportunistic
characteristics and too much under influence Kashani.
(B) New Prime Minister to be someone who could possibly work
with National Front and at same time would have respect of country’s
leading statesmen. He thought Mansour could play this role. Mansour
experienced, resourceful, persuasive and progressive. He stood half-
way between nationalists and so-called elder statesmen.
