970 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX President Carter replied that he had listened with interest to President Mijatovic’s presentation about the prospects for peace, which he had characterized as disappointing. He had thought that the U.S. and Soviet Union had been making good progress leading up to the meeting with President Brezhnev in Vienna last year. He had believed, and continued to believe, that SALT II was in the interest of the people of the world. The American people had accepted the agreement with approval and gratitude, and the Administration had been making good progress toward the treaty’s ratification. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee had approved the treaty without any amendments that posed major problems. The Administration had cleared the Senate calendar for the first part of the year so that it could devote top priority to the ratification of the SALT agreement. The unexpected Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, however, had greatly upset the American people and dealt a severe blow to trust in the Soviet Union. With the invasion of Afghanistan, it had been impossible to ratify the treaty. He wanted to stress, however, that the United States was continuing to observe the terms of the treaty and would continue to do so as long as the Soviets did. (C) Even without prior Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the United States was willing to discuss TNF with the Soviet Union, including SS–20’s and was willing to discuss also issues such as SALT III. Chancellor Schmidt would repeat the same message to the Soviets next week when he went to Moscow. But the Soviets so far had been unwilling to discuss TNF or SALT III. (C) Continuing, President Carter emphasized that the United States recognized the clear danger to detente presented by any worsening of U.S.-Soviet relations. He was determined that this would not happen. But this did not mean we would accept the invasion as an accomplished fact. We would do all we could to obtain the withdrawal of Soviet troops. (C) Turning to China, the President noted that more than a year ago the United States had normalized its relations with China. Since then, relations had deepened; indeed they were better than the United States anticipated they would be at this time. The President stressed that we did not intend to use our relationship against the USSR and that we would not sell weapons to the PRC. The United States had a longstanding commitment to stability in Southeast Asia, and believed that its new relationship with China would be a stabilizing factor in the area. (C) Responding to President Mijatovic’s question about the buildup of China as a superpower, President Carter stated that the United States did not see this as happening in the near future. China had no weapons that could threaten Japan. As far as the United States could determine,
