Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII spending funds for intelligence collection, and supplying material aid on humanitarian grounds (viz, medical supplies), selection of this covert action option would indicate a clear-cut U.S. Government decision to attempt to overturn the current Afghan Government. Risk vs. Gain: An intensified propaganda program against the Afghan regime, particularly one which involved radio broadcasting, would come to Afghan and Soviet attention. It might be blamed on the USG, or CIA in particular, although it would technically remain nonattributable. However, in view of the current volume of Soviet propaganda against the U.S., particularly with regard to neighboring Iran, we doubt that Soviet reaction to such a program would adversely affect U.S. interests in the area. It would increase the hostility of the government towards Americans in Afghanistan, but this is not a vital consideration. A successful propaganda program would make the world more aware of the nature of the Afghan regime, but it probably would do little to weaken it. On the contrary, it might induce the government to tighten its grip and become even more dependent upon the Soviets. Propaganda of the type envisioned could provide marginal encouragement to the insurgents, but overall would have little effect on them. Although thus far we have refrained from doing so, we have the capability to explore with Afghan exiles the possibility of joint action against the regime. If, however, there is no intention to follow through, it would be inadvisable to embark on such a course of action. Raising the expectation of these exiles and then refraining from taking any action, would do more harm than good. GOP support, or at least quiet acquiescence, would be almost essential for the success of any program designed to assist the Peshawarbased rebels. Although we could smuggle small quantities of material to them unilaterally, tacit GOP agreement would be required if larger quantities are involved. We have one unconfirmed report that Saudi sources are sending equipment to the rebels via Karachi, and that the GOP has turned a blind eye to this. If true, this suggests that should we become involved in a supply program, we might consider working with the Saudis in view of the influence they can bring to bear on the GOP. There are several competing factions among the rebels. Some are royalist, some are Islamic fundamentalist and some are both. If we elect to support the dissidence, considerable care will be needed to ensure that our aid gets to the proper place; that it is not squandered on political infighting. We believe this is a manageable problem, because we should be able to keep fairly close track of activity in the dissident movement through a number of separate, compartmented sources.
