1648  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
advance warning of an attack gives the defender ever less time to make 
the attack ineffective. Since the probability of circumstances in which 
the United States would carry out a surprise attack is extremely remote, 
we must be concerned, lest an inspection scheme provide our potential 
enemies with such strategic information as to make their attack more 
effective, without giving us sufficient additional warning to counteract 
the effects of previous disclosure of information regarding our forces. 
This point requires careful study, whether one considers the inspection 
schemes alone or adds to them arms limitation measures.
In the schemes involving inspection alone, it appears preferable to 
focus the monitoring on operational forces and weapon systems, but as 
the schemes are expanded to include arms limitation agreements, mon­
itoring may also include manufacturing and/or development activi­
ties, or even may be limited to one or both of them. These are complex 
problems, certainly not well understood at present.
Involved in all inspection schemes are a host of military-technical 
problems. To mention but a few: (a) the development and evaluation 
of various monitoring techniques as applied to particular weapon sys­
tems (e.g. the effectiveness of aerial photography in detecting opera­
tional missile sites); (b) the “rights and privileges” and the freedom of 
access of the inspectors. Surely some limits must be set on them as oth­
erwise the schemes would not be acceptable even to us, not to mention 
the USSR, but these limits must be so chosen as to introduce the least 
interference with the objectives of the plan; (c) communications from 
inspectors to data evaluation centers become a serious problem when 
hours or minutes become decisive and also the problem of authenti­
cation of these messages needs study; (d) the handling of the data at 
the centers and their transmission to decision centers have not been 
worked out; these are not trivial problems already because of the dan­
ger of false alarms and the consequent possible increase of tensions, 
the reverse of what the scheme is designed to achieve; (e) especially in 
comprehensive inspection systems the inspecting staffs, with logistic 
support, seem to run to tens of thousands; these are expensive schemes 
even if the best use is made of technical aids. This consideration alone 
suggests a consideration of a change from the concept of the complete 
inspection of all forces to that of random sampling, a principle which 
has been effectively used in many industrial situations; (f) distinction 
in the degree of monitoring is probably required between strictly offen­
sive and largely or wholly defensive forces and weapon systems; (g) an 
even more difficult problem is the devising of monitoring schemes 
which, even in the case of a failure of the built-­in early warning, tend 
to protect retaliatory forces of the attacked side and thus stabilize peace 
by mutual deterrents.
