International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 Callaghan: Our contribution will be part of our aid, taking advantage of a marginal amount of funds we have left over for this purpose. Jenkins: This is better than a debt moratorium. Callaghan: This will help relieve the debt of the LDCs. It is not additional in terms of our budget. Healey: It is additional to that aid which we have already committed. Giscard: The idea is that we provide an additional effort. We all have difficult budget positions. We can’t look at the budget and simply say this is exceptional aid. The aid must be additional to what was anticipated in behalf of the poorest countries. We should not say this was an amount we were going to give anyway. Callaghan: We should say we had some funds at the margin which will be allocated for this purpose. They could have gone to some other purpose. Healey: We are reducing our public expenditures as a result of pressure from the IMF. We salt a little away in our program as contingency reserves. It appears as new money. Fukuda: This is different from a routine case. It is an emergency situation. We need special measures with regard to the poorer countries—exceptional emergency measures. Callaghan: I take it that the world development program sounds o.k. to everyone here and should find its way into the Declaration. Trudeau: We should help the billion people who go to bed hungry. If we do not do it willingly, we will be made to do it unwillingly by OPEC. We agree with Giscard if we are not forthcoming at CIEC, we will be forced to do this through our self-interest. We will pay one way or another. We will help the LDCs or be hurt by OPEC. Jenkins: We should ensure that funds flow quickly to countries who need it desperately. Schmidt: We should not hide the fact that this is an additional sacrifice. Callaghan: As far as our people are concerned, our contribution will be additional when it is published. Trade Callaghan: We should now take some time to discuss trade issues. Carter: I would like to introduce Bob Strauss, our Special Trade Representative. Callaghan: I would like to ask Prime Minister Fukuda to open up the discussion of trade. Fukuda: I think it is important to keep in mind that any shrinkage in trade will have an immediate impact on the employment situation
