1956 955 3. If postponement request related to tactics at Geneva (which con­ sidered unlikely) only known current development which would seem relevant is pending Chinese Communist request of April 9 for multi­ lateral conference on Korea. It is just conceivable that Peiping’s tactics in pressing at Geneva for high level conference may be conditioned by what Peiping can learn of initial reaction of 16 UN nations to Chinese Communist note of April 9. Meetings of representatives 16 countries held in Department May 4 and May 9. For your background, reaction of 16 to conference proposal strongly negative. This information highly classified at this stage but with so many countries involved immediate leak to Chinese ­Communists must be considered as probable. Hence Chinese ­Communist tactics for future Geneva meetings presumably can be devised in light of this knowledge. Dulles 599. Letter 32 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 32 Geneva, May 10, 1956 Dear Walter: I arrived down here at noon today by Air Force plane which the Czechs had permitted to come in and pick me up. I told the Czechs that only in this way could I attend the Foreign Minister’s National Day reception last night. Incidentally, at the reception I met the Brazilian Parliamentary ­Delegation, led by a Miss Vargas, which had just arrived and is begin­ ning a tour of all the Bloc as well as Communist China. They will spend some time in the United States on their return but will not be com­ ing through Prague. I did the best I could in the hurly-­burly of the big reception to brief them on Americans in China in the hope that they might do a little missionary work and at least be prepared for whatever they hear from the Chinese about it. It seemed to be a quite intelligent and very sympathetic group on the whole and I would think that it might be worthwhile for FE to keep in touch with the Brazilian Desk so 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A marginal note by McConaughy next to the paragraph concerning Colonel Ekvall’s status reads: “Request for extension made by phone to [illegible in the original] of Defense on 5/27. He promised to check with [illeg­ ible in the original] G–2!”
