About the Series  V
described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed accord-
ing to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents 
within the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been 
supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. 
Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the 
original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently cor-
rected. Other mistakes and omissions in the documents are corrected 
by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition 
in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the original document 
are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved 
as found in the original text, and a list of abbreviations and terms is 
included in the front matter of each volume. In telegrams, the telegram 
number (including special designators such as Secto) is printed at the 
start of the text of the telegram.
Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that 
deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classi-
fied after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and, where 
possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been noted by 
indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omitted. Entire 
documents withheld after declassification review have been accounted 
for and are listed in their chronological place with headings, source 
notes, and the number of pages not declassified.
All brackets that appear in the original document are so identified 
in the footnotes. All ellipses are in the original documents.
The first footnote to each document indicates the sources of the 
document and its original classification, distribution, and drafting 
information. This note also provides the background of important doc-
uments and policies and indicates whether the President or his major 
policy advisers read the document.
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent 
material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional 
documentary sources, provide references to important related doc-
uments printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide 
summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and 
elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs 
and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to sup-
plement or explicate the official record.
The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than 
to page numbers.
Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation
The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, 
established under the Foreign Relations statute, monitors the over-
all compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all
