Chile 275 Hence he felt it important that in addition to making credit available directly to the governments, such lending agencies should be sympathetic to the sound needs and requirements of private individuals or companies for assistance. The President replied immediately that he did, of course, fully agree and actually in the case of Chile there had been just such experience. He mentioned specifically the $20,000,000 credit provided by the IBRD to his own former company, Papeles y Catones, for the construction of a newsprint and celulose plant. He said that during the preceding administrations there had been much pressure from the government to have this credit granted to CORFO, the government development agency, but that the World Bank had insisted on making the loan directly to the private company. The President added that the Eximbank also had made a number of useful loans to private companies in Chile, both foreign and local. Senator Morse then said that in his own behalf and in behalf of Mr. Holt he wished to express his gratitude for the time the President had been kind enough to give to this interview; that he felt he had learned much and was happy to find that the President’s views coincided to such a marked decree with his own. In closing he said he also wished to tell the President how very helpful the Chilean Embassy in Washington had been to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and to assure the President of the high opinion which he and his colleagues on the Committee had of Chile. The President thanked Senator Morse; that he was glad to have his expression of appreciation for the helpfulness of the Chilean Embassy in Washington which he assured him had the full confidence of the government here. He also expressed his appreciation for the understanding and helpfulness of the United States Embassy in Chile with relation to the problems of his government. In departing Senator Morse said that, as a former professor, he had been privileged to attend as a student a most useful seminar, and congratulated the President on his helpful presentation of some of the problems facing his government.
