1520  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
405.	 Report of the Panel on Seismic Improvement1
Washington, January 7, 1959
1. The Panel on Seismic Improvement (PSI), appointed by the 
Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, met in 
­Washington on January 6 and 7, 1959, to review measures whereby it 
“would be reasonably feasible within the present state of seismic tech­
nology to improve the capabilities of the system recommended by the 
Geneva Conference of Experts to detect and to identify seismic events 
as either earthquakes or explosions without increasing the number of 
manned control posts in the system.”
2. The capabilities of the Geneva system with regard to underground 
tests have recently been reevaluated by another Panel on the basis of 
new data from the underground tests at HARDTACK II. The PSI did not 
attempt to evaluate further the specific capability of the Geneva System. 
The proposals recommended herein would increase the estimated capa­
bilities of the Geneva System. It is noted that the data on nuclear shots 
used in these estimates was from Rainier and HARDTACK II and thus 
has all the limitations of that small sample of nuclear test conditions. The 
PSI has not concerned itself with the possible seismic effects of nuclear 
tests under different conditions or the possibilities of concealment by 
decoupling or other techniques.
3. The Geneva System of seismic identification places principal 
reliance on the assessment of a single phenomenon, i.e. the direction 
of displacement of the first arrival of the P-­wave in a specified network 
of seismic instruments. The PSI considered a variety of seismic phe­
nomena and techniques which have been suggested to increase the 
capability of the Geneva System without adding manned control posts, 
including:
(a) Evaluation of the first motion of the P-­wave with aid of approx­
imate inverse transfer functions.
(b) Surface wave phenomena using long-­period instruments.
(c) Unmanned, auxiliary seismic stations.
(d) Larger arrays of seismometers at manned control posts.
(e) Improvements from increased knowledge of the transmission 
properties of the earth by experience in operation of the system.
(f) After shocks as a diagnostic feature.
(g) Radiation asymmetry at the source.
(h) Use of computers in data analysis.
(i) Use of higher frequency seismic signals.
1 Source: Suggests improvements to detection systems. Confidential. 6 pp. Eisen­
hower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special 
Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament.
