618 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III in yoga who has to sit on a mat of pointed needles! But, this will be a good chance for me and my party to experience this firsthand. 2) The question of the value of the yen as referred to by Secretary Blumenthal. Last year we lived through seemingly interminable uncertainty. We then achieved a period of relative calm. Now we are faced with a record weakening of the value of the yen. I feel that we are required to spend great effort in resolving this problem in coming months. This cannot be achieved without instilling confidence in the world economy. This should be addressed at the upcoming Summit. And again it is important for the monetary authorities to continue to cooperate. I am asking Secretary Blumenthal and the others here to help us cooperate. 213. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 3, 1979 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #95 1. Opinion: Dollar Pricing of Oil Several months ago in the midst of the dollar crisis, Michael Blumenthal observed at an SCC Meeting that the United States was bearing a large and unfair burden as a consequence of the fact that oil is priced in dollars. This severely depresses the exchange rate for dollars, and the result is that Germany and Japan are paying less for oil today in real terms than they were before the 1973 price increases. They are becoming “cheap energy” countries which gives them a strong competitive edge in other areas of industry and international trade, aggravating the problem of trade balances and putting further pressure on the dollar. Nonetheless, at the time, Mike was against even studying proposals to convert oil pricing to a “basket of currencies,” for fear that this would show lack of confidence in the dollar and lead to an even heavier speculation. Now that we are past the crisis, I think we should face this issue squarely. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 3–5/79. Secret; Sensitive. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
