800  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
disputes between us. Text of his December 1 draft had given me very 
precise and clear answer to this question.
62. Wang said I had stated I still not clear about his intent this 
regard. In turn, he would like say he still not clear whether it intent U.S. 
following issuance declaration continue its seizure Taiwan.
63. I replied it seemed me Wang still getting us down byroad of 
­discussing what happens with regard settlement our disputes after 
­declaration issued. I did not see that there would be much purpose in 
repeating answers I had consistently given this regard. I wished we could 
get agreement on declaration and then we could carry on in accord­ance 
its specific terms. I had nothing more say on this this morning.
64. Wang said it was because he had some questions in doubt that 
he had put them forward to me. Before these points made clear, issu­
ance declaration would be of no meaning.
65. Wang asked whether I meant, as I had just stated, I would not 
agree to holding Foreign Ministers conference following declaration? 
Did I have this in mind, or perhaps his understanding not correct.
66. I said if his questions were whether U.S. would, following 
issuance declaration, concede to all his views, there could only be one 
answer. I could only characterize this as most remarkable prerequisite 
for issuance of declaration. I had said with regard to his specific question 
on Foreign Ministers meeting that I did not exclude any feasible means 
for realization our common desire for peaceful settlement our disputes, 
nor did I agree that there only one means for realization this desire. I did 
not and would not go beyond words of declaration itself, words which 
he had suggested.
67. Wang asked if we then were agreed that we could accept this 
draft they had proposed.
68. I said I had already accepted language of last paragraph their 
draft.
69. Wang said by that paragraph they precisely had reference to 
Foreign Ministers conference. Did I also accept that? Did I mean we had 
same understanding with regard that paragraph?
70. I said I couldn’t see how I could go beyond what I had already 
said. I fully understood that Wang had in past and probably would in 
future contend that there should be Foreign Ministers meeting. I did 
not see that anything he said in declaration prejudiced his position that 
regard.
71. I said Wang perfectly aware of my position that I consider such 
discussion premature at this time. I did not see that anything said in 
declaration prejudiced position.
72. Wang said reason why he had forward that question was 
because they considered declaration they discussing closely related to
