1955 95 Question we now clearly face is whether we can or should pursue this tactic further. We all have strong impression from today’s meeting that it will not be possible further to advance position we have gained without great difficulty and much time. Question therefore is what approach is going to get most Ameri­ cans out in shortest time. Related to this is question whether we are jus­ tified in taking action which will result those Americans whose release we can now obtain remaining in prison because we strive to obtain simultaneous release large number or all of them. I refrain from com­ menting on cold-­blooded attitude CHICOMS which has brought about this situation but simply say it is fact we must face in dealing with these people however distasteful it may be. We have carefully discussed among ourselves all aspects problem and have come conclusion that course in best overall interests detained Americans is to reach some agreement on representation at present point. First we strongly feel that I would not in forseeable future be able to move Chinese off of legalistic approach to individual American cases. They are not going take simultaneous action on cases all Americans which would jeopardize their ability maintain public pretense action is result workings “justice”. I have tried hard avoid backing them into corner where they could not do this and believe any other course would only indefinitely delay release of any Americans regardless strength Chinese desire get ahead to item two. Second we believe that after release of first group we will be able maintain steady pressure for release of remainder during course talks on “other practical matters”. CHICOMS obviously very anxious get to “other practical matters” and while they will want much we not able give believe we should be able play hand so as to continue pressure for release. I now have commitment for “review” all cases including Downey and Fecteau and can take maximum advantage all opportuni­ ties exploit this. Of course CHICOMS could continue hold remaining prisoners for further bargaining but they may well estimate prisoners are diminishing asset and I do not exclude possibility of fairly prompt release remainder. Of course, before agreeing proceed second agenda item we would reserve right revert agenda item one as long as any Americans detained. Third, they have come so far on substance our representation proposal that it is difficult maintain further discussion this except in context straight trade for release Americans. In fact this point virtually reached at today’s meeting. In this connection believe it helpful recall that original concept before these talks was that agreeing to representa­ tion proposal would assist in obtaining release Americans. I undertook
