Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 357 to separate the telemetry issue from START. A solution could be found prior to START and its duration could run parallel to START’s duration. Burt said the discussion had been useful. It had exposed the fact that there were some fundamental differences as well as some technical problems. Consistent with the approach taken in the U.S. initiative on verification and stability measures, the U.S. side proposed reaching agreement on elements of common ground on data denial and implementing them as a means of achieving in the longer run an adequate START agreement. Of course, there currently were differences. The question of cruise missiles was one of them. But the sides should implement now what was already agreed and then come up with more fully satisfactory solutions in the context of a START treaty. Differences appeared to exist on what practices would be prohibited, on the treatment of cruise missiles, and on the Article VI duration question. Also, the Soviet side did not yet address the issue of test ranges. It did not seem as if the subject could be resolved today. It could be returned to later in the week and in Geneva. He concluded that the most constructive approach was to codify what was agreed to date and leave open the opportunity for both sides to seek better outcomes in a completed START agreement. Nazarkin agreed that the subject required further study. There was not enough time here. He also shared the view that what was already agreed should be recorded. But there was an inconsistency between the U.S. document’s addendum, which listed specific types of ICBMs and SLBMs only and Article IX, paragraph 4 of the START JDT, which contained both U.S. and Soviet formulations in brackets. Brooks reiterated the importance of capturing common ground without prejudicing the positions of either side. Nazarkin remarked that, in addition to excluding cruise missiles, the U.S. approach did not include all ballistic I missiles—­only those flight tested after October 1, 1964. Burt said Nazarkin had just reinforced his point that differences remained and that the two sides should move on. Turning to the unit of account issue, Burt asked if there was a response to the U.S. compromise offer. Nazarkin said he wanted to clarify one point. If the U.S. proposal were accepted, would the number of missiles and launchers be the same? Burt said that, in terms of the 1600 ceiling, the number would be the same. The thing that would be limited would change from a single item to a set of two items—­missile and launcher. This would affect only the provisions dealing with the 1600 limit, primarily in Articles III and VII. Nazarkin stated that, ad referendum and in a spirit of compromise, the Soviet side was prepared to accept the U.S. formulation as a general rule. But it did not exclude the possibility that, in working out the texts, certain exceptional circumstances might arise requiring departures from the rule.
