414
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
them one by one. He is likely to continue those tactics and to adopt pro-
gressively forceful measures against the opposition. The Majlis has
granted him authority to rule by decree until mid-February, and we be-
lieve he will be able to have this power extended if he considers it
necessary.
32. It seems probable that the National Front will remain in power
during 1953. It is likely to retain the backing of the Shah and control
over the security forces. The groups opposing the National Front are
not likely to have the strength or unity to overthrow it. However, we
are unable to estimate with confidence whether Mossadeq himself will
remain in power during 1953. Kashani, Mossadeq’s strongest potential
opponent, will probably continue to exert a strong influence on Mos-
sadeq and consequently will probably prefer to remain in the back-
ground while Mossadeq continues to shoulder responsibility. On the
other hand, Kashani is building up his own political strength and
might, should he so desire, be able to oust Mossadeq by parliamentary
means during 1953.
33. Kashani would also be the probable successor to Mossadeq in
the event of the latter’s death. Regardless of how Mossadeq is replaced,
Kashani or any other National Front successor could not be assured of
the support of all the diverse elements of the National Front. Any suc-
cessor regime would, therefore, be likely to resort to ruthlessness to de-
stroy opposition. In its struggle to do so, and particularly if it failed to
do so, Tudeh influence and opportunities for gaining control would in-
crease rapidly.
34. If present trends in Iran continue unchecked beyond the end of
1953, rising internal tensions and continued deterioration of the
economy and of the budgetary position of the government might lead
to a breakdown of government authority and open the way for at least
a gradual assumption of control by Tudeh.
Probable Developments if the UK and Iran Reach Agreement on the Oil
Question
35. If the Iranian Government reached an oil settlement with the
UK—no matter how favorable to Iran—it would almost certainly be
confronted with violent demonstrations in urban centers by the Tudeh
Party and probably by extremist elements in the National Front. There
would also be immediate danger of Tudeh sabotage of oil installations.
However, the government would almost certainly have the backing of
the Shah, the security forces, and the more moderate National Front
elements and would probably be able to suppress these disturbances.
The resumption of large-scale oil exports would go far toward easing
the government’s budgetary difficulties and would enable it to take
steps to increase the supply of goods and reduce inflationary pressures,
