178
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—The transmitter expansion program was cleared with and neces-
sary licenses requested from the FRG ministry of post and telecommun-
ications, though there is no evidence that Schmidt or Genscher were
specifically consulted by U.S. officials.
—Schmidt’s concern over his lack of control of RFE/RL content
may be exacerbated by his qualms about aspects of East-West relations,
including human rights problems.
Schmidt seems to have put the radios on the agenda for his visit
to Washington. I believe we should try to respond to his concerns
while stressing the importance we attach to the radios and to their
location in the Federal Republic.4
You could also admit that RFE/RL sometimes operated in the past
as though they were autonomous even of the U.S. Government, and
your reconstitution of the Board for International Broadcasting (the
RFE/RL parent) is designed to correct that. You should also add the
strong U.S. interest in the continued effectiveness of these radios.5
Finally, it is noteworthy that Schmidt would be strongly opposed
by the CDU if he tried to take action, and the FDP (his coalition partner)
might not support him.6
4 On July 8, Vance forwarded a briefing memorandum to Carter in preparation for
the meeting with Schmidt. Vance suggested that, in the event Schmidt raised the issue
of RFE/RL, Carter should respond that the administration regards RFE/RL as essential
to informing the people of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, and that a reduction
or withdrawal of the transmitters and radios would be perceived by Moscow and the
United States public as a retreat in the face of Soviet pressure. (Carter Library, National
Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC 023, Schmidt Visit)
5 In telegram 12578 from Bonn, August 2, Ambassador Stroessel reported: “Chancel-
lor raised subject of RFE/RL operations in FRG in general and new transmitters in
particular with President in private conversation at the White House evening of July
13” and, according to accounts by the West German Ambassador to the United States
and MFA State Secretary Schueler, “the President listened to Schmidt’s presentation
with interest and said he would give further consideration to the subject.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770276–0284) A memorandum of conversa-
tion of the Carter-Schmidt discussion on RFE/RL was not found.
6 This sentence was added by Brzezinski in an earlier draft. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112,
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 1977)
