1977  13
Dr. Brzezinski: And we still have the option of pulling back if there 
are reductions.
Secretary Brown: Yes.
Secretary Vance: What about our allies? They will expect a piece of 
the action—­that we will provide them with these systems.
Secretary Brown: We are now supplying them with quick reaction 
land-­based missiles. It’s better to give them cruise missiles than air-
craft. Aircraft are being diverted for other missions. They would be 
concerned if they thought we would pull out.
President Carter: Aren’t our cruise missiles superior to the Russians 
in airframe, engine and electronic control?
Secretary Brown: Yes.
President Carter: I want to learn the details on this.
General Brown: On the point of our allies, the Germans have stressed 
repeatedly to us that what may be tactical to us is strategic to them. 
They look for deployment of land-­based cruise missiles in Central 
Europe. But use of cruise missiles makes verification most difficult. For 
tactical use, whether armed or un-­armed, the situation is very fuzzy.
Secretary Brown: That argues for going slowly.
General Brown: When we think about cruise missiles we tend to 
think too much about offense. We also have to face the challenges of 
defense. They would be a decided threat to the US if they are not cov-
ered by SALT.
President Carter: Our advanced stage of development is a major 
advantage over the Soviets. We can continue procurement and keep the 
advantage or reduce it as leverage.
General Brown: The same is true of the B–1.
Secretary Brown: There is one specific thing about cruise missiles 
with regard to SALT. The Backfire corresponds to land-­based cruise 
missiles in Europe. They are tactical. Let the Russians know that they 
are something we may want to deploy if the Backfire is not take care of.
General Brown: The SS–X–20 concerns the Europeans, too. It’s 
mobile.
President Carter: It concerns China too.
Dr. Brzezinski: Any cut-­back would send the wrong signal to both 
the Europeans and the Chinese.
President Carter: Without cutting back, the actual numbers are not 
very high.
Secretary Vance: On the shipbuilding program, the Germans are 
very much interested in the hydrofoil program. They will take this as a 
signal that we are not really interested in standardization. On the heels
