50 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement INTERNAL SECURITY 13. The Soviet Bloc should be confronted with internal security measures presenting such risks as will serve as a deterrent to covert attack against the United States. 14. In particular, the United States should, to the extent practi­ cable, increase safeguards so as to provide adequate deterrents (a) to clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons by any means such as submarines, small craft, merchant vessels, aircraft, illegal entries of persons and things, and diplomatic channels; and (b) to utilization of such weapons against vital ­targets. Intensive efforts should be con­ tinued to develop active and improved passive devices for the detec­ tion of fissionable material introduced by such means, and to assure their effective use. 15. Measures should be taken to protect U.S. aircraft and airports, as appropriate, against sabotage, espionage, and other subversive activ­ ities, and to provide appropriate safeguards relative to the operations within the continental United States of Soviet Bloc airlines. 16. Selected industrial and governmental facilities of a highly critical nature should be protected against espionage and clandestine attack by nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and conventional sabotage. 17. Selective counterintelligence coverage should be maintained of foreign diplomatic and official personnel suspected of engaging in activities beyond the scope of their normal diplomatic assignments. 18. Plans for the detention in the event of emergency of persons potentially dangerous to the United States should be maintained in a high state of readiness. Port Security3 19. Measures should be taken (a) to protect U.S. ports and vessels therein against sabotage, espionage, and other subversive activities, (b) to supervise and where appropriate deny entry of vessels, and (c) to provide appropriate safeguards relative to the presence in U.S. ports of Sino-Soviet Bloc vessels. In so far as feasible, having due regard for legal procedures and rights, subversives should be excluded from ves­ sels and waterfront facilities.4 3 Certain measures under this heading are supplemental to those contained under the previous heading, “INTERNAL SECURITY”. [Footnote is in the original.] 4 Experience has shown that only a very small percentage of the persons believed to be subversives can be excluded under procedures acceptable to the courts. [Footnote is in the original.]
