Yugoslavia
833
including the agreements with the IAEA, and the implementation of
the new U.S. law on nuclear exports. Also, he said, the INFCE will
continue its work over the next two years or more and a UN Conference
on Nuclear Energy will be convened. It is important that any arrange-
ment made now be consistent with agreements already concluded or
to be concluded. The Yugoslavs thought it premature to go for a long-
term agreement at this time and therefore suggested a temporary agree-
ment for four or five years to provide the fuel and to await the conclu-
sion of an international convention. Under this arrangement Yugoslavia
would clearly reaffirm its commitments under the NPT as well as
bilateral and international commitments. When these are summed up,
they would cover all matters of concern to the U.S. side. Such a solution
would meet the requirements of the Yugoslav situation. Yugoslavia
was among the first signers of the NPT and was in the front line of those
countries fighting for it. Between the industrialized and nonaligned
countries there is need to understand the needs of each and to meet
the special requirements in this case. We should be able to work out
an interim solution; we should examine the concrete situation and
should seek to help the negotiations.
Mr. Vest replied that this Yugoslav approach differs significantly
from that discussed earlier, and that he had not had a chance to consult
with the experts on the subject. He said it would also have to be
acceptable to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and in harmony
with our new legislation. We will pursue this matter. Secretary Vance
said that the plan for continuing discussions was a good one, but that
the subject is very difficult because of the strict limits of our law.
We will do all we can within those limits and without discrimination
against others with whom we deal on this question. Minic said he
also agreed that the two sides should meet soon to continue their
discussions. (The Yugoslavs will give us their proposal in writing.)
Emigre Matters and Terrorism. Minic said that the Yugoslavs are
pleased to note that the present Administration is acting more energet-
ically on this question. During President Ford’s visit to Belgrade in
1975, Minic had given a pro memoria paper to Secretary Kissinger on
all of these matters. Now there was a new paper which brought the
information up to date. The problem basically is that there are too
many acts by the same small groups of people which remain unsolved
and unpunished.
Secretary Vance said that this is a matter of great importance to
us and that since the Carter Administration came into office we have
seen the resolution of the TWA hijacking and of the break-in at the
Yugoslav UN Mission. (He noted that in these matters we were
following actions initiated during the prior Administration.) He contin-
ued that we also feel very strongly about the broader question of
