Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
617
the desire to gain a one-sided advantage—but that we genuinely wish
those relations to improve.20
To this end, it is essential that all key members of your delegation
be explicitly instructed to deliberately and repeatedly emphasize cer-
tain key and simple themes to their Soviet counterparts. Only a delega-
tion that speaks with a united voice, that keeps repeating the same key
themes is likely to convey the message that needs to be heard back in
the Kremlin.
Accordingly, I would recommend that you instruct everyone
going to Vienna to make the following points to every Soviet that they
encounter:
1. The United States wishes to join the Soviet Union in containing
the nuclear arms race through further cuts in SALT II and more ambi-
tious cuts in SALT III, as well as through other arms control measures;21
2. The United States wishes to see the Soviet Union as a partner in
dealing with many emerging global problems, the solution of which
need not be the object of ideological disputes (food, development, en-
ergy, etc.);22
3. The United States cannot be indifferent to Soviet insensitivity to
our concerns in such areas as the Middle East, Southern Africa, Viet-
nam, or Cuba—and such insensitivity will produce strong American
reactions, particularly on matters which are of concern to the Soviet
Union (e.g., China);23
4. Soviet military buildup, both strategic and conventional, has
gone beyond the point of legitimate defense needs, and is generating a
genuine threat to the United States and its principal Allies—and unless
the Soviet side shows restraint, the West, with the United States in the
lead, will undertake major, comprehensive, and matching efforts.
If we succeed in communicating these messages effectively, we
will have achieved our basic objectives. SALT II ratification will get a
boost. Our Allies will maintain confidence in our leadership. You will
have set a clear framework for a constructive U.S.-Soviet relationship
regardless of who succeeds Brezhnev.
20 The President underlined “genuinely wish those relations to improve.”
21 The President wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin next to this point and, beneath
the point, added “We should mutually enhance verification techniques.”
22 The President wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin next to this point and, beneath
the point, added “Closer regular consultations.”
23 The President wrote below this point “VNam, Cuba ok but too narrow. South
Asia, N. Africa more important.”
