Covert and Overt Operations
857
inexperienced and generally extremist electees of the new Majlis are
not good. In terms of domestic Iranian politics, the most attractive solution
available to the Majlis is to hold trials in some form. It will take firm
and skillful leadership to restrain that impulse, possibly by Khomeini
personally, and our past experience offers no reason for optimism that
such leadership will be exerted. (S)
—A second problem is the progressive deterioration of public order
in Iran. This is a vicious circle: incompetence by the Islamic regime
leads to public dissatisfaction which leads in turn to more blatant
purges and repression by the regime in self-defense which leads to
more disaffection. No one knows how long this process will continue
before the social structure collapses into a new round of general vio-
lence, but most observers believe it should be measured in months
rather than years. A collapse of civil order would obviously place the
lives of the hostages in jeopardy and would confront us with some
urgent decisions. (S)
—A third possibility is the death of one or more hostages,
or convincing evidence that their physical safety is in immediate
danger. (C)
—Finally, there may be some act of desperation from within the
country or in association with the various exile groups which attempts
to split the country or establish an alternative regime. At the moment,
the prospects for a successful movement of this type appear limited,
but the possibility of an attempted revolt in Azerbaijan or an attempt
to cut the Khuzestan oil fields away from the rest of the country, for
example, cannot be excluded. Any such attempt would raise the danger
of civil war and increase the temptation for the Soviets to intervene. (S)
Each of these events would effectively be outside our control but
would demand a response on our part which would again place this
issue at the forefront of public concern—in this country and elsewhere.
Our diplomatic strategy is focused on the first of these contingencies.
We are attempting to establish redundant and reliable channels of
communications to various elements in the Iranian power structure
which will permit an exchange of ideas. We wish to insure that the
Iranians understand that trials are totally unacceptable to us. We also
wish to explore ideas about how the issue could be managed with the
Majlis to avoid unpleasant surprises or, if possible, a new round of
sterile rhetoric and confrontational demands. The general outlines of
a negotiating framework were established in the position paper devel-
oped during the earlier negotiating phase in February and March,3 and
our objective is to encourage key Iranians to think in those terms in
3 See Document 137
