1956 881 553. Letter 26 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 26 Geneva, March 28, 1956 Dear Walter: I came back last night from Prague and found your most interest­ ing letter No. 35. I am not particularly surprised at the news it contained nor with the PRC proposal which I am inclined to think is genuine and not just a brainchild of Krishna’s. As you know, I have thought all along that they want to do business with us, on their terms of course, but they find our terms on renunciation of force too hard for them. I think that they are substantially right in saying that accepting our formulation would in fact be an acceptance by them of the status quo. And at present they feel entirely too self-confident and sure of themselves to feel under any compulsion to accept the status quo, particularly with respect to the offshore islands. It is apparent that they feel that they can get easier terms from us if they can find some way to by-pass the Department. Hence their stip­ ulation that our man be a direct representative of the President and not a career Foreign Service officer. This may also indicate that they are having some second thoughts about a Foreign Ministers’ meeting. As far as my talks here are concerned, while on the one hand they may be reluctant to break this contact as long as they feel there is any chance of it developing into something further, and are reluctant to accept the onus for breaking them, on the other hand they may shortly come to the point where they estimate that only by bringing about a break (possibly accompanied by increased actual or threat­ ened stepping up of military activity in the Taiwan area) can they bring maximum pressure on us. In any event, I reluctantly come to the conclusion that these talks are going to be sterile of further results, and the length of time they will continue very problematical unless I am able to introduce some new element. I feel I have gone to the very outer limits of my instructions in holding out a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow to them and in trying to get across the thoughts contained in Senator George’s letter to the Secretary. I also feel that I have gone as far as I can in the other direction without getting so far down the slippery slope which would lead up to a break that I would not be able to draw back. I know that the Department appre­ ciates that this leaves fairly narrow limits within which I can operate. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Top Secret; Official–­Informal; Eyes Only. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
