232
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The USSR is continuing efforts to cooperate with the U.S. private
sector, despite the Jackson-Vanik amendment.5 This indicates that the
Kremlin may implicitly recognize that Soviet economic concerns will
make it difficult to delay forward bilateral movement for long periods
of time because of U.S. human rights advocacy.
With proper management, our security interests and our human
rights concerns both can be accommodated in our relations with the So-
viet Union. In fact, failure to execute an appropriate human rights
strategy with proper balance will detract from the political value of our
human rights policy elsewhere in the world.
The potential normalization of relations with China and Cuba will
place some strain on the credibility of our human rights policy, for in
both cases other considerations are likely to govern in the short term.
As relations are established, we will be expected to take human rights
initiatives. We should now be examining the methods we will utilize to
achieve specific human rights goals. These would probably fall, at the
beginning, in the areas of family reunification and, with respect to
Cuba, the treatment and disposition of political prisoners. We should
recognize that with respect to human rights we will have little, if any,
leverage or influence with the PRC at this stage.
4. Gross Violaters of Human Rights.
Governments that have a consistent record of gross violations of
human rights should be dealt with as special cases, and our policy
should generally be to bring to bear international opinion and con-
certed action by the world community to bring about improvement.
Obviously, this should be done only in flagrant cases after attempts to
encourage evolutionary improvement have been spurned. Even in
such cases, however, there is no necessary reason why formal diplo-
matic relations should not be maintained.
II. Identification of “a Consistent Pattern of Gross Violations of
Internationally Recognized Human Rights.”
The phrase, “a consistent pattern of gross violations of internation-
ally recognized human rights” derives from terminology in Resolution
1503 of the UN Economic and Social Council, dated May 27, 1970,6 and
has been used in Sections 116 and 502B (a) (2) of the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961, Section 28 (a) of the Inter-American Development Bank
Act, and Section 211 (a) of the African Development Fund Act. The gen-
eral purport of all these statutory provisions is that we should not pro-
vide assistance to governments that engage in such conduct.
5 See footnote 13, Document 4.
6 See footnote 3, Document 2.
