1955 321 order of business, have returned to it today and will continue to return to it as long as questions remain. 3. I then took note of fact 10 imprisoned Americans arrived in Hong Kong and some of 12 had also arrived and in expectation PRC will act expeditiously with remaining 19 and further effort demonstrate our desire talks should progress, desired discuss with him today topics which we should discuss under agenda item two. Referred my rejection of higher level meeting and put forward two subjects “renunciation of use of force for achievement national objectives” and “accounting for US personnel”. Consider renunciation of force of fundamental impor­ tance to discussion agenda item two, should therefore be discussed before economic embargo. Therefore suggested subjects in order of (a) accounting US personnel (b) renunciation of force and (c) economic embargo. 4. In reply Wang reiterated previous points on implementation and then referring my suggestion renunciation of force as topic read short prepared statement which was largely non sequitur in terms of what I had said but repeated usual Communist line “not wanting war with US, PRC had renounced force in international relations, tension in Formosa Straits, caused by presence US forces” etc. All this could be resolved only by higher level meeting. Expressed puzzlement by what I meant under subject “accounting for US personnel”, said thought this taken care of under agenda item one. 5. In reply I returned to implementation repeating my questions and again also reframing as suggestions asking for reply next meet­ ing. Then briefly discussed higher level meeting repeating previous position and adding his proposal indicated pessimism which I did not share on what two of us should be able to accomplish. Pointed out I had presented our two items in as neutral terms as possible and would be prepared subsequently discuss them. 6. He then stated prepared to continue discussion next meeting but wanted to make clear had not committed himself on subjects or their order. I agreed and he accepted my proposal for Wednesday, October 5 for next meeting. 7. He tried hard obtain press communique omitting reference to discussion implementation agreed announcement but we finally agreed upon communique identical with that of last meeting. He said would not regard this as precedent for communique next meeting. Gowen Note: Advance copy to Mr. McConaughy (CA) 12:30 p.m. 9/28/55 CWO/FED
