National Security Policy 703 2. The Port Security Program which is currently in operation under responsibility of the Secretary of the Treasury and the Coast Guard is governed by the following: a. U.S. Policy on Continental Defense, in Par. 19 on the subject of Port Security, calls for measures to be applied by Treasury to protect U.S. port areas against sabotage, espionage and clandestine introduc­ tion of persons and things inimical to U.S. security, including meas­ ures, on a selective basis as appropriate, for (1) the denial of entry to vessels, and (2) the boarding, searching and surveillance of vessels (NSC 5802/1, Par. 19, p. 2). State and Treasury, propose that the Port Security paragraph of Continental Defense Policy be revised by delet­ ing provisions for the denial, boarding, searching, and surveillance of Bloc vessels. The majority of the Planning Board recommend that Par. 19 of Continental Defense Policy should not be revised at this time, and the JCS, and IIC and ICIS, excepting the State member, concur in this view. b. U.S. Policy Toward Poland also deals with Port Security in Par. 33 which provides that Polish flag vessels are to be treated in the same manner as Soviet Bloc flag vessels, except that Polish flag passenger ves­ sels may enter at New York, and Polish flag cargo vessels may be per­ mitted entry at designated U.S. ports for the specific purpose of taking on cargo for Poland under U.S.-Polish economic arrangements (NSC 5808/1, Par. 33, p. 11). All members of the Planning Board recommend that this policy be revised so as to permit Polish cargo vessels to enter designated U.S. ports for purposes of normal trade, not necessarily lim­ ited to the taking on of cargoes under a U.S.-Polish economic agree­ ment. The JCS do not concur. c. Pursuant to NSC Action, Treasury submitted a detailed Port Security Program to carry out the previously mentioned policies gov­ erning the denial and control of Sino-­Soviet Bloc and Polish vessels. This program prescribes specific measures to be taken by Treasury and Coast Guard, with respect to: (1) the admission of Polish vessels at des­ ignated ports, after boarding and search, when taking on cargo under an economic agreement, and Polish passenger vessels at New York after boarding and search; (2) the denial of entry to Sino-­Soviet bloc flag vessels, and any other flag vessel which is suspected of being under Bloc control; and (3) the boarding and search of other flag vessels which are suspected of being under Bloc control or which have touched at a Bloc port during the preceding four months. It is also provided that any vessel otherwise excludable from U.S. ports under this policy may be admitted under circumstances as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretaries of State and Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence. (It should be noted that this Presi­ dentially approved program would in effect be rescinded should there be approval of the State-­Treasury proposal to amend present policy by eliminating requirements for the denial, boarding, search, and surveil­ lance of Bloc and other suspect vessels.) 3. In support of the State-­Treasury proposal The following points were advanced: to revise the Port Security provisions of Par. 19 of Continental Defense Policy, are the points made in the State Department
