Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 623 their presence. We would have to take some unilateral steps which would add conviction to their démarches. A Negotiating Strategy We cannot maintain our present posture of watchful waiting for more than a few days without losing credibility entirely. We must also not lose sight of the fact that the transfer of the hostages—even if successful—is not the end of the game. The final negotiation for release is still ahead of us and will be even tougher. We need to have cards in our hand for the next round which will give us some negotiating leverage—things we can give up or things which we can renounce doing—which will keep the negotiations from being focused entirely on U.S. concessions on matters of basic principle. Even if we decide not to go ahead with tangible punitive acts, we need to create an environment of uncertainty and potential threat which will keep the Iranians focused on the immediacy of the problem and, if possible, for them to set deadlines for themselves. This is the necessary counterpart to the carrot we have been brandishing. We must have the private channels of communication, but we should also be doing things which raise doubt in their minds about our real intentions. Pure carrot is going to be ineffective without some stick in the background. There are a number of things we can do which create uncertainty and even fear in the minds of Iranians but which we can blandly explain away as not our doing or as unrelated to Iran. We have been playing the game totally in the open. We should reach down a little into our bag of tricks. I recommend a brainstorming session with the Agency, DOD, State and some selected members of the NSC Staff which would come up with a menu of largely deniable actions which could be orchestrated over a period of time to build pressure and tension. We were doing this for a while, but the effort ceased as the UN Commission took over. It is time to start some new systematic thinking about the end game.
