Chapter 4, February–April 1990  579
The Secretary replied that before we could agree on a Joint Statement 
or a text it was important to do further work on the content of possi-
ble follow-­on negotiations. If we could reach some understanding on 
what we would like to see as principles for those talks, then perhaps we 
could consider whether a Joint Statement would be appropriate. The 
U.S. had some preliminary ideas of its own about START II:
— The talks should be bilateral negotiations involving only the 
U.S. and USSR.
— The U.S. agreed with many of the ideas put forward by 
Ambassador Nazarkin in Geneva. For example, we shared the view 
that the follow-­on talks should aim to remove the incentives to strike 
first, reduce the concentration of warheads on MIRVed ICBMs and give 
preference to survivable systems.
— The U.S. believed that stability would be strengthened if the 
sides could agree on measures that would seek a balance between stra-
tegic defenses and offenses. In this regard, the U.S. believed the Defense 
and Space Talks should continue.
— Of course, stability could be enhanced in other ways as well, 
including confidence-­building measures, and these should also be 
addressed in follow-­on negotiations.
— It was our strongly held view that our objective should be to 
build on START and not to replace it with another 400-­page treaty. We 
should work out amendments, protocols and supplementary measures 
rather than beginning again from scratch.
The next step, the Secretary concluded, was to see whether we 
could reach an understanding regarding the contents of START II. If 
we found we were very far apart, we would need to rethink whether to 
have a Joint Statement. He repeated that before we decided that a Joint 
Statement was the route to follow, we should see how close we are on 
the principles to be embraced by such a statement.
Shevardnadze responded that he had listened very carefully to the 
Secretary’s remarks. Having already set forth the Soviet position, he 
did not think that our views fully coincided; but there were elements 
that could provide the basis for a joint document. He suggested the 
experts get together in order to reach agreement. He added that he had 
no other NST questions. He then passed along the package of Soviet 
papers,5 remarking that the conveyor belt was fully operational.
START: Backfire
The Secretary said he had a couple of additional START-related 
issues to raise. The first was the Backfire bomber. This remained a seri-
ous concern to the U.S. In our view it would need to be captured one 
way or another. One way to do this would be to count Backfire in START 
but to discount it by 50% in terms of the 1600 and 6000 limits. Another 
5 Not found.
