Chapter 4, February–April 1990  487
issue was that of range. He asked Kanter to run through the areas of 
agreements so that we could be sure we had a mutual understanding.
NSC Senior Staff Director Kanter then read the additional elements 
of common ground.
— For the United States:
 Attribute 10 warheads to each B–52 equipped for ALCMs, 10 
warheads to each B–1 equipped for ALCMs, and 10 warheads to future 
heavy bombers equipped for ALCMs.
 Each B–52, B–1 and future heavy bomber may be equipped for no 
more than 20 ALCMs.
— For the Soviet Union:
 Attribute 8 warheads to each TU–95 equipped for ALCMs, 8 war-
heads to each TU–160 equipped for ALCMs, and 10 warheads to future 
heavy bombers equipped for ALCMs.
 Each TU–95 and TU–160 may be equipped for no more than 12 
ALCMs; future Soviet heavy bombers may be equipped for no more 
than 20 ALCMs.
— The total number of TU–95s equipped for ALCMs and TU–160s 
equipped for ALCMs may be up to 40% more than the total number of 
U.S. heavy bombers equipped for ALCMs.
Kanter concluded by saying that all other elements of the package 
previously discussed would remain unchanged. (Final agreed text of 
Elements of Common Ground on ALCMs is attached.)8
The Secretary asked whether Kanter meant all other elements of 
the U.S. proposal had been agreed. Kanter replied that this was correct, 
with the exception of the range threshold.
Shevardnadze said he wanted to consult with his delegation.
(The meeting recessed at 9:30 and resumed at 9:35.)
Shevardnadze returned, remarking that negotiating was a difficult 
business. He believed that all these questions could be enumerated. On 
seven points, the sides had taken an agreed position and on one, range, 
they still had to resolve their differences. He believed we could say 
that the entire package had been agreed with the exception of range. 
He asked, however, that the U.S. not cite publicly the figures that had 
been agreed. The reason was that it would be difficult for the Soviet 
side to explain these new figures, given the fact that they gave the U.S. 
side a certain edge. Problems would arise right away from the fact that 
the U.S. was getting 1100 warheads above the 6000 limit. Therefore, he 
would like the sides to state publicly nothing more than that all ques-
tions had been agreed except for range and that work will go on.
8 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Additional Elements of 
Common Ground on ALCMs.”
