The railroads throughout the country are in a fair state of prosperity. Their service is
good and their supply of cars is abundant. Their condition would be improved and the
public better served by a system of consolidations. I recommend that the Congress
authorize such consolidations under the supervision of the Interstate Commerce
Commission, with power to approve or disapprove when proposed parts are excluded
or new parts added. I am informed that the railroad managers and their employees have
reached a substantial agreement as to what legislation is necessary to regulate and
improve their relationship. Whenever they bring forward such proposals, which seem
sufficient also to protect the interests of the public, they should be enacted into law.
It is gratifying to report that both the railroad managers and railroad employees are
providing boards for the mutual adjustment of differences in harmony with the
principles of conference, conciliation, and arbitration. The solution of their problems
ought to be an example to all other industries. Those who ask the protections of
civilization should be ready to use the methods of civilization.
A strike in modern industry has many of the aspects of war in the modern world. It
injures labor and it injures capital. If the industry involved is a basic one, it reduces the
necessary economic surplus and, increasing the cost of living, it injures the economic
welfare and general comfort of the whole people. It also involves a deeper cost. It tends
to embitter and divide the community into warring classes and thus weakens the unity
and power of our national life.
Labor can make no permanent gains at the cost of the general welfare. All the victories
won by organized labor in the past generation have been won through the support of
public opinion. The manifest inclination of the managers and employees of the
railroads to adopt a policy of action in harmony with these principles marks a new
epoch in our industrial life.
OUTLYING POSSESSIONS
The time has come for careful investigation of the expenditures and success of the laws
by which we have undertaken to administer our outlying possessions. A very large
amount of money is being expended for administration in Alaska. It appears so far out
of proportion to the number of inhabitants and the amount of production as to indicate
cause for thorough investigation. Likewise consideration should be given to the
experience under the law which governs the Philippines. From such reports as reach me
there are indications that more authority should be given to the Governor General, so
that he will not be so dependent upon the local legislative body to render effective our
efforts to set an example of the sound administration and good government, which is so
necessary for the preparation of the Philippine people for self-government under
ultimate independence. If they are to be trained in these arts, it is our duty to provide
for them the best that there is.
