1050
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
posed initiatives.2 Their responses indicate that work is underway and
there is support for elements of the strategy; however, further analysis
and joint discussion is needed to develop the program initiatives. The
number of agencies involved, combined with the differing perspectives
of health as a function of developmental assistance or of medical re-
search, requires that we complete the policy review before we will be in
a position to announce the details of a major initiative.
As a result of your continuing interest, the Departments and
agencies have already initiated internal efforts to determine how they
can support the initiatives.
—HEW is developing a draft message for Secretary Califano to de-
liver, as your personal representative, to the World Health Assembly in
May. AID, State and others are involved in the planning.3
—AID has issued FY80 program guidance based on its draft
strategy to promote health within a basic needs framework.
—Treasury has asked the World Bank to assess the Bank’s effec-
tiveness in the health sector, and the possibilities for future lending.
—DOD has asked the military departments to identify specific
projects in the areas of education, training and research.
In cooperation with the international organizations, we plan to
consider giving special attention to the following:
—Basic health, nutrition and family planning measures particu-
larly to improve maternal and child health;4
—Prevention of blindness;5
—Provision of safe water and basic sanitation; and
—Development of better ways to improve health.
“Basic needs” approaches to development must include health
considerations. Decent health is essential to both labor productivity
and learning ability. Young children and mothers suffer particularly
poor health. Yet their suffering can be substantially alleviated through
inexpensive, basic health programs in conjunction with measures to
improve agriculture and expand education. Most third-world families
lack the simplest means or information to deal effectively with the com-
monest health hazards. About 70 percent of the population lacks safe
water, and even more do without adequate sanitation. Approximately
40 million people in the world are blind. We believe the American
people will support initiatives to help provide families in developing
countries with essential and inexpensive health care and immuniza-
2 See Document 309. The February 1 memorandum to Carter was not found.
3 The President placed a check mark next to this paragraph.
4 The President placed a check mark next to each of these points.
5 The President added next to this point: “Big prob. in Liberia.”
