612 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew: We do not accept the concept of an agreed, legally-­ binding limit. We do accept the concept of a politically-­binding limit, but only on nuclear-­armed SLCMs. Akhromeyev: My job tonight is to go through the list, and identify a list of differences. I want to find out on which points we differ. Then we will summarize. Burt: Why does the Soviet side think it necessary to limit conventional SLCMs? Akhromeyev: I want to go through the list first, but I will answer the question. If we reach agreement with you on range, set the range at 600 km, then we are prepared to limit only nuclear SLCMs. Then you would have the right to deploy freely conventional SLCMs. Akhromeyev (moving to paragraph 6 in the Soviet paper): I assume you would like to disagree on point 6, that the maximum number of nuclear-­armed long-­range SLCMs would not exceed 600 units. Bartholomew: You understand correctly. Akhromeyev: On point 7, future nuclear-­armed long-­range SLCMs would be made distinguishable from non-­nuclear SLCMs on the basis of external and functionally-­defined differences. I understand you disagree. Bartholomew: Your understanding is correct. Akhromeyev: The question still stands. How do we distinguish nuclear SLCMs from non-­nuclear SLCMs? This is different from ALCMs, where we have distinguishability rules, on-­site inspection, etc. How do we distinguish SLCMs? Bartholomew: You can put us down as disagreeing on 7, 8, 9, and 10. The verification problem is fundamental from the outset. We cannot devise verification means to reach levels of confidence required to develop legally-­binding limits and bring them to Congress. (Holding up the Moscow bracketed draft declaration) I do not believe we have yet succeeded in explaining how serious this declaration is and how it serves your needs because of our political system. Burt will explain why it meets many of the points you have been raising about limits and levels. Akhromeyev: You disregard the political atmosphere today in the Soviet Union. Probably you are disregarding our situation in taking this document to the Supreme Soviet without verification. It would not be ratified. Burt: You do not appreciate what a politically sophisticated document the draft SLCM declaration is. We need to find an approach that meets both the political realities here and in the Soviet Union. I will speak candidly, recognizing the informality of this meeting. We recognize your desire to have some form of limits on SLCMs. But we face a difficult problem. We cannot produce on the verification regime that would meet the demanding tests required by Congress to get an
