462 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Nordics and others support it as well. Weakening would be a major setback on trade at the Summit. Carter: Does this modification meet French concerns? Giscard: Before we seek to find words let us look at the problem. Negotiations are still underway. They have made substantial progress thanks to Strauss, who, I am told, is energetic and persuasive, and even difficult from time to time. We are not negotiating directly with the United States but through the European Commission. The Commission consults countries in the EC through an internal EC procedure under Article 113 of the Treaty of Rome.3 The Geneva framework of understanding was accepted by a representative of the Commission. Subsequently, France expressed reservations about the document.4 While we agree that negotiations should move along these lines and will re-emphasize the point that progress has been made, we do not want to give formal approval of a document on which France has reserved. We support the view that progress has been made which reflects our converging opinions, but we can’t approve a document which we have reserved on. Lambsdorff: I recognize the legal reservation here. But last evening we expressed our political support for progress at Geneva.5 That is why we could agree to what Bob Strauss had suggested. We can say we appreciate and strongly support the progress as set forth in the framework of understanding. We could welcome the results and say we appreciate the results. But by saying we appreciate what is set forth in the document we also recognize that it is true that many points remain unsettled. But the first line spells out that not all problems have been or can be resolved. A further point in Mr. Deniau’s text is point 2. I believe the last section of the text echoes what Deniau suggested. This stage of the Geneva negotiations was timed so that we could give new impetus at the Summit. For political reasons it is desirable to recognize the achievement at Geneva and lend support to it. Schmidt: On the last bracket, it is not clear whether there is a difference in substance between the end of the year and December 15 conclusion. 3 The Treaty of Rome, signed by Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands in 1957, established the European Economic Community. 4 Telegrams 13806, 13820, and 13831 from USEC Brussels, all July 14, report on the French reaction to the Geneva Framework of Understanding. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780289–0020, D780289–0143, and D780289–0387, respectively) 5 Presumably a reference to remarks at the dinner for the Heads of State and Chiefs of Government on the evening of July 16.
