International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
983
297.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to the Chairman of the
Board of the Population Council (Rockefeller)1
Washington, September 17, 1977
Dear John:
Many thanks for your kind words on my participation in the Asia
Society Dinner on June 30.2 I, too, enjoyed the occasion enormously.
The time and setting were right for a serious discussion of our Asian
policy, and I’m most grateful for the opportunity the Society afforded
me. I think the reaction to the speech was positive in just about every
respect.
In population matters, there are these recent initiatives: In his mes-
sage to Congress on the environment,3 the President pointed to popula-
tion growth as a major problem of world dimensions and made plain
that the United States was prepared to respond promptly and fully to
all requests for assistance. I have sent a message to all our posts empha-
sizing my personal concern with population matters and requiring that
our Ambassadors give population questions their personal attention.4
As you are probably aware, the Agency for International Develop-
ment (AID), at the President’s request, is now undertaking a major
study on the future of US foreign assistance,5 and I am assured that
population considerations will be part of this analysis. Long-range
global population growth is also being examined in the light of its im-
pact on environment and resources.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
Vance, Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 80D135, September Chron 1977. No classifica-
tion marking. Drafted by William Twaddell (S) on August 15. John D. Rockefeller, III,
Chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation, established the Population Council in 1952 and
served as Chairman of the Board until his death in 1978.
2 In prepared remarks to the Asia Society on June 29, Vance referenced the Carter
administration’s pursuit of a “basic human needs” strategy emphasizing development
and women’s roles within it, increased nutrition and food production, expanded educa-
tional programming and technical training, preventative medicine and prenatal health,
and family planning. He added: “To all of these efforts the United States pledges its
strong support. But in many countries rapid population growth poses a threat to eco-
nomic development. While pressures of population on the land are already threatening
East Asia’s natural environment, some East Asian countries will double their 1970 popu-
lation by the end of the century. I believe the United States must help countries coping
with these difficult problems.” (Department of State Bulletin, August 1, 1977, pp. 143–145)
3 See footnote 4, Document 284.
4 See Document 284.
5 Documentation on the AID study is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III,
Foreign Economic Policy.
