478
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
The above represents roughly our available assets for use in an
emergency. They are hardly adequate. Study is being given the possi-
bility of supplementing them.
Allen Dulles2
2 Printed from a copy that indicates the original was signed.
170.
Memorandum Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, March 3, 1953.
CAPABILITIES OF CIA CLANDESTINE SERVICES IN IRAN
1. To Prevent Assumption of Power by Tudeh: CIA clandestine assets
in Iran are far from sufficient in themselves to prevent a Tudeh as-
sumption of power. Moreover, what CIA assets in Iran are depends
upon the use to which they will be put. For example, there are propa-
ganda groups which could operate effectively to support Mossadegh
but which would refuse to work against him. The same applies to other
groups as regards the Shah. Specifically, CIA capabilities in the clan-
destine field are as follows:
a. Mass propaganda means (press, etc.): CIA controls a network
with numerous press, political, and clerical contacts which has proven
itself capable of disseminating large-scale anti-Tudeh propaganda. The
network can also give effective propaganda support to Prime Minister
Mossadegh. It could not, however, engage in anti-Mossadegh propa-
ganda nor could it support a prime minister not acceptable to Mos-
sadegh. There is another group serving CIA which is capable of pro-
viding reasonably effective pro-Shah propaganda. It would not,
however, support a pro-Shah candidate for the Prime Ministry unless
the views of that individual were acceptable to this group. CIA pres-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 80R01443R, Box 1, Folder 7. Se-
cret; Security Information. A handwritten note on a sheet of paper attached to the memo-
randum indicates that it was prepared for the March 5 NSC meeting, but was not used.
Another copy of the memorandum indicates that it was prepared in the Iran Branch of
the Directorate of Plans. (Ibid., DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 12, Misc. Corre-
spondence TPAJAX)
