834
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
249.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 3, 1979
SUBJECT
West Bank/Gaza Negotiations
Secretary Vance has sent you the memo at Tab A2 in advance of our
Friday morning meeting with Bob Strauss.3 At this point more ques-
tions are raised than answered. Specifically:
—A deputy for Strauss. Bob will not be able to assume full responsi-
bility until later in the year. Even then, he may not want to get into all
the details. One possible candidate to be his deputy is Jim Leonard
from our UN Mission. He knows the Middle East well and is an experi-
enced diplomat.4
—Appropriate US role. How active should we be? When should we
begin to lay out substantive positions? Cy prefers to hold back for a
while, letting the Egyptians and Israelis take the lead at first.
—Broadening Arab support. The positions we take on settlements,
Jerusalem and a dialogue with the PLO will be important signals to the
Arab world. The direction and timing of our moves will require careful
consideration.
—PLO. Most Arab governments are urging us to open a dialogue
with the PLO. This would cause an uproar in Israel.5 An alternative
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 36, Israel: 5–11/79. Secret. Carter wrote at the top of the memorandum, “Cy’s
memo to Bob [Strauss] J.”
2 Attached but not printed is Vance’s May 2 memorandum prepared for Carter in
anticipation of a their scheduled May 3 meeting on the “practical and substantive issues
we will face in the West Bank/Gaza negotiations,” also involving Mondale, Strauss, Brze-
zinski, and Jordan. (See footnote 3 below) The memorandum provided “a brief status re-
port on questions connected with US staffing of the negotiations;” discussed “issues that
arise with respect to the initial phase concerning arrangements, procedure, and agenda;”
addressed “substantive issues on which we need early decisions if we are to have an ef-
fective strategy of winning Arab support for the negotiations,” including Israeli settle-
ments, the status of Jerusalem, and U.S. relations with the Palestinians, including the
PLO; and presented “alternatives for our longer-term strategy toward the negotiations.”
In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of Vance’s memorandum, Carter wrote:
“To Strauss—for comment J.C.” (Ibid.)
3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter held a breakfast meeting with
Mondale, Vance, Brown, and Brzezinski from 7:30 a.m. to 8:56 a.m., May 4. They were
joined by Strauss from 8:35 a.m. to 8:56 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No
memorandum of conversation for this meeting has been found.
4 The appointment of Leonard, who had previously served as Deputy Representa-
tive to the United Nations, as Strauss’s deputy was announced May 12. (Public Papers:
Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 852)
5 In an April 30 letter to Vance, Begin protested reported comments made by
Saunders and Hansell to Congress “to the effect that communications between the gov-
ernment of the United States and the P.L.O. might be considered compatible with the
