1170 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX people held hostage. The American people cannot acquiesce in their people’s being killed. Therefore, the President has been patient for 160 days and more. The world has been astonished by this patience. Even Sadat—at Aswan—said that the U.S. had lost 50,000 lives in Vietnam. Prime Minister Begin had had to tell Sadat that in the U.S. life is sacred. He (Prime Minister Begin) did not think that direct action would help: though Khomeini’s army is weak, and would be crushed, the hostages would be dead. This patience honors America and the President. Israelis have the same pain, and the choices are difficult. Prime Minister Begin knows that it is a sacrifice for the President to see him (Prime Minister Begin). Therefore he is grateful for the President’s taking time to see Sadat and now the Israelis. Second, there are the Soviets in Afghanistan. This is one of the most serious events since World War II. Some people compare this invasion with Czechoslovakia in 1968. There was a tragedy at the end of its “spring,” when the Czechoslovak people had begun to breathe. Warsaw Pact forces crushed them, and then there came the Brezhnev Doctrine.3 Yugoslavia and Romania and others denied it. But anyway, Afghanistan is not in the Soviet orbit. It could go through Baluchistan to the Indian Ocean in a few days, and change the balance of forces in the world. There is no force to stop them. Therefore this is one of the greatest events, and it is difficult to handle. Declarations by the President, Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezinski—they still found time to talk to us (Prime Minister Begin and Sadat). Therefore he is grateful. And therefore he will do his best to bring about practical results, and has come here with concrete proposals to discuss. Israel agrees on intensified talks. He suggests holding them in the Middle East for 40 days. This is not a deadline, it is not a target date, as was suggested at Camp David and Israel did not accept. It had said we need to be careful, and therefore accepted, on his amendment, that the two countries pledged with good faith to go for the goal of finishing in one year. Then elections can be held for the Self-Governing Authority as expeditiously as
