Chapter 4, February–April 1990 533 a license to keep talking in Geneva and there were signs of progress, at least on the margins. A new agreement which addressed the future was preferable to arguments over the ABM Treaty. However, the U.S. has told the Soviet side that it will retain its right to interpret the ABM Treaty as it believes proper, that it will not accept limits more restrictive than the ABM Treaty. Therefore, U.S. activity permitted by the ABM Treaty could not possibly justify Soviet withdrawal from START. Strategic Defenses 15. The German and Canadian Permreps wondered whether the U.S. had noted any shift in Soviet thinking about strategic defenses. Ambassador Smith replied that Soviet attitudes toward both the ABM Treaty and strategic defenses seemed to be moving slowly but steadily in the U.S. direction. He noted that the super-­restrictive Soviet ABM interpretation of 1985 had given way to successively less restrictive ones. They now appeared to be nearing the so-­called “narrow” interpretation. Also, the Soviets themselves were now proposing that offense-­ defense issues be addressed in the post-START timeframe. The U.S. favored such discussions now, and was trying to convince the Soviets that a negotiated cooperative transition is the best course for both sides. 16. On SDI, Ambassador Smith noted that the Soviet media had lessened its harsh anti-SDI rhetoric. Articles had even begun to appear suggesting that the Soviets should pursue advanced strategic defenses. In part, this reflected a growing Soviet appreciation of the nuclear threat from third countries. Perhaps some thinking on defensive sufficiency was starting to creep into Soviet strategic thought. There had also been some recent progress in the DST talks themselves. The Soviets had made their first positive moves on predictability measures since May 1988. The fact that they had dropped their ABM/START linkage was itself evidence of a thaw in Soviet attitudes toward strategic defenses. Danish Permrep Bierring asked whether the U.S. envisaged ever sharing technology with the Soviets as a means of enhancing predictability and confidence. Ambassador Smith replied that the two sides were pursuing data exchanges as well as meetings of experts, visits to labs, and observations of tests to enhance confidence. But there had been no discussion of technology sharing in the negotiations. 17. Belgian Permrep Thuysbaert asked whether news of U.S. progress on SDI work like Brilliant Pebbles did not harden Soviet positions in Geneva. Smith replied that U.S. technical and economic strength was certainly a key Soviet concern, but one that could be handled. Predictability measures would avert technological surprise and a negotiated cooperative transition would ensure stability. For example, the Soviet scientists who attended the December visit to U.S. SDI labs surely went away with a balanced view that the U.S. is devoting resources and making progress in SDI, that the Americans can make
