3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 634 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI with U.S. officials. Vasev indicated he understood, implying that Soviets would not attempt to circumvent the interview. Vasev repeated Soviet demand to meet with Godunov and stated again that Soviets could only consider Godunov’s request to meet with his wife at meeting with him, and Vasev implied that requested U.S. meeting with Vlasova would be acceptable. 6. Shortly thereafter, Department received information that Vlasova had boarded Aeroflot aircraft and plane was preparing to depart. Aircraft was then denied permission to depart JFK. Following arrival of Hurwitz and Smith at airport, INS officials repeatedly requested Vlasova be permitted to leave aircraft for interview, a request Soviets continued to deny. INS officials who boarded aircraft several times confirmed Vlasova’s presence aboard and large escort of presumed Soviet security officials. 7. In subsequent conversation with Vasev, Goodby charged Soviets with having violated clear U.S. instructions in seeking to spirit Vlasova out of U.S. and demanded that she be taken off aircraft for an interview. Goodby advised Vasev airliner would not be permitted to depart without such an interview. Vasev responded that U.S. had not only had opportunities to interview Vlasova but also she had been permitted by U.S. customs and Immigration officials to board aircraft and Soviets thus believed we had no objections to her departure. In subsequent response, Goodby pointed out to Vasev no U.S. Immigration and Customs controls exist formally for departing passengers. 8. We are at present at an impasse. Soviets are seeking by various means, including threat to halt tonight’s Bolshoy performance at Lincoln Center—to pressure U.S. to permit Vlasova to depart. Department remains adamant that Vlasova must leave the aircraft and indicate to us, in non-coercive surroundings, that she is voluntarily returning to the USSR before we will permit her to do so. Soviets refuse to agree. Thus, aircraft with passengers and crew aboard remain at Pan Am terminal. Godunov himself is enroute JFK and his lawyer, Orville Schell is already present. Makeyev of SMUN appears to be senior Soviet official present. 9. We will keep you advised. Assume that you and we will be receiving mighty Soviet protest very soon. US position is that (a) Soviet side acted in bad faith by reneging on its earlier indications that meeting with Vlasova was acceptable and that (b) in light of present circumstances, U.S. side must be able to interview Vlasova in noncoercive environment. 10. Please advise by Niact Immediate of any known arrivals of U.S. chartered aircraft since we assume some form of retaliation is likely.
