3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
634
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
with U.S. officials. Vasev indicated he understood, implying that So-
viets would not attempt to circumvent the interview. Vasev repeated
Soviet demand to meet with Godunov and stated again that Soviets
could only consider Godunov’s request to meet with his wife at
meeting with him, and Vasev implied that requested U.S. meeting with
Vlasova would be acceptable.
6. Shortly thereafter, Department received information that Vla-
sova had boarded Aeroflot aircraft and plane was preparing to depart.
Aircraft was then denied permission to depart JFK. Following arrival of
Hurwitz and Smith at airport, INS officials repeatedly requested Vla-
sova be permitted to leave aircraft for interview, a request Soviets con-
tinued to deny. INS officials who boarded aircraft several times con-
firmed Vlasova’s presence aboard and large escort of presumed Soviet
security officials.
7. In subsequent conversation with Vasev, Goodby charged So-
viets with having violated clear U.S. instructions in seeking to spirit
Vlasova out of U.S. and demanded that she be taken off aircraft for an
interview. Goodby advised Vasev airliner would not be permitted to
depart without such an interview. Vasev responded that U.S. had not
only had opportunities to interview Vlasova but also she had been per-
mitted by U.S. customs and Immigration officials to board aircraft and
Soviets thus believed we had no objections to her departure. In subse-
quent response, Goodby pointed out to Vasev no U.S. Immigration and
Customs controls exist formally for departing passengers.
8. We are at present at an impasse. Soviets are seeking by various
means, including threat to halt tonight’s Bolshoy performance at Lin-
coln Center—to pressure U.S. to permit Vlasova to depart. Department
remains adamant that Vlasova must leave the aircraft and indicate to
us, in non-coercive surroundings, that she is voluntarily returning to
the USSR before we will permit her to do so. Soviets refuse to agree.
Thus, aircraft with passengers and crew aboard remain at Pan Am ter-
minal. Godunov himself is enroute JFK and his lawyer, Orville Schell is
already present. Makeyev of SMUN appears to be senior Soviet official
present.
9. We will keep you advised. Assume that you and we will be re-
ceiving mighty Soviet protest very soon. US position is that (a) Soviet
side acted in bad faith by reneging on its earlier indications that
meeting with Vlasova was acceptable and that (b) in light of present cir-
cumstances, U.S. side must be able to interview Vlasova in non-
coercive environment.
10. Please advise by Niact Immediate of any known arrivals of U.S.
chartered aircraft since we assume some form of retaliation is likely.
