830  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
First, a commission to investigate must be set up at once. The JCS 
and SAC cannot be left to review the problems alone. The Defense Sci-
ence Board might provide the umbrella. To be compelling to public 
critics, it cannot be Harold Brown’s in-­house review. You might con-
sider Schlesinger to head the review. That appointment could achieve 
two things at once. First, Schlesinger’s prestige and Republican back-
ground could help turn the matter into a bi-­partisan affair. Second, it 
could take Schlesinger out of the public debate the remainder of the 
summer. He can be expected to become more vocal against the Admin-
istration. (S)
Second, [2 lines not declassified] I am attaching a memo (Tab A)4 
in which I made the case against this option. [1 line not declassified] 
Brown, for some reason, [4 lines not declassified] if he knew that we 
have an [less than 1 line not declassified] option [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] he would give the President fits. He also promised that the 
Senate Armed Services Committee (SASC) would be looking into the 
matter. [1 line not declassified]
Third, the President should sign the targeting PD5 [less than 1 line 
not declassified] soon. [1 line not declassified] The PD, properly back-
grounded to the press, should help diffuse the NORAD issue. You will 
recall that I have frequently referred to the SIOP and the NORAD–SAC 
plan for war as having many of the characteristics of the German and 
Russian war plans of 1914. They were based on the assumption that 
the war would be short. They could not be reversed once commenced. 
They set in motion enormous forces and actions, the consequences of 
which planners had only the vaguest notion. And they were not related 
to the war aims of any party involved. Although we cannot dismantle 
the SIOP system, we can surely begin serious problems to give us less 
cataclysmic options. (TS)
Fourth, the SCC on COG/C3I, scheduled for this week, can be 
both politically and operationally useful in this present situation. Any 
investigation by an outside commission will soon determine that NCA 
survivability is doubtful if the present system is stressed by a Soviet 
strike at our C3I. The COG/C3I study recommendations would launch 
the first serious program to increase NCA survivability since the 1950s. 
(TS)
In summary, the President can, in the next ten days, take four sig-
nificant steps.
—Set up a commission to investigate the NORAD system.
—[1 line not declassified]
4 Not found attached.
5 See Document 208.
