444
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ally engage in discussions in depth and at length, regarding our respec-
tive world viewpoints, interests, trends, etc., thereby also creating the
context for some accommodation. We have not done enough of that—
and Dobrynin has hinted to me as much. Given the present frictions, an
effort to clear the air—but on the basis of firmness regarding those
matters which we consider important (notably their military buildup
and their conduct in the third world)—is needed.
Historically, a phase of friction in U.S.-Soviet relations has contrib-
uted to the emergence of new “rules of the game,” regarding either re-
straint in the use of conventional forces, or on strategic matters, or even
regarding espionage. We now need to develop similar understandings
regarding restraint and accommodation on such matters as the use of
military proxies or direct military intrusion into third world conflicts.
But that will require candid and prolonged discussions.
In general, our approach has been one in which we have focused
on the negotiation of specific issues, in a legal-contractual fashion,
somewhat neglecting the need to develop and sustain a political
dialogue.
I would think that it would be especially useful if you would dis-
patch periodically Cy, me, Andy, and others—to talk to the principal
leaders with whom we are trying to maintain or develop closer rela-
tions: this would be flattering even to Giscard, or Schmidt, or Fukuda—
and certainly to the Shah, or Fahd, or Obasanjo, or Desai; and it would
also be useful with Hua, or Tito, Gierek, Ceausescu, etc. This could sup-
plement your direct personal contact with these leaders, and in some
cases could reinforce any ongoing negotiations.
From the domestic point of view, doing the above would also
convey the feeling that you are deliberately orchestrating some of the di-
versity of viewpoints around you on behalf of your strategic goals. Inci-
dentally, the Soviets have long used, and quite effectively, the tactic of
occasionally sending “hard” spokesmen to convey a soft message, and
“soft” spokesmen to convey a hard message, in order to enhance the
credibility of that message, and to show that the “soft” and “hard” op-
tions are deliberate instruments of policy and not merely reflections of
internal vacillation. FDR did some of the same, and it is in your interest
to promote also such a perception of yourself.
Finally, there is the fact that such consultations—conducted on a
regular basis with ten or so top leaders around the world—would re-
duce some of the foreign misunderstandings and anxieties regarding
our policy.
Cy is departing tonight for the Middle East where he will, in effect,
carry out at least in part the kind of consultations I have in mind with
