In case the United States Government should not be able to agree with this modification, it seems at any rate desirable to add a clause to this article, stipulating that the rights conferred by it can never he exercised at a distance greater than 12 geographical miles from the coast of the United States, its territories or possessions. 3. It seems further desirable to make an exception on the stipulation in Article 3 prohibiting the unloading of liquor within the United States, in so far that unloading for transhipment in another Netherland vessel may be possible. The addition to the end of the article 3 of the words: “unloading for transhipment in another Netherland vessel is allowed” is therefore proposed. It be moreover well understood that by “seastores” not only the liquor destined for the use of the crew and the passengers is meant but also the provisions for medical purposes. 4. The Royal Government agrees with the provisions of the first part of the Article 4, ruling that claims for compensation will be referred to the joint consideration of two persons nominated for the purpose and that in case no joint report can be agreed upon, these claims shall be submitted to the Permanent Court of Arbitration. The arrangement however prescribed in the second part of this article seems hardly to be acceptable. The latter part of this article is evidently taken from the “special agreement for the submitting to arbitration of pecuniary claims outstanding between Great Britain and the United States” of August 18, 1910.67 This agreement existing between the Union and the United Kingdom, it is a matter of course that the claims arising eventually from any new agreement concluded between these two Powers be submitted to the same special procedure. As, however, no such a special agreement exists between the United States and The Netherlands it will be difficult to the Royal Government to accept the special arrangement, mentioned in the second part of the Article 4, the more so as this arrangement greatly differs from the way generally adopted for settling claims by arbitration and as it does not harmonize with the system adopted in other treaties concluded by the Netherlands. The Royal Government suggests therefore to replace the last part of this article beginning with the words: “All sums of money etc. … [”] by the sentence: “Each Government
