1980  909
the European example. It is better to lead on the way “up” in force 
development than on the way “down.” (S)
Issue #-4—What Far East strategic posture will best relieve Soviet pres-
sure on Europe and the PG/IO, while limiting risks of simultaneous global 
war? Dr. Brzezinski listed the three points of the Defense paper recom-
mendations as:
—Getting the Japanese to rearm faster.
—Getting the Japanese to take security responsibilities for Korea.
—Sale of limited defensive arms to China. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski expressed doubt that this formula is feasible. The 
Japanese will not respond effectively. (S)
Muskie asked why. The problems are the same that we have with 
the Europeans! (S)
Brzezinski replied that indeed the argument can be made that the 
Europeans won’t contribute adequately to defense and, therefore, we 
should also contribute less. This would lead to complete Finlandization 
of Europe and our inability to defend adequately either in Europe or 
in the Persian Gulf. Therefore, the proper conclusion is that we must 
continue to press the Allies for more defense effort regardless of their 
reluctance. (S)
Turner argued that two of the points are paper tigers. First, build-
ing up China will take far too long to make any difference in the 1980s. 
Second, the same is true for Japan. The United States should shift its 
forces to the two other theaters and ignore East Asia. (S)
Brown conceded some truth to this. In a three front war, East Asia 
would get last priority. Turner argued that cancellation of our “swing 
strategy” was a mistake. The Atlantic is critical, and we must be able to 
draw from the Pacific to win the Atlantic battle. (S)
Brown turned to arms for China and said that we must face up to 
it. Is it politically feasible to provide weapons or to get the Europeans 
to do it? (S)
Muskie objected to any increase in military cooperation because it 
might cause the Soviets to take programmatic actions we do not like. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski put our policy toward China in the following way. 
We now have the ability to do a number of low key things. There is 
no need for a new policy. If the Soviets do inflammatory things, make 
these destabilizing moves such as intervention in Poland, we will have 
the option of increasing our military operations with the PRC publicly 
and explicitly as a U.S. reaction to Soviet behavior. (S)
Harold Brown said he liked Dr. Brzezinski’s formulation, but the 
new Administration will have to address some specific issues like 
fighter aircraft engine improvements for China. (S)
