3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
498
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
165.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State1
Geneva, December 22, 1978, 1605Z
Secto 15012. Department for Christopher. Department pass DOD
for Sec. Brown. Subject: First Vance/Gromyko Session 12/22/78.2
1. In two-hour meeting this morning we made continued progress
on several issues, referring a few points to heads of SALT delegations
to work out possible resolutions and report back to Gromyko and me
this afternoon.
2. On cruise missile definition, Gromyko reaffirmed that GL/
SLCMs were limited only in the protocol, and the obligations of the
protocol would expire with it, so that thereafter there would be only
ALCM limits to which the definition could apply. Earle and Karpov are
to try to work out language. Our objective is to insure that the treaty
definition is cast in terms relating specifically to ALCMs, to forestall the
argument that a generic definition should apply automatically to pos-
sible future limits on GL/SLCMs.
3. Gromyko raised the issue of how to “formalize” the under-
standing concerning the de facto limit on number of cruise missiles per
bomber. I said we preferred to do this outside the formal document.
Gromyko asked if the US might send an official letter and I said that we
would consider this and assume the Soviets would give us a similar
letter. We agreed to return to this subject.
4. On unarmed cruise missiles (unarmed RPVs), Soviet concern ap-
pears to be to insure that unarmed versions of cruise missiles that are
normally armed should be covered (e.g., a recce version of Tomahawk).
Soviets said they do not propose to treat all unarmed pilotless aircraft
as cruise missiles. Karpov and Earle are to try to work out a type rule to
settle this issue.
5. On telemetry encryption, I stated that I understood Gromyko to
have said yesterday that the sides could arrive at a jointly-agreed prin-
ciple banning denial of telemetry that impedes verification. I then reit-
erated US language as embodying this agreed principle. Gromyko em-
phasized that their “provided” language in their revised common
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 38, SALT—
(11/78–4/79). Secret; Cherokee; Flash; Nodis. Sent flash to the White House. Printed
from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 The full memorandum of conversation is in the Department of State, Office of the
Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall
Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Gromyko/Vance Meeting, December,
1978.
