The plebiscite was held under Interallied supervision on March 20, 1921. As was expected, in some districts heavy majorities were cast for Poland, in other districts heavy majorities for Germany. Faced with the problem of delimiting the frontier so as to conform as nearly as possible with the spirit and letter of the Treaty, the Supreme Council invoked the good offices of the Council of the League of Nations. The Council appointed a Polish-German Commission under the presidency of Felix Calonder, former President of the Swiss Republic, which actually delimited the boundary line in conformity with the wishes of the inhabitants as expressed in the vote by communes and with due regard for geographical and economic considerations. The work of this Commission was approved by the Council of the League and accepted by the Supreme Council. On May 15, 1922, Poland and Germany signed a Treaty at Geneva embodying the terms of the settlement including the boundary line as approved by the Council of the League and the Supreme Council. No boundary line could have been drawn which would have placed all of the Poles within Poland and all of the Germans within Germany. Sizeable minorities of Poles and Germans respectively were by the force of necessity excluded from the country of their choice. Immediately after the incorporation within Poland of the part of Upper Silesia allotted by the Treaty, a very large measure of autonomy was granted it by the Polish Diet. A special Upper Silesian Diet was elected by universal suffrage. In the Diet so elected there are 48 members of which number 35 are Poles and 13 are Germans. These facts which set forth the legal and moral rights of Poland in respect to Pomerania and Upper Silesia will serve to explain why it is unthinkable that any Polish Government could permit itself to enter into a discussion which would in whatever form tend to question Poland’s rights to these parts of her territory. In so refusing to enter into any international discussion of its rights to these territories the Polish Government has ample proof of the unanimous support of its people. WASHINGTON, May 28, 1925. 36 For statement on the work of the Locarno Conference, see the President’s message to Congress, December 8, p. VII [Pg. VII is part of Message of the President of the United States to Congress, December 8, 1925]. 37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum. 37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum. 37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum. 37 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.
