Chapter 5, May–June 1990 779 142. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, May 31, 1990, 5:15–5:40 p.m. SUBJECT START, CFE PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, International Security Affairs, Lot 01D127, 1969–1990 Subject Record of James P. Timbie, Soviet Summit Memcons, May 1990. Secret. Drafted on July 2. The meeting took place in Bartholomew’s office. It commenced as Gorbachev and Soviet delegation officials were meeting with Bush and his national security team in the Cabinet Room, prior to a State Dinner in honor of the Soviet leader, who arrived that day and departed the afternoon of June 3. The memorandum of conversation of the afternoon meeting between Bush and Gorbachev is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. 2 Not found. Bartholomew Karpov Bartholomew: (Gives Karpov a copy of the interview Akhromeyev gave in Canada)2 What is going on? We have had enough walking back. My authorities have told me to tell you what we feel about this. Karpov: I don’t understand. This was settled totally in Wyoming. What Akhromeyev says is not right and not our position. I will take this right to Shevardnadze and Gorbachev. Bartholomew: You have to understand the tremendous negative effect the Washington ministerial had here, where what was done earlier was walked back. Secretary Baker was most upset, but despite that took the lead and pushed the process ahead. This was difficult for him personally and politically. Now we have not only this interview but your people are leaving open the possibility of changes to the START statement when your military come in and review it. Any backtracking now on what was done in Moscow would reopen the whole question of whether these agreements are worth the trouble. Karpov: I understand. I said before the Washington ministerial that we whould stick to what had been agreed, that this was very important. What was done was done. Bartholomew: Nazarkin says it would be better to wait on the work he and Burt are doing until the military can be there. Karpov: No, we should go right ahead. Bartholomew: I can now confirm in spades what I told you on non-­circumvention—­there will be no treaty if you stick to what your instructions say. This is not just a matter of ending a 50-­year-­old pattern
