2
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State2
Washington, undated
Guidelines on US Foreign Policy for Human Rights
General Policy
Progress toward full observance of internationally recognized
human rights throughout the world is one of the central goals of U.S.
foreign policy. To help achieve that objective, we seek social, economic,
and political conditions in all countries which foster observance of
human rights and encourage attitudes within each country that con-
tribute to progress in this field.
Pertinent Legislation
The Congress has recently enacted legislation designed to help as-
sure the observance of human rights abroad, in the context of certain
U.S. bilateral and multilateral relations:
—The Harkin Amendment to bills authorizing increased US par-
ticipation in the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and initi-
ating US participation in the African Development Fund (ADF) re-
quires that the US Executive Directors to those banks vote against any
loan or grant to any country that “engages in a consistent pattern of
gross violations of internationally recognized human rights . . . unless
such assistance will directly benefit the needy people of the country.”3
Similar provisions have been incorporated into the legislation author-
izing foreign development assistance.4
2 No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the paper.
3 Representative Harkin attached an amendment to H.R. 9721, a bill that increased
U.S. participation in the Inter-American Development Bank and authorized U.S. partici-
pation in the African Development Fund. President Ford signed the bill into law on May
31, 1976. (P.L. 94–302).
4 Presumable reference to the International Development and Food Assistance Act
of 1975 (H.R. 9005; P.L. 94–161), signed into law by Ford on December 20, 1975. In addi-
tion to authorizing a 2-year, $3.1 billion foreign economic aid program, the act, in Section
116, prohibited development aid to any nation engaging in a consistent pattern of gross
violations of internationally-recognized human rights unless Congress determined that
such aid benefited the needy. (Congress and the Nation, Volume IV, 1973–1976, pp.
867–869) Harkin authored the human rights amendment to the legislation. (“House Votes
to Ban Foreign Aid For Human-Rights Violations,” The New York Times, September 11,
1975, p. A–18)
