748  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Our third major action was the design of a basing mode for the 
M–X that would survive a surprise attack by Soviet ICBMs, be ade-
quately verifiable under SALT II, and have a minimal impact on the 
environment. After intensive study of alternatives, a mobile M–X based 
in a complex of horizontal shelters was selected. The M–X missile is 
designed to have military capability equal to that of the Soviets’ SS–18, 
even though it is half the size. Full scale development of the missile and 
basing system began this year.
In the aggregate, these programs will double the spending on stra-
tegic systems compared to the early ’70s, but will still be far less than 
we spent in the early ’60s. In fact, improved technology will allow us to 
build the new missiles at less cost (in constant dollars) than the systems 
they are replacing.
These strategic programs have also contributed to the develop-
ment of two new weapons to strengthen our theater nuclear forces. The 
ground-­launched cruise missile is a derivative of one of the compet-
ing air-­launched cruise missile designs. It will be deployed one year 
later than the ALCM. The PERSHING II missile uses the same solid fuel 
technology developed for the TRIDENT I missile, which allows each 
of them to have greater range than their predecessors. The PERSHING 
uses advanced technology terminal guidance systems, which improves 
accuracy ten-­fold over previous systems.
Our new systems will enable U.S. strategic forces to maintain their 
equivalence in the face of the mounting Soviet challenge. Even more 
important, all of these systems have been designed to have high inher-
ent survivability, thus discouraging any hopes the Soviets might have 
for a successful disarming surprise attack. In addition, the high sur-
vivability of these new systems will make it possible for us to reduce 
significantly the total number of nuclear weapons in our force, while 
preserving national security interests, if the Soviet Union can be per-
suaded to make similar reductions in SALT III.
III
Leading the NATO Alliance
From its very outset, this Administration launched several major 
initiatives to strengthen NATO’s deterrent and defense capabilities, 
which had languished during and after the Vietnam conflict. At the 
May 1977 NATO Summit in London, you called for a stepped-­up long 
term effort, implementation of selected short term readiness measures, 
and greater armaments collaboration.
Within a year, NATO heads of government personally endorsed at 
a May 1978 Washington Summit a bold Long Term Defense Program 
backed up by pledges of 3% real annual growth in defense spending.
