3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
569
the importance of the U.S.-Chinese relationship;5 to improve the atmos-
pherics and some tangibles of the U.S.-Soviet bilateral relationship; but
not to limit in any way Soviet freedom of action in regards either to Eu-
rope or some of the Third World areas of turbulence.
In addition, the schedule proposed by the Soviet side minimizes
public exposure and thus diminishes their usual penchant for public
camaraderie. Above all, we are getting one message—no surprises.6
Their approach is one of extreme caution. What they appear to fear
most is the picture of a young U.S. President making dramatic initia-
tives (a la March 1977) without careful preparation in advance to en-
sure their acceptability to the Soviet leadership.
Tone and Style
Given the character of Soviet objectives, atmosphere will be a par-
ticularly important7 aspect of this summit. Every indication is that both
sides seek a positive atmosphere. We should understand, however,
that the Soviets have more to gain and less to lose than you do from
pumping up the atmospherics. A glowing summit gives the Soviet
leadership a boost at home and abroad, because they face no public
comparison between pretense and actual results.
In managing the atmosphere and the substance of the summit, a
number of points deserve being kept in mind:
1. There is little to be gained by philosophical discourse or ideolog-
ical debate with the Soviet leaders; they are not psychologically confi-
dent enough to engage at the philosophical level as the Chinese do; in
particular, trying to debate rules of conduct becomes frustrating be-
cause of the gap in perceptions;8
2. Concrete issues, however, are more easily resolved but only if
they have been well prepared9 and the Soviets do not have to contend
with surprises that have not been aired by the collective leadership;
3. Soviet leaders are quite sensitive to their personal treatment;10
they are particularly concerned over any slights reflecting the inferi-
ority of the USSR. This will be a particularly important issue at this
summit with Brezhnev’s ill health. It is not in our interest to exploit his
infirmities.
5 Carter underlined “a U.S.-Soviet partnership in the management of world affairs,”
“downplay,” and “U.S.-Chinese relationship” in this clause.
6 Carter underlined “no surprises” in this sentence.
7 Carter underlined “atmosphere” and “particularly important” in this sentence.
8 Carter underlined “little to be gained,” “ideological debate,” and “rules of con-
duct” in this paragraph.
9 Carter underlined “concrete issues” and “well prepared” in this sentence.
10 Carter underlined most of the previous clause.
