780 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III uation if there is any slippage.5 This will place maximum pressure on the Congress to come through, but is fully consistent with all of our understandings with them. In addition, any cuts in the IDA appropriation can be attributed to our (delayed) contribution to IDA IV—so the Administration maintains great flexibility domestically. (Needless to say, this latter possibility must be held extremely closely.) 3. For its part, the IDA management agreed—for the first time—to stop committing U.S. capital before it is appropriated. I regard this as a major step forward. Current IDA practice is both fiscally imprudent and extremely damaging to our position with the Congress, which is just getting on to the fact that its appropriation prerogatives have been badly undermined by such advance commitments. 4. The other donors, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, appeared to accept our call for a thorough review of the future allocation of IDA lending— hopefully leading to a much lower share for India (now getting 40 percent) with more going to Egypt, Africa and perhaps others.6 They recognized that there has been no such review since mid-1973, despite massive changes in the world economic situation. We should pursue this initiative through the Executive Board at the World Bank, and I raised the issue with McNamara today. DELIVERY ON THIS ISSUE WILL, IN MY JUDGMENT, GO FARTHER THAN ANY OTHER SINGLE STEP TO RESTORE CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT FOR OUR IDA, AND PERHAPS OVERALL IFI, REQUESTS—and it makes sense in both economic and international political terms as well. 5. Most important of all, the session began a process—which will necessarily be slow—of restoring others’ faith in U.S. policy in this area. Several speakers candidly said that they distrusted the last Administration, or at least did not know where it stood. They believe that we are sincere, are working hard, and may be able to deliver. Last Wednesday’s7 approval by the House Appropriations Subcommittee of our long- 5 The terms of the replenishment included “a procedure whereby the United States in signing up for IDA V must make an unqualified commitment for the first installment of $800 million and may make a qualified commitment (subject to appropriations from the Congress) for the second and third installments.” The rules governing the activation of the second and third installments were structured so as “to require a full appropriation of the US share each year for the replenishment to proceed as planned.” If need be, the IDA Deputies could convene in order “to consider what steps to take to obtain the necessary commitments.” (Ibid.) 6 In his February 24 memorandum to Blumenthal (see footnote 3 above), Bergsten noted that he intended “to begin the process of seeking support from other donors for cutting India’s share of IDA lending (now 40 percent) and raising the share of Egypt, several African countries and perhaps several in the Far East. Such a shift is necessary on equity and economic grounds, as well [as] in response to intense Congressional pressure. State fully agrees with us, and indeed is calling in the Indians today to inform them of our new posture.” 7 February 23.
