Arms Control and Disarmament  1237
of Bedell Smith and he recommended Professor Wolfers of Yale. Does 
this commend itself to A? A said yes—he should think so. A said if you 
get a panel you might as well put it in the newspapers so you might as 
well get good names. Get whom you want. The Sec said this is largely 
scenery. It is a public relations job and you are never going to get any­
where with these…… A said to get some practical people who can sit 
around and talk about it. A asked what about CD? He does not want to 
help? The Sec indicated such was the case.
292.	 Record of Telephone Conversation Between John Foster 
Dulles and Lovett1
February 20, 1958, 5:09 p.m.
The Sec said he wants L’s help on disarmament. The Sec wants 
to set up a new way to carry on that will be better. It has to be part of 
State and L agreed. One trouble, said the Sec, with Stassen was he was 
only interested in disarmament. The Sec needs 2–3 people he can talk 
with in a general way as to the lines we are following. He wants an 
informal panel composed of 3—Gruenther, Smith and L—he can talk 
to them from time to time to get their counsel and advice. He does not 
think it will take more than a couple of hours a month. It would be an 
immense service to the Sec if he can do that. L said he has been in the 
hospital and is leaving to recuperate until April 7 but will be available 
after that. It is not a formal group but the Sec would like to have it 
known. The Sec feels the prospects of getting any substantial result 
are not very good unless and until there are some solutions to political 
problems. But it is vitally important to keep pressing in this field and 
it will be disastrous if it is felt we were not interested. L said it would 
be better if Congress and the papers shut up so trained diplomats can 
work it out. The Sec referred to the last letter to Bulganin—which L 
approved of heartily.
1 Source: Request to Lovett to join advisory panel on disarmament. No classification 
marking. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
