338  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
been particularly active, evidently as a means of getting one Protestant 
missionary out of the town of Supiá. I would think that the Catholics 
should realize that the only people who could profit from a quarrel of 
this kind were the Communists. I, on my part, had repeatedly urged 
moderation on the Protestants and their statements, and I feared that 
if the Catholic attacks continued the Protestants would join in the fray. 
That would be no atmosphere in which to get anything done in the 
religious question.
The Foreign Minister said that he knew that Bishop Alvarez 
Restrepo had been deeply offended by his conversation with the Consol 
in Cali. (Why, I can’t imagine - one of the two consular officers who 
spoke with him is a Catholic, and according to their account Alvarez 
Restrepo completely misrepresented the conversation). He thought that 
he might speak to the Nuncio and suggested I do the same. I agreed 
that this might be helpful.
The whole conversation lasted an hour and a half.
John M. Cabot
American Ambassador
CO–13.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to 
the Department of State1
 
Bogotá, October 14, 1958, 5 p.m.
187. Re DEPTEL 107.2
Embassy believes considerable of Avianca opposition to bilat-
eral air agreement stems from bitterness over failure of CAB to take 
action connection permanent permit Miami/New York route. If ques-
tion Avianca permit could be settled rapidly, this complicating factor 
in Colombian Congress consideration of pact would be eliminated. If 
CAB decision favorable to Avianca we could expect less opposition 
for bilateral from this influential airline which presently may fear U.S. 
withholding adverse action until ratification achieved. Inasmuch as it 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.2194/10–1453. Confidential.
2 The referenced telegram, September 25, 1958, provided information concerning 
the situation in commercial aviation between the United States and Colombia should the 
pending bilateral air agreement fail ratification in the Colombian Congress. (Department 
of State microfilm telegram reels)
