January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1103
Mr. Samuel R. Peale, State/NEA
Lt Colonel Edward C. Redican, OASD/ISA (NESA)
Egyptian Side
General Kamal Hassan Ali, Minister of Defense
Lt General Ahmed Badawi, Chief of Staff, Armed Forces
Maj General Gamal al Sayese, Assistant Minister of Defense
Maj General Mahmoud Kamal, Assistant Minister of Defense
Maj General Habib Shorab, DMI
Maj General Mohamed Harudi, COS Land Forces
Maj General Mohamed Abu Ghazala, Defense Attache, Washington
Meeting opened with Mr. McGiffert passing President Carter’s
greetings and the Secretary of Defense’s greetings to Minister of De-
fense Ali. He then described his mission to Cairo as being one of the
messenger to deliver President Carter’s final decisions on the current
phase of the US security assistance program for Egypt. He pointed out
to MOD Ali that President Sadat’s intercession with President Carter2
had had a profound affect on President Carter’s thinking, thereby
causing him to revise his original decisions; but, given financial con-
straints faced by the United States, both domestically and worldwide,
President Carter feels that he has done all he can at this time. Mr.
McGiffert then explained in a summary way the decisions the President
had made, passing a written summary (Aide Memoire)3 of these deci-
sions to Minister Ali. Mr. McGiffert continued by outlining the objec-
tives of his current mission to Cairo; namely, that the Egyptian MOD
fully understand the decisions that they were receiving as well as the
opportunities and constraints offered by these decisions. A short expla-
nation then followed of the implications of cash flow financing with
emphasis on the fact that this is a highly unusual decision for the
United States to undertake in security assistance. Ambassador Ath-
erton then commented that he was very pleasantly surprised by the de-
cisions, feeling that they represented much more than he thought
would be possible at this time. He further stated that there was little
doubt that President Sadat and Vice President Mubarak had had an im-
pact on this program. Minister Ali then thanked Mr. McGiffert for
2 Reference is to Sadat’s January 26 letter to Carter. (See Document 333)
3 Not found. In a February 20 plenary meeting between the U.S. and Egyptian dele-
gations, McGiffert described Carter’s decisions as falling into two categories: Financing
and Equipment. “On the financing issue,” the memorandum of conversation summa-
rized, “the United States would be willing to make available to Egypt $550 million FMS
credit in FY 1981 and that a planning figure of $800 million FMS credit could be used for
FY 1982. At this point, Mr. McGiffert pointed out that the United States was willing to
allow cash flow financing of new programs contracted for the FY 1980 and 1981 period
up to $1.5 billion.” On equipment, “McGiffert explained that the United States was
willing to make available all the items requested by Egypt last August on the high pri-
ority requirements list except more F–4 aircraft and frigate type ships.” (Washington Na-
tional Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–81–0446, DEM Memcons/Reporting Cables)
