Comprehensive Test Ban
317
first step. Some have asserted more than the possibility, stressing the
special responsibility of the US and USSR to take the lead.
10. The issue of the proper forum for CTB negotiations was also
raised by the 1975 Soviet proposal, which envisaged a new negotiating
body composed of all NWS and 25–30 NNWS. (The inclusion of the
NNWS was at Mexican insistence, evidence of the political unaccepta-
bility at the UN of a restructured NWS negotiation.) Several of our
allies have strongly defended the role of the CCD in CTB negotiations,
pointing out that CTB has been the “highest priority” issue in the CCD
for years. While the forum question is perhaps of secondary impor-
tance, and to some extent a corollary of the participation issue, the im-
plications of choosing any forum (whether the CCD, a separate com-
mittee, or bi- or trilateral meeting) will necessarily have to be weighted.
If a CTB is to be, as our allies and most nonaligned expect, a multilateral
instrument in the pattern of the LTBT and the NPT, or to have broad in-
ternational support, it will be important to ensure broadly-based par-
ticipation throughout the negotiating process. Participation will be par-
ticularly important in connection with development of solutions to the
verification and PNE problems.
11. There has been relatively little specific reaction so far in New
York to President Carter’s statement,4 which has been somewhat over-
shadowed by other recent events, but it is certain to promote wide in-
terest and raise expectations that the long-standing stalemate may be
broken in the relatively near future. Expectations had already been
raised to some extent last fall, when the Soviets announced a new posi-
tion on CTB verification envisaging a “voluntary framework” for on-
site inspection. At the same time, however, there is certain to be a
degree of skepticism on the part of many unless and until there are spe-
cific signs of possible negotiations, new proposals, or changes of posi-
tion. Indications that new developments may be at hand are likely to
have a favorable impact on UN (and CCD) disarmament activities in
the coming months, but we can also expect to be brought to account in
the absence of real movement.
Bennett
4 Ibid.
