National Security Policy  857
Secretary Gates repeated that there would be controversy over this 
in the testimony given to the Congress. The President intervened at this 
point saying it never would have occurred to him in his military service, 
once a decision had been made by higher authority, to make public his 
personal convictions where they differed from this decision. He said he 
would like to see the next Quantico Conference devoted to ­loyalty—­to 
the principle that when a decision is made all join in carrying it out. 
Mr. Gates said that many people in the military service think that there 
will be a requirement on the part of Defense for a super-­booster and 
would like to keep an “in-­house” capability for the production of such 
a booster in the Defense Department.
Dr. Glennan said he saw two problems in making an announce­
ment—the first pertaining to the group at Huntsville and the second to 
the Congress. The President said that Congress will not have the cour­
age to get into this matter if there is not too much dissension within 
Defense. He then outlined the kind of announcement he had in mind—
stressing his admiration for the fine performance of ABMA, its tremen­
dous accomplishments under Army aegis, and the need for bringing 
this talent to bear on a consolidated super-­booster program. He asked 
for a draft announcement along these lines to be furnished to him for 
release later in the day at Augusta.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
207.	 Memorandum From Gates and Glennan to Eisenhower1
Washington, October 21, 1959
SUBJECT
Responsibility and Organization for Certain Space Activities
The Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of NASA have 
agreed upon, and recommend to the President, certain actions designed 
to clarify responsibilities, improve coordination, and enhance the 
national space effort. The actions recommended below are consistent 
1 Source: Responsibility and organization for certain space activities: transfer of 
ABMA to NASA. No classification marking. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, 
DDE Diaries.
