the scope of the Conference, is endeavoring as a last resort to bring about a reconsideration of this matter on the part of this Government by referring to your conversation in Tokyo expressing views held by the Department prior to consideration of Chinese proposals of June 24. I have just received a note from British Embassy14 informing me of instructions which the British Government have communicated to their Chargé in Peking for his guidance in discussing with you American draft. The note states, inter alia, that British Chargé has been “informed that his Majesty’s Government disapprove the statement in the American draft reply that the Extraterritorial Commission will be instructed to make recommendations to enable the Powers to consider what steps may be taken for relinquishing their extraterritorial rights, inasmuch as my Government feel that the commission should be allowed to make such recommendations as may appear to them desirable without any lead from the Powers.” You should point out to British Chargé that language of American draft states that this Government desires to instruct its commissioner to include in his report recommendations based upon the findings of the commission which will enable the Governments concerned to consider “what, if any, steps may be taken” and not “what steps may be taken.” The British note also objects to the use of the term tariff autonomy. This objection will be met, it seems to me, by alternate phraseology mentioned in Department’s 173 of July 30, 1 P.M. British note also objects to the use of phrases such as “constant and sympathetic interest” and “gratification at progress in the improvement of the Chinese judicial system.” I have no objection to the omission from the text of draft reply of the clauses “and has watched the growth of that sentiment with constant and sympathetic interest,” “sympathetically and hopefully [helpfully?]” and “it has been gratified to note the progress that has been made in this connection.” With reference to paragraph 10 of your telegram you should know that text of Department’s draft reply has been communicated to all of the Powers party to the Washington Conference and to those Powers who have indicated their adherence to Resolution No. 5. They were told that this draft was to be used by you as a basis for discussing the Powers’ reply to Chinese Government’s policies of June 24. KELLOGG 13 Post, 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687]. 14 Note No. 723 of July 30, p. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666].
