984 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Like you, I want to see good intentions and words about population issues translated into actions. And I intend to see that they are. Do keep me abreast of your own thinking in this regard. With warm regards, Sincerely,6 6 Printed from a copy that indicates that Vance signed the original. 298. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, September 27, 1977 Thoughts on Policy Areas Which May Be of Special Interest To You This Year Following up on our earlier conversation, I wanted to suggest a few areas where I think your personal involvement and leadership would be particularly important to the Department and the government. I selected the issues described below based on a sense that the Secretary will be out front on such areas as SALT, the Middle East, China, and southern Africa, and that you could usefully take charge of other issues which (a) cut across several bureaus in the Department and/or involve other government departments, (b) are of potential Presidential concern, and (c) could make a significant difference in terms of this Administration’s tangible accomplishments. Issues for your consideration: 1. Foreign Assistance: The importance and complexity of our foreign assistance program is obvious, as is the extensive involvement of the Department, other agencies, Congress and the President. The development of a foreign assistance program each year brings together security, economic, political and humanitarian considerations. However, the process has traditionally been poorly organized, as you have be- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 9/16–9/30/77. Limited Official Use. Attached but not printed are a September 22 draft briefing memorandum from Lake and Hormats to Vance concerning the effectiveness of foreign assistance programs, an undated draft letter from Vance to Brzezinski on the same subject, and a copy of the annex to PRM–8.
