Panama  945
problem was that Panamanian apprentices could not compete with 
the American beginners. To meet this, the new plan proposes that the 
Panamanian apprentices compete among themselves. The President 
thought that the wage structure was certainly sufficient to disavow any 
complaint on that basis.
Secretary Brucker pointed out the link between points 1 and 9 
of the proposed action, i.e. increasing wages of Panamanian employ-
ees 10 per cent and increasing the pay of teachers in Latin American 
schools; he referred to the link between items 6 and 7 having to do 
with the installation of a new water main to supply Panama and a 
reduced charge for water furnished to Panama; also, items 3 and 4 were 
related, having to do with the replacement of 500 substandard houses 
in the Zone and the construction of 500 low-­cost houses in Panama 
for Zone employees. The proposed wage increase of 10 per cent had 
been recommended deliberately, rather than the 5 per cent increase 
originally suggested, and the company was thinking of making this 
an annual increment which would, therefore, eliminate a wage differ-
ential between Panamanians and Americans in 10 years. Mr. Brucker 
said that the company had also deliberately increased the number of 
apprentices from 20 ­to 25 per year in its proposal; since the training 
period is 4 years, there would be 100 Panamanians in the school at all 
times, a rather impressive figure, he thought.
The President inquired about the U.S. treaty obligations to the 
world regarding rates charged ships transiting the Canal. Wasn’t there 
some way we could increase the rates so as to amortize the original 
building costs for the Canal? Mr. Roderick explained that there was 
in effect a formula with the Congress which works in the following 
way: if the Canal Company books show that the rates are too low or 
too high, the Executive Branch could, after a six-­month waiting period, 
recommend a reduction or an increase in the rates in order to balance 
the books. The Administration tried in the 83rd and 84th Congresses 
to include original building costs in the financial base structure of the 
Canal Company accounts, but the pressures on the Congress were suf-
ficient to nullify the government’s recommendations.
The President noticed that there was no mention of third coun-
try purchases or the sale of luxury items in the PX’s. Mr. Brucker 
declared that the measures affecting these points had already been 
placed into effect.
Mr. Merchant commented that this action had had favorable 
repercussions.
Secretary Brucker said that his Department was prepared to move 
ahead on all points in the company proposal although enabling legis-
lation would be required for point 4, covering construction of housing 
units in Panama, and point 8, an increase of pensions paid disabled
