Arms Control and Disarmament 1309 Attachment Report Prepared by the NSC Ad Hoc Working Group Washington, March 26, 1958 REPORT OF THE NSC AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON THE MONITORING OF LONG-­RANGE ROCKET TEST AGREEMENT In response to the action taken by the National Security Council meeting on January 6, 1958, an ad hoc working group of the President’s Science Advisory Committee and the Central Intelligence Agency has undertaken a study of “the technical factors involved in monitoring a long-­range rocket test agreement to assure that it is carried out for peaceful purposes.” On the basis of technical presentations and discussions at its ini­ tial meeting on 13 March 1958, the working group arrived at the con­ clusions set forth below. For the purpose of this study, the working group considered “long-­range” rockets to include the IRBM, ICBM, and vehicles capable of orbiting satellites for either military or peace­ ful purposes. No attempt was made to establish an exact definition for “peaceful purposes.” However, it was assumed that rockets for the delivery of nuclear or other warheads [text not declassified] are not for “peaceful purposes.” CONCLUSIONS 1. The remote detection of long-­range rockets, which are fired from any point in the Soviet bloc and which leave the atmosphere, could be made almost certain by a monitoring system employing an expan­ sion of the present intelligence detection systems at locations outside the Soviet bloc and new techniques now under development. [text not declassified] 2. The detection of long-­range rockets, which are fired anywhere in the Soviet bloc from either known or unknown launching sites and which leave the atmosphere, could be further improved by a monitor­ ing system which included suitably placed stations [text not declassified] however, such stations may actually not be required to provide cer­ tainty of detection. 3. The above mentioned detection techniques may not be capable of discriminating in all cases between “long-­range” rockets and other large rockets which leave the atmosphere, such as short-­range mil­ itary ballistic missiles and certain types of AICBM’s. For this reason the remainder of the conclusions are stated in terms of “large rockets which leave the atmosphere.” It must be recognized that the definition
