necessary in order to sell goods abroad. There must be offices, there must
be distributing centers and showing centers, and a hundred other expenses.
Under these French regulations our producers are asked to undertake this
expense with no certainty that the field will even be open to them in the
future. They may establish a distribution service on the basis fixed for a
year’s distribution and as soon as their expense is consummated the whole
basis on which they have built up their service may be altered over night.
10. For the sake of clarity I must ask you to subdivide this question in your
minds into two very distinct and separate categories; the first, the right of a
nation, based on the very reasonable contention that a state must maintain
public morals and order, to censor the films shown to its own people. With
this right we have of course no opposition to raise. We fully recognize such
right in any state. The second category has to do with the handling of this
question for economic purposes for the purpose of protecting industry. It is
the action of France in relation to this second category to which we take
exception and which I hope to be able to demonstrate to you gentlemen is
clearly contrary to the purpose of this convention.
11. Gentlemen, when we drew up our convention last autumn it was to do
away with restrictive measures on importation—certain specified
exceptions were allowed but it was certainly the spirit, more than that it was
the intent—of the instrument to do away with all other types of formalities
and regulations of a nature to restrict importation.
12. Now, I ask you, what does importation mean?—in our minds, in the
minds of businessmen, in the ordinary conception of the word? Does it
mean, I ask you, merely the passing of a frontier or the passing of a frontier
for a useful purpose? Does it mean that we Americans are free to ship
wheat and cotton to the world, to enter the states freely, but still may be
prevented from distributing this wheat and cotton by so-called internal
regulations? Does it mean we can send typewriters, motorcars, or any other
form of our products freely to the world but that the other states may in
their discretion decide which ones of these motorcars and which ones of
these typewriters may be distributed and sold within their frontiers? On
[Eliminate] the question of public order and public morals, and [the] cases
are not only analogous but identical.
