1957 1329 obstruction in departure, he may so inform office of Charge ­d’Affaires UK.” Under our announcement, it clear question obstruction arises, not when PRC wishes to raise it, but when “any American in PRC believes he encountering obstruction.” Is Fr McCarthy American in PRC? Does he believe he is encountering obstruction? Then question of obstruction has arisen. D. The representative also on Dec 28 told UK Charge his request for facilities investigate facts was not in accordance terms agreed announcement. What are those terms? Any American who believes he being obstructed, and again I quote from our announcement, “may so inform office of Charge d’Affaires UK in PRC and request it make representations on his behalf to Govt PRC. If desired by US, Govt of UK may also investigate facts any such case.” Did Fr McCarthy inform office of UK Charge of his belief his departure being obstructed? Did he request UK Charge make representations on his behalf? Does US desire facts this case be investigated? Can you point to any other terms our announcement bearing on this question of investigation of facts? Can you cite any part announcement which can be used justify refusal your authorities permit this investigation? E. Would like ask you in all seriousness this morning whether there any provision of announcement which your authorities intend apply to cases Fr McCarthy and nine other Americans whose depar­ ture still being obstructed by your govt. Or is it your intention utterly repudiate our agreement? This is question of most fundamental impor­ tance for if relations between our countries are to be placed on some other basis than that of profound distrust and mutual suspicion, it is up to two of us take first steps in that direction. It up to us show nego­ tiations between our two countries can result in understandings and agreements which will be carried out in good faith. Impartial testimony shows my govt has and is continuing demonstrate its good faith in car­ rying out this first agreement between us. I continue seek evidence of intention your authorities do same. 2. Wang said attitude adopted by China in this conference has all along been relations between China and US should improve, disputes between us should achieve settlement. From statement I had made this morning he did not see display similar spirit. 3. Wang (turning to prepared statement) continued, might mention press statement of US Dept State Jan 29 again indulged total inversion right and wrong to confuse world. No amount such malicious argu­ ments can establish point that making American criminals serve sen­ tence which accordance law, China guilty violation accord Sept 1955. 4. Wang (from notes) continued, I had asked question whether agreement between us was to be repudiated. His answer was no amount groundless charges could distort facts this matter. Good faith his govt
