192
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
urge to drive the British from Iran. Any people bound together by ge-
ography, language, central government and history, are conscious of a
common background which sets them apart from others. Time, in its
story of Prime Minister Mosadeq as “man of 1951”, gave an impression
that he ranked with great philosophical nationalists like Nehru. In fact,
he is much more an opportunist who perceived the potential force in
indigenous nationalism and had the ability to direct it to his support.
Towards the end of 1949, nine politicians11 formed a coalition
whose name, the National Front, showed its determination to win
power from Iranian nationalism. It was not the first time that this ap-
peal has been made in Iran. Reza Shah, after capturing the throne by
force, called for popular support of his nationalist program to give Iran
a new position in the modern world. His son, the present Shah, ap-
pealed to nationalism in 1946 when Iran regained control of Russian-
dominated Azerbaijan. Seyid Zia Tabatabai called his anti-communist
organization the National Will Party. Majlis deputies often have ap-
pealed to national pride, in the fashion of politicians around the world.
But the National Front was the first Iranian political organization delib-
erately to set out to capture popular support in order to gain power.
They sought, in nationalism, the force which was required to break the
closed circle of entrenched governing politicians.
Independence from Foreign Domination First among national aspira-
tions is Iran’s hope to be, as well as seem, a sovereign nation. Such pre-
viously colonial countries as India, Pakistan and Indonesia now deter-
mine their own destinies. The Persians feel that they are behind the
times in Asia and they want “independent” life. It is quite true that,
during recent centuries of European rivalry in Asia, Persia has been
subject to foreign domination. Now, the Persians quite simply want
freedom from this influence.
When Mosadeq leaned forward in his bed to tell Ambassador
Grady sharply, “We value independence more than economics”,12 he
was not only arguing against American advice that Iran should make a
settlement with the British in order to preserve oil revenues. He was ex-
pressing a heart-felt, earnest belief that by driving out the British, he
would end what he believed to be Iran’s semi-colonial status. This sen-
timent was shared by Persians of all classes. Even the present opposi-
tion to Mosadeq’s Government does not declare that British influence
11 Deputies Abol Qadar Azad, Dr. Mosafar Baghai, Seyid Abol Hasan Haerizadeh,
Ayatollah Kashani, Seyid Hosein Maki, Dr. Mohammad Mosadeq, Seyid Mahud Nar-
iman, Alayar Saleh, Seyid Ali Shayegan. Only Azad subsequently left the coaliton. [Foot-
note is in the original.]
12 Memorandum of Conversation, June 28 (Embassy despatch 1159, June 29, 1951).
[Footnote is in the original.]
