Honduras 815 meet from present human resources. This appears to be the priority problem in Honduras, and this conclusion is reflected in the 1959 and 1960 Program submissions, which include a program for the building of school rooms under the “aided self-­help” system. Whereas this is a worthwhile effort and will coordinate well with the teacher education project, it is my opinion that it will be long range in its expected effects and will not be of sufficient impact to solve the problem. I have hopes that a more effective and immediate solution can be found for this grave situation, possibly a solution which will include adult education programs on a very broad scale. Incidentally, in order to achieve the greatest flexibility in the “aided self-help school program, I hope it can be approved in the category of Special Assistance rather than Technical Cooperation. There are other problems, however, which should be recognized if gains are to be consolidated, and if the country is to develop continuing institutions which will help it to help itself. I refer specifically to the development of a better public administration and a tradition of good government, and also to the activation of private enterprise to permit sound development of the national economy. The USOM, which has had a large scale turnover of personnel in the last year or two, has been in the process of re-­evaluating its program, and I am pleased to note that the above problems have been recognized in its current budget submission; the program for FY 1961 calls for a somewhat broader approach than before in the field of public administration, and there is a proposed industrial development project which has for its purpose the training of managerial skills and increase in industrial productivity. Both of these activities are small scale, which I believe is appropriate at this stage, until there has been more experience in local conditions. In the case of the industry project, one of the conditions to be observed is the effect of the recently adopted Labor Code, which may have an inhibiting effect on both new and existing industrial enterprise. A related project which has been rather successful in the past, and which will continue, is the training of labor leaders. Selected trade union officials have been sent to Puerto Rico and the United States for observation and training in the responsibilities and obligations of democratic labor leadership. This has been supplemented in the past two years by labor training seminars for leaders at a somewhat lower level, given to larger groups within Honduras. It is considered that these activities have been very helpful in combating Communist attempts to dominate the unions, and have resulted in more responsible trade union leadership and improved labor management relations. The project will be continued in FY 1961, but on a smaller scale than previously. In the field of agriculture, no major changes in program are foreseen, although the USOM in recent months has been making a
