Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
599
rity and that of our allies also depends on the strength of ideas and
ideals and on arms control measures that can stabilize and finally re-
verse a dangerous and a wasteful arms race which neither side can win.
This is a path of wisdom. This is a path of peace.
118.
Address by Secretary of State Vance1
Chicago, May 1, 1979
Meeting the Challenges of a Changing World
From the first days of our nation; Americans have held a staunch
optimism about the future. We have been a self-confident people, cer-
tain about our ability to shape our destiny. And we are a people who
have not only adapted well to change, we have thrived on it.
We are now living in a period of history marked by deep and rapid
change. Tonight, I want to talk about change and how America can use
its extraordinary strength to meet the challenges of a changing world.
America’s optimism has been jarred in recent years—by a bitter
war, by domestic divisions that tested our democratic institutions and
left many of our people skeptical about government, by the sudden
awareness that our economic life at home can be shaped by actions
abroad, and by the realization that there are events which affect us but
which we can only partly influence.
There is much that we can and have learned from these experi-
ences. But fear of the future is not one of them.
Let me share with you frankly my concern that the distorted prop-
osition being advanced by some that America is in a period of decline
in the world is not only wrong as a matter of fact but dangerous as a
basis for policy.
For we would imperil our future if we lost confidence in ourselves
and in our strength and retreated from energetic leadership in the
world. And we would imperil our future, as well, if we reacted in frus-
tration and used our power to resist change in the world or employed
our military power when it would do more harm than good.
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, June 1979, pp. 16–19. Vance delivered his ad-
dress before a meeting of the American Association of Community and Junior Colleges.
