September 18–December 16, 1978
209
and the Palestinians would have to approve. There would be a Jorda-
nian participation in joint patrols and monitoring of the borders if you
agree. The Israelis have already agreed.
—The Israelis recognize that the legitimate rights of the Pales-
tinians have to be honored and that there will be no new settlements in
the West Bank or Gaza Strip during the time of the negotiations and
any additional settlements would be as determined by the negotiations
themselves.
—The Israelis have agreed also that there will be a final settlement
of the status of the West Bank/Gaza Strip and also a treaty with you
within the five-year period.
These are some of the provisions which are in the Camp David
agreement that directly involve you and/or the Palestinians. Our hope
is, Your Majesty, that you would agree to have a thorough briefing
from us, and following that briefing, that you would agree to join the
present negotiations. This is a first step, but it provides a framework
through which all the hopes and dreams of the Palestinian people who
live in the West Bank and Gaza can be realized. But it is very crucial
that you be willing to participate.
If you have specific questions after you have a thorough briefing
on the documents, or have objections, I would like to have an opportu-
nity to work with the Israelis to remove those objections before you re-
ject the possibility of your participation. I hope that you will not make a
decision on this until we can have a thorough briefing for you.
I have already invited Crown Prince Fahd to come to Washington2
as soon as it is convenient to talk to him about the provisions of the
Camp David settlement. But I urge you in the strongest possible terms
to participate fully in it along with ourselves, if you desire, and the Is-
raelis, the Palestinians, and the Egyptians.
King Hussein. Thank you very much indeed, Mr. President. I ap-
preciate very much indeed your kind call. Mr. President, the last few
hours have caused us very many surprises and call for very deep
thought. And with your kind permission, sir, it is something I will
think about very carefully and I will be looking forward to receiving
the briefing. On the other hand, we will see what we can do not only
within Jordan but also within the area itself. Against the background of
these many many years of tragedy and see what we can come up with.
With your permission, Mr. President, I will be in touch with you.
President. Can I assume, Your Majesty, that you will try to partici-
pate in the negotiations, but that you will not make a decision until
after you get a thorough briefing from us? Is that correct?
2 See Document 65.
