The contracting countries undertake to refuse or invalidate registration, and to prohibit by appropriate means the use, failing authorization from the competent authority, whether as trade-mark or as components of such, of all coats of arms, flags, and other state emblems of contracting countries, official control and guarantee signs and stamps adopted by them, and all imitation from an heraldic point of view. The prohibition of official control and guarantee signs and stamps shall apply only in cases where marks which comprise them are intended to be used on merchandise of the same or a similar nature. For the application of these provisions the contracting countries agree to communicate reciprocally, through the intermediary of the International Bureau of Berne, the list of state emblems and official control and guarantee signs and stamps which they desire, or will desire, to place, wholly or with certain reservations, under the protection of the present article, as well as all subsequent modifications added to the list. Each contracting country shall place the communicated list at the disposal of the public in due course. Each contracting country may, within a period of twelve months from the receipt of the notification, and through the intermediary of the International Bureau of Berne, transmit its possible objections to any other country concerned. For state emblems which are well known the provisions of paragraph 1 shall be applicable only to marks registered after the signature of this convention. For state emblems which are not well known, and for official signs and stamps, these provisions shall be applicable only to marks registered more than two months after the receipt of the notification provided for in paragraph 3. In the case of bad faith, countries shall have the right to cancel even the marks registered before the signature of the present convention and embodying state emblems, signs, and stamps. Nationals of each country who are authorized to make use of state emblems, and signs and stamps of their country, may use them even if there be a similarity with those of another country. The contracting countries undertake to prohibit the unauthorized use in trade of state coats of arms of other contracting countries when such use would be liable to cause confusion as to the origin of the product. The preceding provisions will not prevent the countries’ exercising the right to refuse
