44
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
possible with a greater US presence could act to induce greater respon-
siveness by the regimes to human rights concerns.
There also is a possible middle course but it would be feasible only after
the problem of extending MFN credits eligibility to these countries has been
overcome in the Congress and once the terms on which we are prepared
to extend MFN and credits prove acceptable to the regimes in question.
In particular, before granting MFN and credit eligibility, we would
insist that such normalization steps as described above had been carried
out; that gross violation of human rights be eliminated; and that at
least some concrete progress in the human rights area be achieved.
Beyond this, we would not insist on far-reaching internal liberalization
before seeking MFN and credit eligibility and engaging ourselves more
actively in the economic area.
For example:
—Bulgaria is a tightly controlled country with bothersome press
coverage. But (largely because of its tight control), it has no visible
dissident problem. And it has been and is being reasonably responsive
on divided families. Thus, absent Jackson/Vanik, we might consider
MFN/credits for Bulgaria.
—Czechoslovakia—Few would hold that the US should be prepared
to grant Czechoslovakia MFN/credits under current conditions: active
repression of human rights advocates, restrictive divided families poli-
cies, attempted precensorship of foreign journalists, and sharp and
intensive press attacks on the US human rights position.
The German Democratic Republic as a Special Case
The GDR is unique in that it is not a traditional national state, as
are the other members of the Warsaw Pact, but an outgrowth of the
Soviet desire to maintain direct control over a substantial portion of
the former German Reich. Further aspects of the GDR’s special position
in Europe are the fact that Berlin is located in the center of its territory,
that the GDR exerts a negative influence on the situation in West Berlin,
and that the GDR is a significant industrial and military power whose
potential is of great importance to the Soviets and the other Warsaw
Pact allies.
US/GDR diplomatic relations were established in 1974 as part of a
package of East-West agreements affecting German matters and general
European security. In agreeing to establish relations, the US deferred
its prior demands for an acceptable consular convention and for the
satisfactory resolution of claims emanating from World War II.
When we established relations, we stipulated three objectives:
(a) to resolve outstanding humanitarian cases; (b) to conclude a satisfac-
tory consular convention; and (c) to obtain a claims settlement, includ-
ing GDR recognition of Jewish claims. Given the complexity of claims
