World Hunger and Food Policy
923
Some of these were mentioned in the Venice communique´.9 IDCA and
AID are now working on an agricultural development plan for your
next term aimed at achieving important increases in food production in
key countries, and significantly reducing chronic malnutrition in a
wider group of nations. AID has just completed an analysis of its agri-
culture staffing and is now considering ways to reverse the five year
decline in these skills.
We hope to increase support for international scientific and tech-
nological research on food and nutrition, using the particular compara-
tive advantage the United States has in this area. We have been sup-
porting efforts for land tenure reform in some countries through AID
and through our participation in the multilateral development banks.
As the Commission recommends, IDCA has given explicit atten-
tion to the importance of development and dissemination of capital
saving technology. AID has launched a new program initiative fo-
cusing on small-scale enterprises. IDCA is urging the multilateral de-
velopment banks and the UN agencies to give higher priority to in-
creasing productive employment opportunities—with capital saving
technology at low cost per job—in their development assistance
projects.
The Commission recommends—and you have supported—ex-
tending the statutory authority that permits the least developed coun-
tries to place amounts owed to the United States into local currency ac-
counts for development purposes to all non-oil developing nations.
The U.S. Congress has thus far not appropriated funding for this pur-
pose, even for the poorest countries.
With regard to the multilateral development banks (MDBs), the
Report urges U.S. support for: Bank activities that address basic needs;
restraint from restrictive amendments on types of loans and recipient
countries in Bank authorizing and appropriation legislation; and in-
creased contributions to the MDB concessional windows. These recom-
mendations are consistent with the policies of your Administration. In
congressional consideration of MDB legislation, we have not always
been successful in avoiding restrictive amendments or in gaining sup-
port for the full funding needed to meet negotiated replenishments. In
your next term, we will be negotiating the seventh replenishment of
IDA, the World Bank concessional window, as well as presenting to the
Congress a proposal for a general capital increase for the World Bank,
and we will be negotiating replenishments for the regional banks.
Trade—The Report emphasizes the importance of trade to the
world economy, and developing country growth in particular, and
9 See footnote 4, above.
