International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
493
156.
Summary of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, August 15, 1978
IN ATTENDANCE
The President, the Vice President, Chairman Miller, Secretary Vance, Secretary
Blumenthal, Secretary Schlesinger, Messrs. Brzezinski, Eizenstat, Jordan,
Moore, Owen, Powell and Schultze
1. The Secretary of the Treasury and Chairman Miller discussed
the dangers posed by the decline in the dollar abroad.2
2. The Secretary suggested a three-stage approach:
(a) a calming statement to be issued now by Chairman Miller and
himself;
(b) a program of financial measures to strengthen the dollar in the
short term, which could be negotiated in the next few days:
(c) a program of fundamental measures to strengthen the dollar
over the longer term, some of which might be announced by the Presi-
dent Friday.3
3. These suggestions were discussed, as were possibilities for Con-
gressional consultation.
4. The President:
(a) authorized Secretary Blumenthal and Chairman Miller to issue
a calming statement now.4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 56,
NSC–011, 5/18/78, U.S.-Soviet Relations. Secret. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the
page, and Brzezinski signed at the bottom of the page. The meeting, which took place in
the Cabinet Room, began at 3:04 p.m. and ended at 4 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential
Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
2 An August 16 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter forwarded a report by
Robert Hunter, who had recently visited Europe: “In all my [Hunter’s] conversations in
Europe, it seems clear that the leadership of the Administration is now being judged—
not so much in terms of issues like the neutron bomb or U.S.-Soviet relations—but much
more on the management of the U.S. economy, the enactment of energy legislation, and
the role of the dollar. Psychologically, the fall of the dollar is having a profound impact in
Western Europe (with continual front-page news) and is having an impact on percep-
tions of our reliability in general.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International:
7/78–1980)
3 August 18.
4 On August 16, the White House issued a statement expressing Carter’s “deep con-
cern over developments in foreign exchange markets in recent days.” For the text of the
statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II,
pp. 1426–1427. See also footnote 3, Document 158.
