punished and that these assaults should cease. In regard to neutralization, I did not understand what was meant, but that if Mr. Velarde meant that the United States take over the government of the provinces, that would be impossible under the Treaty of Ancon, the terms of the submission and the award; administrative, judicial, and legislative control of the provinces is in Chile’s hands; and neither the Arbitrator nor this Government has any right or power to take over that administration. In award it was provided that Chile and Peru should enact appropriate legislation for apprehension, trial, and punishment of whoever is guilty of intimidation, bribery, fraud, or other offense in connection with registration for the plebiscite or with the voting, or of interference with the Plebiscitary Commission. The limit of action was to investigate and, after the facts had been verified, to bring these facts to attention of Chilean authorities and to demand that guilty be punished and that measures be taken to have these practices stopped. It was impossible to do more than this. The Ambassador called attention to Chile’s failure in past to punish those guilty of crimes, and said that no faith could be placed in Chilean guarantees, and that some formal guarantees of neutralization were expected. I asked Mr. Velarde to state specifically what he thought the United States could do, and again pointed out to him our inability to take over government of provinces. He reflected a moment; then said that he supposed that was all that could be done for the present but that he was bringing matter to my attention so that were events to develop later which would make holding of plebiscite impossible and thereby render Peru’s abstention necessary, I would be fully informed on antecedents of the matter and would know that Peru’s action was correct. I regard it as important that there should be no misunderstanding in Peru over powers and duties of the Arbitrator and of the Government of the United States. Not only does this Government possess no right or power to intervene with armed forces, but it will not do so. I feel very strongly that question between Peru and Chile is matter to be settled through plebiscite by means of ordered procedure and not through use of force by this Government; and any statements by those in authority which would create any sentiment whatever to contrary are greatly to be deprecated.
