Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
339
tions among nations are coming together around particular interests,
often cutting across ideological, regional and political lines. From the
core relationship with our historical allies and friends, we are able, on
an increasing number of issues, to join together with nations we have
not worked closely with in the past. This is especially true with the de-
veloping world. Moreover, when the nations of the communist world
seek constructive solutions to common problems, we and others are
ready to join with them. We seek the most inclusive coalitions that can
be effective in meeting the particular challenges before us.
We are also operating on the assumption that no animosity is so
deep that there is not some common ground. For instance, we find our-
selves associated with the Soviet Union on certain issues, such as the
Law of the Seas, even as we stand in opposition on other issues. At the
same time, we recognize that our alliances can never be so total that dis-
agreements on some issues are precluded.
We recognize that diverse and equally valid American goals may
themselves come into conflict, particularly over the short term. Thus,
our interest in secure energy supplies can conflict with our interest in
preventing nuclear proliferation, for nuclear energy without adequate
safeguards can be used to develop nuclear weapons. Our commitment
to human rights may sometimes clash with our desire to maintain close
ties to countries whose cooperation we need on security or economic
issues.
The pursuit of our basic principles must therefore be flexible and
pragmatic, for balances inevitably must be struck. Both our principles
and their pragmatic pursuit are traditional American strengths. As we
reassert the international vitality of our national ideals, we must re-
main practical in recognizing the limits to our power and the con-
flicting demands which our ideals may make upon our policies.
America has been most successful in the world when it has maintained
this sense of practical idealism.
The changing nature of international cooperation and competition,
our diverse interests in the world, the absence of armed conflicts in-
volving American force, all contribute to move American foreign
policy beyond the generalized doctrines of times past. Our policies do
not lend themselves to simple doctrinal explanations. We must there-
fore take special care to work closely with the Congress, to open our
policies to broad public discussion and to encourage alternative points
of view within the Administration itself. All voices must be heard:
America’s foreign policy cannot be sustained without the under-
standing and support of the American people.
2. Agenda for 1978
The decisions which the Administration, Congress and American
people face in 1978 will be made, in large measure, within the context of
