1138 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI U.S. Statement on the SS–N–23 Paragraph 1(a) of Section I of the throw-weight protocol describes the method for determining the throw-weight of “ICBMS or SLBMs, the final stage of which executes a procedure for dispensing reentry vehicles.” The U.S. side understood that this method for determining throw-weight was negotiated specifically to address design characteristics that are unique to the RSM–54 SLBM, known to the U.S. side as the SS–N–23. However, the Soviet side now asserts that the throwweight of the SS–N–23 should be determined on the basis of the method described in paragraph 1(b) of the throw-weight protocol. The Soviet side also informed the U.S. side that the accountable throw-weight of the SS–N–23, 2800 kg, was determined on the basis of the 1(b) method. While the U.S. side believes the SS–N–23 is of 1(a), not 1(b), design; for purposes of calculating throw-weight, the U.S. side accepts the SS–N–23 as a type 1(b) SLBM. However, the U.S. side stresses that this acceptance is without prejudice to our right to contest in the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission the throw-weight values of any new type of ICBM or SLBM or modified existing type of ICBM or SLBM that incorporates a design similar to the SS–N–23, if such throwweight values are based on the 1(b) method. Soviet Statement on the SLBM SS–N–23 In connection with the U.S. statement on the SLBM SS–N–23 (RSM–54) the Soviet side confirms that the throw-weight of that missile should be determined on the basis of the method described in paragraph 1(b) of Section I of the throw-weight protocol to the treaty on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms, since in terms of its design the SLBM SS–N–23 does not belong to missiles, the final stage of which executes a procedure for dispensing reentry vehicles. In this connection, the Soviet side states that there is no ground for raising an issue related to determining the throw-weight pursuant to paragraph 1(a) of Section I of the throw-weight protocol for any new type of ICBM or SLBM or modified existing type of ICBM or SLBM that incorporated a design similar to the SLBM SS–N–23 (RSM–54). U.S. Statement on Attachment Joints With respect to the inclusion of the distance between joints for attaching long-range nuclear ALCMs in Annex G and H to the memorandum of understanding, the attachment joints used on bombers belonging to the United States of America are of a design that allows the attachment of a variety of nuclear and non-nuclear weapons. In the U.S. view, such armament attachment joints are inappropriate for use as specified features that make heavy bombers belonging to the United States of America equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs distinguishable from heavy bombers belonging to the United States of America
