Arms Control and Disarmament  1661
468.	 Telegram Secto 67 From Herter at Geneva1
Geneva, May 18, 1959, 9 p.m.
Secto 67. Secretary met with Lloyd (U.K.) today re Soviet refusal 
technical discussions capabilities detection and identification seismic 
events and technical criteria for inspections. Following is approved 
summary conversation: Lloyd mentioned three points: (1)  Whether 
we should continue to press Gromyko on acceptance technical talks as 
requested in discussion with him; (2) whether we should agree to tech­
nical discussions on high altitude alone, and (3) extent of further discus­
sions nuclear testing at Foreign Minister level during this conference.
Secretary stated Gromyko owes us an explanation because in dis­
cussion on May 14, he seemed to go quite far toward accepting wide-­
range technical talks.
With respect to high altitude alone, Secretary stated he did not think 
we should accept at this time. Secretary and Lloyd agreed that there 
should be no extensive talks with Gromyko on nuclear testing during 
Foreign Minister’s conference. Secretary pointed out that it could be 
Gromyko’s intention to use minor concessions on testing during For­
eign Minister conference as basis necessary progress for summit.
Lloyd briefly discussed status U.S.–U.K. positions outstanding 
issues. It was agreed much work remains to be done by both U.S.–U.K. 
staffs in developing respective positions and in developing jointly-­
agreed positions outstanding issues. It was agreed Secretary would 
approach Gromyko for meeting at noon May 19 to again seek agree­
ment for technical talks high altitude, capabilities detection and iden­
tification seismic events and technical criteria for inspections. It was 
agreed that if Gromyko accepts, U.S.–U.K. scientists should meet Lon­
don or Washington several days before technical talks with U.S.S.R.
Herter
1 Source: Account of talk with Lloyd on Soviet refusal of technical discussions 
on seismic detection, criteria for inspections. Secret. 1 p. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 
396.1–GE/5–1859.
