86 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III sources. Unemployment is still very high and inflation affects all of our systems. With respect to balance of payments issues, only a few OECD countries have surpluses. Most of them, and most LDCs, are in deficit. The surplus OECD countries simply add money on top of the already large OPEC-related deficit. To overcome this, we need to deal with the structural problem. All of us must make an effort to bring the structure to conformity with new realities. This requires time and a gradual approach to adjustment. If not gradual, there will be negative consequences for unemployment. We should reduce our deficits, but this also depends on countries with favorable balances. If the stronger would reaffirm their primary role in achieving growth, it will be easier for the weaker economies. Also, there must be adequate balance between financing and adjustment. The oil importers have turned primarily to the private markets for finance. Now they are less solvent and find it more difficult to sustain future deficits. The financial market has reacted positively but there cannot be a solid financial position without a positive attitude by the creditor and debtor countries. The creditors have been lending primarily to good-loan risks—the low-risk countries. The debtors could restore solvency if they stress the will and ability to put their economies in order. The IMF has a role to play, in that it can provide adequate resources to support stabilization plans. But the Fund should act more symmetrically in order to lay the preconditions for recovery. We ourselves are contributing through our stabilization policy and by not imposing trade restrictions. This involves major efforts to secure the consent of various elements of society and our political parties. With regard to unemployment, Giscard highlighted the political aspects of the problem. We should leave no stone unturned to reduce the gravity of the phenomenon. Also, we should discuss the growth of youth unemployment. Seven million young people, 40% of unemployment in the OECD, are a major problem. The young represent 22% of the work force. Also there is high unemployment among degree holders. We cannot await an impact in a drop of the birth rate, which should take effect in the mid-1980s, to deal with this. Certain actions must be taken. We should refer to this in our final Declaration. Unemployment is a major challenge to us all. Schmidt: I thank Jim for his traditional UK hospitality and also welcome President Carter and Prime Minister Fukuda. Valery is right in saying this is not a normal situation, or typical business-cycle recession. It is a structural crisis. It reflects a lack of confidence among the world’s rich nations, particularly among our consumers. In Germany, we have a 14% rate of savings and the lowest interest rate in history. No one asks for credit, yet we have money available. People do not use it
