872 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement NI–21. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of Nicaraguan Affairs (Godfrey)1  Washington, June 7, 1960. SUBJECT NICARAGUA: Visit of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa to discuss Nicaraguan-­ Honduran Relations and Request for Asylum by Pro-Batista Exiles. PARTICIPANTS Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua ARA—Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary OAP—Richard A. Godfrey, Nicaraguan Desk Officer 1. Nicaraguan-Honduran Relations Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated that he had been instructed by President Somoza to acquaint the Department of State with certain views of the President on current Nicaraguan-Honduran relations. The GON continues to view with great concern the continued presence in Honduras near the Nicaraguan border of revolutionary groups, which from time to time have made incursions into Nicaragua, the last cited example being that of April 27, 1960. The GON expects the GOH to take immediate, effective measures to eliminate these revolutionary groups. Should the GOH continue, what the GON considers an evasive attitude on the elimination of these revolutionary groups, then the GON proposes, (1) to withdraw from the Mixed Military Mission now meeting in Tegucigalpa, and (2) to withdraw its Ambassador from Tegucigalpa, since his continued presence there served no useful purpose. President Somoza had also expressed the opinion that President Villeda was misleading the U.S. Ambassador by stating that the GOH lacked sufficient facilities to search out and eliminate these revolution groups. President Somoza had stated that the location of the groups was well-­known to the GOH, and that members of these groups had circulated freely in Tegucigalpa and had even visited with certain GOH officials. After presenting the above views of President Somoza, Ambassador Sevilla- Sacasa requested that the U.S. Government use its good offices through the U.S. Ambassador in Tegucigalpa to press for prompt and decisive action on this matter by the GOH. Mr. Rubottom observed that President Somoza has every reason to feel as he did in the face of the continued provocations and harassments by these revolutionary groups and he was justified in expecting the GOH to take effective action against those groups using Honduras 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 615.17/6–760. Confidential.
