Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
547
IV. Final Steps (Objective: Ten days after transfer)
The previous scenario agreed to by both parties envisioned a final
stage of reciprocal steps leading to release of the Americans held in
Tehran.
However, the sequence of steps envisioned then has changed
because in the new circumstances the Commission will return to Iran
after the Revolutionary Council has taken custody of the American
personnel. Because of recent developments, the final steps of the sce-
nario agreed earlier seem no longer to be completely applicable. If that
assumption is not correct, the US is prepared to abide by the previously
agreed scenario.
If the final steps of the earlier scenario can no longer be followed,
it is necessary for both parties to agree on the steps in a new final
stage. In these new circumstances, the United States believes that the
components of the final stage—including the report of the United
Nations Commission, the statements of Presidents Carter and Bani
Sadr, the establishment of an Iran-US joint commission to resolve bilat-
eral issues, and the release of all 53 Americans—should be taken simul-
taneously. It is also the position of the United States that the release
of the hostages should take place no later than 10 days after the transfer
of the American personnel. End text.
5. The one possible action the Secretary might wish to discuss with
SYG Waldheim Friday while members of the Commission may still be
in New York is the possible message from the Commission described
in para IIC of the scenario above. They could at least talk it over with
a view to authorizing the co-chairmen to send it Sunday or Monday
to arrive in Tehran shortly after the election results are available and
when the US message arrives in Tehran Sunday.6
6. A draft of the message mentioned in para IIB of the scenario is
being carried back to Washington Friday morning.
Vine
6 Brzezinski informed Carter that he thought it “doubtful that we can side-step”
Khomeini’s public declarations against release of the hostages. He found the scenario
to have “an unrealistic quality in not factoring in student resistance, the Ayatollah’s,
the Parliament, etc.” and added “we will be setting ourselves up for another fall which
will leave the hostages still in Tehran and could damage you seriously politically.” He
concluded that Bani-Sadr is “stringing us along.” (Memorandum from Brzezinski to
Carter, March 14; Carter Library, Plains File, Box 10)
