Chapter 6, June–December 1990  869
159.	 Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, September 28, 1990
SUBJECT
Definitions of “RV” and “Simulated Release” in START
Two of the remaining blanks in our START position are defini-
tions for “RV” and “simulated releases” of RVs during flight testing. 
Both terms are important for the treaty, but have defied attempts to 
find accurate definitions that do not leave open obvious circumven-
tion paths or capture potential U.S. capabilities (e.g. penaids) that 
would not otherwise be subject to START limits. In neither case do 
we need a definition to make the Treaty work. In both cases the issues 
are whether specific definitions will help or hurt us politically during 
ratification and whether they will clarify or exacerbate compliance 
disputes later.
RV Definition
We and the Soviets have agreed to include a definition of RV in 
START, but neither side has proposed specific language. The concept of 
RV is central to making the linkage between flight-testing observations 
of RVs and treaty accountability of warheads under the 6000/4900/1540 
limits.
It will seem odd to the Senate not to have a definition of a cen-
tral term in START when over 130 other terms, many of them minor, 
are defined. (In INF at the Senate’s urging we went back to the Soviets 
during ratification to get a common understanding of the term 
“weapon.” We have incorporated the substance of that definition into 
START: any mechanism or device that, when directed against a target, 
is designed to damage or destroy it.)
On the other hand, it is not clear that we need to have a definition of 
RV. In SALT there has never been a compliance question about whether 
or not an object should be treated as a RV; we know a RV when we see 
one. Moreover, most potential definitions could have unintended nega-
tive affects on U.S. options. A definition that included a weight thresh-
old could count certain penaids as RVs or exclude future light-­weight 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, Scowcroft Close Hold Files, NSC Original Files—IF—Brent Scowcroft Folder 
#2 [9020666–9021348]. Secret. Sent for action. Sent through Kanter. A stamped notation at 
the top of the memorandum reads: “Signed.”
