642
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Chief police Modabar “angrily” rejected police report which stated
that 4–5 thousand National Front and 10–15 thousand Tudehs partici-
pated in 21 July demonstrations. Modabar hurled report to desk
shouting: “How can I give this to PM? How can I explain why we were
able to turn out so few when we have spent 1 million tomans (approx
$100,000)?”
Mossadeq “angry” at National Movement faction deputies for re-
fusing 22 July to return to Majlis pending his decision whether to con-
duct referendum. Razavi, who carried deputies’ decision to Mossadeq
left in huff, remarking: “He no longer has Majlis (as shield) between
him and Shah.”
Gen Zahedi has become very active since leaving Majlis 20 July
and probably will not return to bast.
250.
Paper Given by the British Ambassador (Makins) to the
Under Secretary of State (Smith)1
Washington, July 23, 1953.
“Her Majesty’s Government have noted the State Department’s
views as got out in a report on the conversation between Mr. Byroade
and Mr. Beeley on 7 July, and have much sympathy for them.2
“The overriding consideration is that the whole question of com-
pensation must be left to the impartial arbitration of an international
tribunal. Furthermore the terms of any future arrangements must be
such as not to appear to provide a reward for the tearing up of contrac-
tual obligations or to disturb the pattern of world oil prices. Subject to
this Her Majesty’s Government are prepared to go to the utmost to help
‘ . . . with the problem of presenting an agreement to the public’ locally.
They are also convinced that the Company, who have not been con-
sulted, will adopt a generous attitude as regards methods and duration
of payments as regards any compensation awarded to them.
“The answers therefore to the specific questions raised in the re-
port from Washington Embassy are as follows:
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files, CSHP 208. Secret; Secu-
rity Information. The paper is Appendix C to CSHP, Overthrow of Premier Mossadeq of Iran,
from which the date is taken.
2 Not found.
