262
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
For Israel this means borders that are recognized and secure. Secu-
rity arrangements are crucial to a nation that has fought for its survival
in each of the last four decades. The commitment of the United States to
Israel’s security is unquestionable.
For the Arabs, the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people must
be recognized. One of the things that binds the American people to Is-
rael is our shared respect for human rights and the courage with which
Israel has defended such rights. It is clear that a true and lasting peace
in the Middle East must also respect the rights of all peoples of the area.
How these rights are to be defined and implemented is, of course, for
the interested parties to decide in detailed negotiations and not for us
to dictate.
We do not intend to impose, from the outside, a settlement on the
nations of the Middle East.
The United States has been meeting with the foreign ministers of
Israel and the Arab nations involved in the search for peace.9 We are
staying in close contact with the Soviet Union, with whom we share re-
sponsibility for reconvening the Geneva conference.
As a result of these consultations, the Soviet Union and the United
States have agreed to call for the resumption of the Geneva conference
before the end of this year.10
While a number of procedural questions remain, if the parties
continue to act in good faith, I believe that these questions can be
answered.
The major powers have a special responsibility to act with restraint
in areas of the world where they have competing interests, because the
association of these interests with local rivalries and conflicts can lead
to serious confrontation.
In the Indian Ocean area, neither we nor the Soviet Union has a
large military presence, nor is there a rapidly mounting competition be-
tween us.
Restraint in the area may well begin with a mutual effort to stabi-
lize our presence and to avoid an escalation in military competition.
Then both sides can consider how our military activities in the Indian
Ocean, this whole area, might be even further reduced.
9 Memoranda of conversation of these meetings are printed in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Documents
105–118.
10 On September 30, Vance and Gromyko met for 90 minutes to discuss both the
Middle East and arms limitation. Both agreed to work toward resolving issues of Pales-
tinian representation at a resumed Geneva conference. (Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. and
Soviet Vow Big Push on Mideast: Vance Meets Gromyko and Sees Cooperation on Ge-
neva Talks,” The New York Times, October 1, 1977, pp. 1, 4)
