Romania
691
Turning to another subject, he noted that the Romanian Govern-
ment was grateful for the briefing by Mr. Barry on the Summit.3 This
had been highly appreciated. One point needed clarification, however.
This concerned MFN for the Soviet Union. It looked like it would not
be possible to give MFN to the USSR this year. At the same time the
US might feel that it could not delay MFN for China. Bogdan felt that
part of the Jewish preoccupation with MFN for Romania was related
to this. (C)
Mr. Aaron replied that the President was still considering the ques-
tion of MFN for the Soviet Union and had not made up his mind. At
this point it was simply too early to tell what the President would do.
The Administration had not linked the two (MFN for China and the
Soviet Union). It wanted to proceed forward with both. However, the
point of decision had not been reached. (C)
Amb. Bogdan stated that he believed some of the Jewish concern
was related not just to Romania, but to the Soviet Union. He then
turned to the question of MBFR, noting that it was his understanding
that there had been no real progress in Vienna. He did not understand
why the starting level of troops was such a problem. (C)
In reply, Mr. Aaron noted that at Vienna Gromyko had noted that
the differences between the troop levels of both sides was 150,000.
Defense Minister Ustinov had corrected him, saying that the difference
was 180,000.4 (C)
Mr. Aaron noted that this was a large discrepancy. The problem
was that we couldn’t agree on the starting point. If we couldn’t agree
on the starting point, it would be hard to know how many troops had
been withdrawn. In short, if we couldn’t agree on where we were, how
could we agree on where we were going? He noted that SALT was
easy to verify in comparison to MBFR. (C)
3 In telegram 4026 from Bucharest, June 26, the Embassy reported on Barry’s June
22 meeting with Andrei to brief the Romanian Foreign Minister on SALT II and the Carter-
Brezhnev Summit in Vienna. The Embassy reported that, following the presentation of
the U.S. position, Andrei told Barry that he wondered “if briefing which Soviets might
provide would be as helpful.” The Romanians also raised GOR concerns regarding Soviet
views of Chinese participation in SALT III, effects of SALT II on Western European
disarmament thinking, and possibility of movement on other disarmament issues. Barry
also met with Andrei on June 23, prior to his departure from Bucharest. At that meeting,
the Embassy reported, “Andrei reiterated GOR support for SALT II Treaty as a good
step toward other disarmament measures, goal of which is to stop arms race, cut military
budgets, and effect troop reductions.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790288–0202)
4 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 204.
