International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1097
give special attention to the range of financial and so-called debt issues
which are in the forefront of international discussions.
We will support stepped-up efforts to conclude studies and imple-
ment decisions regarding increased co-financing with private markets,
program lending, and further cooperation between the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund. Additionally, further study is re-
quired on how best to relate public and private credit flows to the de-
velopment plans of individual countries in order to prevent financial
crises from occurring.
Dependable and predictable total financial flows to finance devel-
opment should be sought. This has long been a goal on the public side.
Donor countries must be assured that their assistance will be used to
support efficient development efforts in which private capital plays an
increasing role; developing countries should consider and plan their
private borrowings in order to minimize unpredictable fluctuations in
the financing available for their development.
Early efforts in this direction have been unsuccessful, although
great strides have been made in collecting necessary information.
IDCA will support a renewed effort in an appropriate forum, such as
the IMF/World Bank Development Committee, to study and agree on
means to achieve this goal.
Trade
—The United States should remain open to the exports of devel-
oping countries so that the developing countries may earn more of the
capital required for development through trade.
The growth of the world economy is tied to the growth of world
trade. Developing country prosperity fosters our prosperity. As their
economies grow they are able to buy more of our goods, and exports
built on their comparative advantages lessen our own inflationary
pressures. Moreover, debt crises are unavoidable—even worse, unre-
solvable—if developing countries cannot at least bring into greater bal-
ance their import and export accounts. In fact, the North-South dia-
logue emerged from the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. You have determined that development issues will be
considered in the framing of our trade policy, and we intend to be con-
structive in this domain. The review of the Generalized System of Pref-
erences and the implementation of the codes of the MTN are two op-
portunities for the United States to demonstrate our enlightened
commitment to interdependence.
IDCA will raise for government-wide consideration the possibility
of establishing a trade alert system, so that developed countries can an-
ticipate and plan for evolutions in product cycles that require adjust-
