Non-Proliferation
879
343.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 12, 1977
SUBJECT
Storage of Foreign Spent Nuclear Fuel
While we were in London, the NSC Interagency Group on Prolifer-
ation was completing the last three major studies assigned by you in
PD–8. One of these concerns spent fuel storage. The report is the result
of an intensive six-week effort, and contains recommendations which
are unanimously supported by State, ACDA and ERDA—an unusual
situation on this issue. The conclusion is that the US will have to accept
foreign spent fuel as a key incentive if other countries are to agree to
forego reprocessing.
Quoting from the summary paper (Tab B):2
“Indefinite deferral of reprocessing within the US and our policy
initiatives for other countries to join in this deferral will require a signif-
icant increase in spent fuel storage capacity . . .
“The overall concept we envisage is to provide short-term storage
for existing reactors (i.e. for approximately ten years) through more ef-
ficient use of existing reactor basin storage and through existing or
planned away-from-reactor storage facilities. Long-term storage (i.e.
after about ten years of out-of-reactor storage) would be provided in re-
gional, international storage facilities; one for the EC area, one for Japan
and Pacific Basin, and one for US utilities and US foreign customers, as
needed. To bring this about, the US Government will have to (1) take
the lead in working with foreign customers to expand capacity of ex-
isting reactor storage basins; (2) make provisions for US and foreign
near-term storage shortfalls in the US; (3) develop long-term storage fa-
cilities in the US that will handle fuel from foreign as well as US util-
ities; and, (4) initiate concrete steps to establish other international
storage areas.”
While you may not choose to approve all of the options the Group has rec-
ommended, it does seem clear that until you have had an opportunity to study
their proposals, we should not lock ourselves into a public position which
would rule out any storage of foreign spent fuel in the US. Therefore, I have
drafted for your approval (Tab A),3 a proposed response should this
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 4, PD–08
[1]. No classification marking. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the
memorandum, Carter wrote “Zbig. Get me a brief memo—perhaps with photos or
sketches & maps showing me what we’re doing now with wastes. JC.”
2 Attached but not printed.
3 Attached but not printed.
