364
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
concern. This is a major—and we should hope not short run—change in
international practice.
The recently concluded meeting of the U.N. Human Rights Com-
mission provides an example of what I mean.6 It was one of the most
successful in a decade. More important, it provided evidence that Af-
rican and Asian countries are assuming a leadership role in an area
where many in this country believe that only we care. For the first time
in U.N. history, the Commission took action under its 1503 procedures7
against a member state—in this case Uganda, Uruguay, Equatorial
Guinea, and a number of other countries. The credit for this develop-
ment lies more in a growing international consciousness than in any ef-
forts by the United States.
Yet at this point it is unclear whether this country has the patience
to build the kind of international consensus on human rights that will
make the subject a central issue of international diplomacy. Recalling
an influence we no longer enjoy, we may overlook a collective success
we stand some chance of achieving.
Foreign Policy Design and Domestic Demands
Perhaps the most striking aspect of this new age of diplomacy is its
field of practice. We have entered an age of democratic diplomacy
which is revolutionizing the craft. It used to be said that foreign policy
had only a small constituency. But who can say that today? The constit-
uency is growing every day; the problem is that it is not of one mind
and too often it is angry.
For decades our leaders have argued that to accomplish a political
task, one must organize. I think it is safe to say Americans have learned
how. The civil rights, consumer, and antiwar movements have pro-
vided on-the-job training to all of us. As a result, on a growing number
of issues, foreign policy appears to be losing its earlier character as a
largely autonomous sphere of action and thought. Foreign policy is be-
coming more inextricably linked to domestic politics and policy.
In the postwar period, we should recall, the two realms were not
so closely linked.
• It was only recently that the dependence of the United States on
certain raw materials reached the point that shifts in the terms of trade
or embargoes could have a radical effect on our domestic economy.
6 The 34th UN Human Rights Commission meeting took place in Geneva February
6–March 10. For a summary of the meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II,
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 125.
7 Adopted in 1970, these procedures, set out in ECOSOC Resolution 1503, outlined
steps for dealing with communications regarding human rights violations.
