784 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Deputy Foreign Minister Obukhov: There is also a document in the form of a statement on non-­proliferation that is agreed upon. (S) President Gorbachev: Mr. President. The ball is now in your court. (U) The President. Maybe it would be best to ask Ambassador Bartholomew to summarize. Reggie would you? (U) Ambassador Bartholemew: As is usual, I agree with most, but not all of what Mr. Karpov has said. We agree that the chemical weapons accord is a major achievement and the Joint Statement on Non- Proliferation should serve everyone’s interest. The protocols on nuclear testing are fifteen years old and it’s good to finish that. On next steps, we stand by the policy but believe that we need a pause to consider the lay of the land. (S) On Vienna, we have a strong joint statement for the two of you to issue this afternoon underscoring the need to finish that treaty this year. It is fundamental for building the security structure in Europe and is a precondition for a CSCE Summit. There is significant convergence on armor issues and destruction which opens the door to settling that. We had hoped for more progress on aircraft and we need to work hard to meet the timetable you have reaffirmed. (S) Let me focus for a minute on the outstanding START issues. There are two joint statements—­one records progress on START to date on major issues and the second is a statement of our common objectives after START. The first is more or less complete except for the 1100 number and in addition there are three outstanding issues that we would like to try to resolve so that they too could be included—­non-­ circumvention; Backfire; and heavy ICBMs. Let me review where we stand on those issues. (S) On heavies, we proposed a series of steps to establish a limit of two flight tests per year. This is at the end of a long series of U.S. efforts to find resolution of this issue. The two flight tests would permit the Soviet Union to maintain the reliability of its systems so that the current modernization program could continue but it would prohibit more ambitious upgrades which would make future negotiations difficult. When the Soviet Union said this would be too constraining we tried several variants—­perhaps seven-­eight tests over three years. The issue remains open. (S) On Backfire, we agreed that the Soviet Union could make a politically binding declaration committing the Soviet Union not to give Backfire intercontinental capability through in-­air refueling. The U.S. proposed a total number, not to exceed 400, much as we did with SLCM. We proposed that Backfire then be examined in CFE and that the total include both naval and airforce Backfires. We do not have
