Special Session on Disarmament 1185 otherwise might be perceived to be potentially hostile. Moreover, they could provide a foundation for regional arms control cooperation that could eventually lead to more significant agreements to limit and reduce forces and to ease the burden of defense expenditures on national budgets. Neither the UN nor existing regional organizations now have the technical expertise for a serious effort to promote stabilizing measures between interested nations. The United States could propose to strengthen the international machinery for this purpose, making our own experience available in the process. We would propose to prepare a coordinated proposal, working initially with PM. In addition to these possible specific initiatives, we are continuing to work in four other areas in preparation for the SSOD. 1. Disarmament-Development Link. It will be hard to escape addressing Third World interests in assuring that any savings from “disarmament” will be ascribed to economic and social development in the Third World. This Administration’s self-restraint initiatives (B–1)7 and arms control achievements (SALT8 and CTB prospects) will go some distance to show seriousness about arms control. Nevertheless, this will not be adequate for many developing countries, which draw distinctions between disarmament (which presumably generates significant savings) and arms control (which, aside from the ABM Treaty, has not). Aside from continuing support for the Norweigian initiative (longer term study for the disarmament/development link),9 and the need to avoid any automatic linkages, we have two approaches in mind: 1) an attempt to achieve acceptance of the principles of common obligations (for both developing and developed countries) to preserve scarce resources otherwise devoted to armaments, and 2) to point out that any transfer of savings which might be possible would be facilitated by some internationally acceptable accounting in- 7 Carter canceled funding for the B–1 bomber, a supersonic, low-level penetration aircraft, on June 30, 1977. For more on this decision, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy. 8 The Carter administration continued the Nixon and Ford administration’s commitment to the SALT II negotiations with the Soviet Union, which aimed to replace the SALT I Interim Agreement with a long-term agreement to limit strategic offensive weapons systems. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980. 9 The Norwegian initiative was actually written by the Nordic countries including Sweden, Finland, and Norway. Telegram 4486 from USUN, November 10, contains the text of the proposed resolution, which called for the “curtailment of expenditures on armaments” which would “facilitate the availability of greater resources for economic and social development, particularly to the developing countries.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770426–0762)
