18  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
hard issues. It remained to be seen if the two sides could conclude this 
agreement (and he thought that one should never say never) but the 
probability of this was not very great (Shevardnadze agreed).
Secretary Shultz continued that the more of these difficult details 
could be worked out to pass on to Mr. Bush with President Reagan’s 
approval, the better he would be able to pass this on to the Senate and 
say that he agreed with President Reagan’s decisions and added some 
of his own in order to complete the agreement. It would be advanta-
geous to have such a joint Bush/Reagan structure. The two countries 
should not do this if they were not ready but if they could nail things 
down it would be an advantage.
The Vice President agreed with this and added that the two basic 
elements of his policy would be continuity and no surprises.
Shevardnadze replied that the Soviet side was convinced of this. 
They had analyzed the Vice President’s statements and programs. There 
were elements with which the Soviet side could not agree, but they real-
ized that the campaign creates a special kind of situation. But the basic 
direction of which the Vice President had spoken would be a good base 
for cooperation between the two countries. He had no doubt that on 
this basis and on the basis of the experience which had been gained, the 
Soviet side could work well with President Bush.
The Vice President said that he was smiling because he was recall-
ing that when he was in China in 1974 a statement was made by the 
Chinese which caused him a lot of concern since it was very negative 
with regard to the U.S. He had gone to the Foreign Minister (who 
was subsequently dropped after Mao’s departure) to complain about 
the statement. The Chinese Foreign Minister replied, quoting Mao, 
that these were “empty cannons rhetoric”. The Vice President told 
Shevardnadze that they had known each other for a long time, and it 
was not that people would say things that they did not believe in, but 
that sometimes they would stress certain things, and that there were 
elements of the rhetorical cannons.
Shevardnadze replied that in the present campaign there was less 
anti-Soviet rhetoric than in previous ones. There was a new feeling, 
a new content. The Soviet side had noticed that in his statements the 
Vice President had taken a responsible stance with regard to Soviet-
American relations.
The Vice President replied that this was the pulse of East Texas. 
The election campaign had been criticized for not dealing with substan-
tive issues but this was (was there a Georgian word for it?) “bullshit”. 
But the American people want continuity. And continuity and no sur-
prises were the Bush policy now and if he won the election.
Secretary Shultz said that the Vice President probably needed 
to return to his campaign work, and the time for their meeting had
