918 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 4. Nye also stressed the importance of balanced UNGA resolutions on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, noting that the Congress and US public opinion could be expected to react adversely to virtually unqualified UN endorsement of transfer of nuclear technology to developing countries. A major US objective at INFCE was to develop new safeguardable technologies which would be both proliferation-resistant and economical. UN actions and decisions should be closely coordinated, he said, with the INFCE and IAEA work in this field. 5. The questions, asked mainly by the reps from Argentina, Brazil, Pakistan, and Yugoslavia, reflected many of the concerns raised in the first committee by the developing countries. They included the following: (A) Why has the London Club not been opened to recipients and what will happen to it during the INFCE? (B) Are the developing countries expected to postpone their nuclear programs based on old technologies pending the outcome of the INFCE? (C) How long will it take to develop and prove the new technologies? (D) What will be the implication of these new technologies for our commitment to nuclear disarmament? (E) Is the US prepared to consider stopping its R&D for weapons development, or is it only asking NNWS to accept more stringent safeguards while going ahead with its own program? (F) If a CTB is attained, will nuclear safeguards apply to nuclear weapons states as well as to nonnuclear weapon states? (G) Will comprehensive safeguards in the US be retrospective or applied only to new facilities? 6. At the end of the one and one-half-hour program, Argentina Perm-Rep Ortiz de Rozas expressed on behalf of the group appreciation to Nye and his hope that the Carter administration would indeed move ahead in positive spirit to finding viable answers acceptable to both developing and developed countries in reconciling the objectives of non-proliferation and energy for development. 7. In the late afternoon Nye met separately with Yugoslav and Pakistani UN Dels to discuss the non-aligned draft resolution on “The Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Development”. While indicating US readiness to seek to work out an acceptable text he highlighted our difficulties with the latest version. He emphasized our concern that only safeguardable nuclear technologies should be transferred to developing countries as well as our doubts about a UN conference (Reftel). 8. We believe Nye visit provided timely and useful opportunity for US to restate and clarify our non-proliferation objectives to a number of important UN Delegations. Moreover, we believe that Nye was able to convey our concerns to Yugoslavia and Pakistan in constructive spirit while highlighting the implications for their own interests in an unbalanced UNGA resolution. The Mission and Disarmament Del expressed their appreciation to Nye for his efforts.
