3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
784
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
You state that the Daoud government was perfectly acceptable to
you, I rejoined. Nevertheless, you felt it necessary to support those who
had shot and killed Daoud and who had overthrown his government.
Your response was to prop up the government of Daoud’s killers by in-
creasing your military personnel and economic assistance tenfold, de-
spite the fact that the new Afghan government was following policies
which were highly unpopular and which eventually led to the current
destabilizing crisis in the area. (S)
It is true that support for revolutionary movements is a funda-
mental aspect of our foreign policy, said Bessmertnykh. We have no
choice in such situations. For better or worse, we feel we have to sup-
port revolutionary movements. “If anyone wants Soviet support, all
they have to do is start a revolution.” (S)
While we might not like your various actions in Afghanistan and
elsewhere, I replied, we nevertheless can accept that the USSR has a
right to assist those governments and political forces with which it is
sympathetic. This could even include military assistance. However,
where one has to draw the line is armed combat. The introduction of
Soviet combat troops, or even the introduction of the troops of Soviet
surrogates, such as the Cubans or Vietnamese, creates situations which
make a detente relationship between the superpowers impossible to
maintain. Furthermore, it makes no sense to view the invasion of Af-
ghanistan in isolation. In 1975 the USSR shipped a Cuban army to An-
gola. In 1977 and again in 1978, Soviet generals commanded Cuban
troops in combat in Ethiopia. Then the Vietnamese attacked Cambodia.
Finally, at the end of 1979, you invaded Afghanistan with Soviet
troops—the first time in 30 years that Soviet troops have transgressed
the boundaries you achieved as a result of World War II. This is not
something which you could expect the United States or its allies to ig-
nore. It sets a remarkably dangerous precedent and is an event to which
we have to respond unambiguously, so that your government does not
mistake the depth and gravity of our reaction or what our reaction will
be if this type of behavior continues. (S)
The fact of the matter is, Bessmertnykh replied, that your allies see
the situation entirely differently than you do. Not only do they not re-
gard Afghanistan as endangering them in any way, they rather see it as
an opportunity to derive commercial advantage in their dealing with
us. Many people in Moscow are aware of this and are trying to take ad-
vantage of it. Dobrynin and I have worked very hard to build up
US-Soviet trade, and now it will all go to the West Europeans and the
Japanese. (S)
More important than trade, I said, is whether the Soviet Union
thinks it has the right to introduce armed combat troops anywhere in
the world to support “revolutionary movements” wherever they exist.
