Afghanistan 217 detailed study of imagery should be undertaken in an effort to see if the overall status of the division has been upgraded on a permanent basis. [classification marking and codeword not declassified] 12. At Termez, a motorized rifle regiment appeared to be vacating its garrison on [less than 1 line not declassified] in a convoy headed towards a railroad loading area. [less than 1 line not declassified] the activity at the garrison seemed normal, with the vehicles apparently returned to their sheds. However, a camp of 110 tents was still set up in a training area some seven kilometers away. As is the case with the units at Kushka, a major field training exercise probably would require some call-up of reservists. Moreover, we cannot determine whether the tent camp belongs to the motorized rifle regiment that apparently came out of the Termez garrison on [less than 1 line, classification, and codeword not declassified] Evidence of Previous Augmentation of Border Divisions 13. [3 lines not declassified] After one week, the regiment was transferred by railroad via Alma Ata to Termez where it remained for about two weeks, then transferred to a tent camp in Kushka. The reasons for the mobilization type call-up and move, according to [1 line not declassified] was the unsettled situation in Iran and Afghanistan. [classification marking not declassified] 14. From information furnished [less than 1 line not declassified], the MR was at Termez during the period 13–27 March and at Kushka from 27 March to 15 April. [less than 1 line not declassified] the Kushka Army Barracks installation during this timeframe revealed a high level of activity at the installation and in the surrounding training areas. Equipment was observed in four bivouac areas north, south, east and west of the installation from [less than 1 line, classification marking, and codeword not declassified] 15. There was no reason on the basis only of imagery to identify this activity as involving elements that were not drawn from the motorized rifle division normally based in the Kushka area. [1 line, classification marking, and codeword not declassified] 16. We believe this information also is significant in that it reveals that divisional combat units were fleshed out with reservists and moved several hundred kilometers to the Afghanistan border in one week with no clear indication of what had transpired. [classification marking not declassified] Douglas J. MacEachin3 Director 3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
