Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite systems.] Turning to anti-satellite systems, Gromyko said that Secretary Vance and he had discussed this matter just two days ago.2 He did not believe it necessary to repeat what he had said to Secretary Vance. The President was well aware of the Soviet position. The difference between our respective positions was very great indeed, and he would ask the President to take a more objective look at this matter. An agreement could not possibly be one-sided, benefiting the United States alone. When Gromyko turned to conventional arms transfers, the President interjected a few comments on the anti-satellite talks. We had not complained about the Soviet-manned Soyuz/Salyut flights, and had not asserted that they were anti-satellite systems. Our space shuttle will not be designed as an anti-satellite system. It was the very center of our space effort in the future. The President hoped that this would not be allowed to block progress in the talks because we are going to continue developing this vehicle. This was not a departure from our overall space effort, and if the Soviets took the position that the shuttle was being developed as an anti-satellite system, we would only assure them that it definitely was not. Gromyko said that the Soviet Union was in favor of continuing these negotiations, but it would be impossible to reach agreement on the basis of the US position. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to anti-satellite systems.] 2 See Document 55. Editorial Note On January 10, 1980, Richard Burt of the New York Times reported that anonymous U.S. officials said that “President Carter has instructed ACDA to stop arms control negotiations in the wake of the Afghanistan invasion.” However, Department of State Spokesman Hodding Carter III denied that President Jimmy Carter had issued a memorandum containing such instructions. In his press guidance, Carter conceded that “the adverse political climate engendered by Soviet actions on Afghanistan already will have an impact on arms control. But as we have done in the past we will determine our policies in each arms control negotiations in accordance with our national interests. Where we see the possi-
