1014 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement F. First, consider question in terms of drafts, of concrete docu­ ments. Stated at time, your December 1 draft constituted advance over previous position. Surely effort both us ought be preserve elements of advance in draft and concentrate solely on improving it. My successive efforts followed this principle, in true spirit reciprocity and desire for progress. Do not believe you can point to any respect in which my revision April 19 sacrificed any part your Dec 1 draft. Unfortunately, your draft May 11 does sacrifice much of earlier draft. Revisions which it suggests either depart completely from spirit reciprocity and mutu­ ality, or limit validity of declaration, or introduce new and extraneous elements ambiguity. Even excludes those portions of your own Dec 1 draft I had accepted. Rather than moving direction of agreement, moves away from agreement. G. Second, consider question in terms of relations between my country yours, and of situation Taiwan area. Does not set time limit— and short one, at that—on validity of proposed declaration automat­ ically heighten [not] decrease, dangers of that situation? Does it not automatically raise question of what your side intends do at end two-­ month period? Your December 1 draft constituted apparent advance towards basis for agreement on meaningful renunciation force. That is, I felt and still feel if its ambiguities removed, as was done in my April 19 draft the Dec 1 draft could lead to removal dangers inherent in present situation in ­Taiwan area. It could thus open road toward genuine peaceful discussion and resolution differences. I felt and still feel this is direction which we should try move. Must insist your May 11 draft is step in opposite direction. Do not see how anyone could consider it as other than reversal of course, and hope you will understand my reluctance join you in backward step. 2. Wang replied (from notes and from prepared statement) he noted my statement this morning dealt general terms their previous drafts. Could not agree my assertion terming May 11 draft retrogression. It presented exactly because their previous draft Dec 1 been submitted for long time and did not achieve any result in discussions. View that sit­ uation they submitted new draft May 11. May 11 draft common points been included. In light expressed attitude US last few meetings in dis­ cussion May 11 draft, particularly in light my statement this morning as well as opposition to time limit in declaration it become quite clear my intention this discussion is try get declaration freezing status quo Taiwan area, then resort prolonged procrastination without following up with FMC in order maintain ability my country continue seizure Taiwan intervene China’s internal affairs. That position what their side would under no circumstances agree to. 3. Wang said as been repeatedly pointed out US already used force threat force in seizing China’s territory Taiwan intervening China’s
