1032  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Former and Retired Types of ICBMs and SLBMs
11. The Soviets have begun asking some good questions about the 
management regime we propose for former and retired types. I thought 
this had all been worked out in the context of data denial, but was mis-
taken. We have been fighting internally over this for a week and will 
need help from Washington on what the U.S. position really is, at least 
for retired types. There is support here for simplifying things by han-
dling former types outside the formal treaty regime—­for example, in 
an agreed statement.
Production Units
12. The promised new information on the production units com-
ing out of the Votkinsk and Pavlograd facilities has still not appeared. 
Perhaps we have convinced the Soviets this is very important and they 
are reviewing the solution they have in mind. Presumably they will try 
to convince us that “production units” are not “stages.” One helpful 
note is that Roslyakov told me that the solution they will propose could 
involve changes in Soviet production practices.
Weights and Measures
13. Progress has been made in this area as well. The Soviets are 
now willing to provide weights and dimensions for the first stages, 
and overall lengths, for all their ICBMs and SLBMs. Early exhibitions 
would be held for the SS–13, SS–24, SS–25 and SS–18. For all these, we 
would have access to real hardware to verify separate first stage and 
complete missile length. For all SLBMs (except the retired SS–N–17), 
we would have access to fully assembled missiles. As part of the deal, 
there would be no data or measurements on upper stages or self-­
contained dispensing mechanisms.
Rapid Reload
14. This continues to be a hard issue we would like to settle soon. 
The remaining problems concern the separations of space launch facili-
ties, test ranges and training facilities. One possible compromise I have 
suggested would be to allow the Soviets to permit a space launch facil-
ity to be created out of an ICBM base, provided that:
—­the entire base will be closed out except for an agreed number of 
launchers that could be retained for use as space launchers.
—­the facility would be at least 100 km from other relevant facilities.
Pigs in Space
15. The Soviets, as expected, now say they want to be able to do 
work, in a third country, on ICBMs or SLBMs to be used for space launch 
from airplanes. They insist they would not transfer ballistic missile
