150  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
undertake through appropriate means a study appraising the upper 
limits of massive concentrated nuclear detonations and their by-­
products which could be tolerated by the peoples of the world and by 
the world itself. (Paragraph 2–­a, page 3, of the enclosure to the reference 
memorandum of March 24, 1958.)
(3) The Office of Defense Mobilization and the Federal Civil 
Defense Administration, in consultation with the Special Assistant 
to the President for Science and Technology, to undertake a study 
appraising the problem of survival of populations in the period fol­
lowing their coming out of shelter after a massive nuclear exchange. 
(Paragraph 2–­b, page 3, of the enclosure to the reference memoran­
dum of March 24, 1958.)
c. A limited program of prototype construction of relatively 
small-­capacity fallout shelters, differing in design and type (includ­
ing multiple-­use) and adapted to differing conditions such as climate; 
appropriate tests by actual occupancy for realistic periods of time to be 
conducted after completion (total cost not to exceed $6 million).
d. A nation-­wide survey along the lines recommended in subpara­
graph 2–­a of NSC 5807, which reads as follows:
“2. Surveys and Pilot Studies
“a. Development of estimated availability of existing shelter on a 
sampling basis
“As a basis for national planning, definitive information is needed 
regarding the capability of existing structures to provide fallout shelter, 
particularly in large cities. The Committee recommends that a survey 
of existing structures be conducted on a sampling basis to yield such 
information. This would be handled through direct Federal contract, 
and would be completed in one year.
“-----$2.0 Millions”
e. Initiation of a program of public education along the lines rec­
ommended in paragraph 3 of NSC 5807, as modified by FCDA in the 
light of NSC discussion and as outlined below (cost estimated at not 
over $12.5 million for FY 1959; subsequent annual appropriations to be 
determined on the basis of experience):
Outline of Proposed Coverage of FCDA
Information and Education Program
(1) Objectives
(a) Public understanding of nuclear weapons effects, particularly 
radiation.
(b) Instruction on effective measures of protection.
