Afghanistan
451
In the period before the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, Paki-
stani leaders considered attempting to normalize relations with
Afghanistan and the USSR. Even now, there is some sentiment in the
government for keeping the Soviet option open. Senior foreign affairs
adviser Agha Shahi, who is thought to hold this view, may be pressing
the government to demand maximum commitments from the US in
the hope of demonstrating that Washington cannot be counted on. (S
[handling restriction not declassified])
President Zia and most military leaders would prefer—in the best
of worlds—to return to a close relationship with the US. Zia and other
top officers are all anti-Soviet, and few of them believe that better
relations with the Soviets would do more than buy time. They recognize
that any longer term benefits would founder on the higher priority the
USSR will—in a crunch—always give India. (S [handling restriction not
declassified])
Military Assistance
In recent years, Pakistani foreign policy has emphasized ties with
Islamic and nonaligned nations—a policy that probably will continue.
For Pakistan to establish close ties with the US again would require
Washington’s willingness to provide the military equipment Pakistan
believes it needs to assure its security. The Pakistanis believe a military
aid package must contain sophisticated weaponry, preferably including
A–7 aircraft—previously denied them by Washington. (S [handling
restriction not declassified])
There probably would be little give in Pakistan’s position on the
nuclear issue. The Pakistanis believe strongly that a nuclear capability
is critical for Pakistan to become a secure and important Third World
power. There is no dispute over this objective in Pakistan—Zia’s oppo-
nents also support it—and any compromise on it, regardless of other
aid from the US, would meet strong public opposition. (S [handling
restriction not declassified])
Zia would probably regard a joint Sino-American effort to resupply
and reequip his forces as a particularly attractive proposal. The Paki-
stanis are heavily dependent on their relationship with China. If they
are to risk incurring Soviet wrath, they would like to have their two
great-power allies united behind them. The popularity of China among
Pakistanis would also be a useful counter to their generally critical
attitude toward the US. (S [handling restriction not declassified])
The conclusion of a US military assistance program with Pakistan
would cause a furor in India. Indira Gandhi can be expected to launch
a vigorous campaign against new arms deliveries to Pakistan even
though India’s armed forces are overwhelmingly superior to Pakistan’s,
both in equipment and numbers of personnel. (S [handling restriction
not declassified])
