Panama  899
of opportunity to citizens of Panama for employment in the Canal 
Zone, save for security positions. Further, the United States agreed 
to evaluate, classify and title all positions in the Canal Zone without 
regard to the nationality of the incumbent or proposed incumbent and 
provide opportunity for participation in any training programs. The 
necessary legislation was passed by the Congress (Public Law 85–550, 
85th Congress) and approved on July 25, 1958. In connection with the 
implementation of this law two informal meetings have taken place 
in the Foreign Ministry and helpful suggestions were made by the 
Panamanian participants. The points raised by the Panamanian partic-
ipants were further discussed in Washington and clarifying informa-
tion will be made available to the Government of Panama as soon as 
possible. In this connection, further representations have been made 
by His Excellency President de la Guardia in a letter sent directly to 
President Eisenhower, under date of March 7, 1959, to which a direct 
reply will be forthcoming shortly.
Item 5 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached: 11 
During the First Session of the 85th Congress, the Congress 
appropriated $750,000 to defray the costs of the initial engineering 
studies and testings, drafting of plans and other preliminary work 
related to the contemplated construction of a high-­level bridge 
over the Panama Canal at Balboa, legislation which the United 
States had undertaken to seek under Item 5 of the Memorandum 
of Understandings Reached. Legislative action on a bill requesting 
an additional appropriation of $19,250,000 for construction of the 
bridge was completed on June 17, 1958, and the President approved 
the bill on June 25, 1958. In complying with this undertaking, my 
Government has provided $20,000,000 for a project which will 
make substantial immediate and long-­range contributions to the 
Panamanian economy.
Item 8 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached:
My Government has given further consideration to the provi-
sions of Item 8 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached but 
adheres to the correctness of its interpretation of the meaning and 
intent of the provisions of Item 8, including the definition of the word 
“feasible”, which is that in certain instances purchases in third coun-
tries may be made. Item 8 provides “In general connection with the 
matter of the importation of items of merchandise for resale in the 
sales stores in the Canal Zone, it will be the practice of the agencies 
11 For the text of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached, see the Department 
of State Bulletin, February 7, 1955, p. 241.
