1102 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Allocation of Resources —IDCA will review the allocation of resources for the various development assistance programs that the United States now supports in order to prepare a U.S. development assistance policy for the 1980s. The 1980 budget request calls for 35 percent of our development assistance to support multilateral efforts, with the remaining 65 percent to support our bilateral program. The 1970s have seen the creation of several new and worthwhile international funds. Donor countries have maintained their commitment to growth by their support of international development banks and institutions. Although our bilateral program has grown, our commitment to multilateral efforts has been even greater. Regionally, also, there have been changes in the allocations of bilateral and multilateral donors— from the relatively wealthier to the poorer developing countries. The complexity of the development task, the size of the capital requirements, and your commitment to cooperate and consult with Congress in the design and implementation of our development programs, mean that we must review now the patterns of assistance that we will implement in the 1980s. Fundamental to these allocation questions—and to the credibility of our efforts to help alleviate Third World poverty—is the amount of development assistance we provide. In the 1950s and 1960s, we led the world and urged and cajoled the other industrial nations to follow our aid example; they rose to the challenge while our assistance efforts flagged. At 0.2 percent of GNP, our development assistance is near the bottom among the industrialized democracies. In real terms, it is lower now than in 1971. As you have pledged on earlier occasions, we must renew our efforts to reverse this decline. 5. Increased Efficiency and Effectiveness —In the case of AID, an increased assistance program will be carried out with reduced staff by improving the efficiency of AID’s efforts. By studying the most effective techniques used for providing assistance to countries at different stages of development, we will be able to increase the amount of assistance provided without increasing our staff. Additionally, by modifying the procedures now used in AID, it should be possible to carry out our programs more rapidly. IDCA is preparing Development Assistance Strategies for key countries. This will enable assistance to be provided in a more rational and coordinated fashion. Working closely with the Treasury Department and the Agency for International Development, we are reshaping an early-warning system in order to enable U.S. overseas personnel to react to the
