World Hunger and Food Policy
653
prolonged period. But, in this unlikely event, threats to US interests
posed by the impact of food-related issues on international politics
would become more intense and dangerous. Strident LDC demands for
their “fair share” of a scarce resource—even the employment of ter-
rorism and “nuclear diplomacy” to affect US decisions—might result,
for example.
In addition to its impact on the precarious balance between food
supply and demand, world population growth is likely to contribute,
directly or indirectly, to domestic upheavals and international conflicts
that could adversely affect US interests. Population growth will also re-
inforce the politicization of international economic relations and inten-
sify the drive of LDCs for a redistribution of wealth and of authority in
international affairs. Over the long term, the ecological and environ-
mental consequences of population growth might physically threaten
US interests. Implementation of long-term goals for slowing world
population growth will at times necessarily come into conflict with
such immediate requirements as maintaining stability in and effective
ties with certain poor countries.
[Omitted here are two short segments on terrorism and nuclear
proliferation, Chapter II: Energy Dependence, and Chapter III: LDC
Demands for a “New International Economic Order” (NIEO).]
IV. World Food and Population Trends
A. The Setting
In the early 1970s, unfavorable weather, crop failures, massive So-
viet grain imports, the depletion of grain reserves, declining fish
catches, and skyrocketing food prices caused an unprecedented fo-
cusing of international attention on the precarious balance between
food supply and demand, and politicized the issues of population
growth and food distribution. As the world’s pre-eminent food ex-
porter, the US is uniquely situated to realize significant gains—and im-
posing problems—from increasing international reliance on its agricul-
tural production. This dependence could help the US manage some of
the global issues discussed in this report and increase US influence over
international affairs generally, but world food and population trends
portend threats as well as opportunities. Interconnections between
population and food-related developments and other global issues,
moreover, complicate the challenges that the US will face in foreign
policy generally.
B. Food: The Dynamics of Demand and Supply
Worldwide demand for food is rising primarily because the earth’s
population increases by some 65–75 million each year. This increase
stems in large part from the failure of birth rates in the populous LDCs
