1979  577
Secretary Brown summarized the DOD point paper on population 
targeting by noting the great uncertainties that would exist in the event 
the population were dispersed, and how those uncertainties about 
the real location of the Soviet population could cause gross misalloca-
tions of weapons. He noted that DOD had studies underway to reduce 
uncertainties as to population location specifically, on how and at what 
times it might be targetable, but these studies are not yet complete.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how the logic of targeting Soviet population 
would be affected by the presence or the absence of US population 
dispersal.
Admiral Murphy noted that DOD studies were not looking at US 
population dispersal.
Secretary Brown commented that question here was how to target 
Soviet population in the presence of uncertainty as to where it would 
be located.
Dr. Brzezinski said that our approach to targeting Soviet population 
should be influenced by any asymmetries in the vulnerability of the 
respective populations.
Secretary Brown noted that the not yet existing FEMA was now cus-
todian of the US side of the problem, but that DOD would have to do 
the evaluation looking at both sides.
Mr. Slocombe promised to report back with a schedule and an out-
line for a study of relative population vulnerabilities and their relation 
to targeting.
Spurgeon Keeny reminded the group that much data was available 
from earlier Civil Defense studies.
Mr. Slocombe pointed out that those studies contain artificial 
assumptions about the actual locations of Soviet evacuated population.
Secretary Brown called attention to a recent Soviet Civil Defense 
CPX that revealed some information on CD planning for Petropav-
lovsk. He noted that some 16% of the population covered by that paper 
exercise had been expected to become casualties.
Dr. Brzezinski reaffirmed the need for an outline and a target date 
for a study of this issue.
Secretary Brown then introduced the discussion of targeting lead-
ership: Our basic problem is we don’t know how the Soviet leadership 
would function and where in fact it would be in a war. We now tar-
get their peacetime locations and known bunkers, but they have many 
bunkers (all of which we can’t be sure we know about) and elaborate 
hardened communications. This is one reason, he said, why accurate 
missile warheads are useful. He observed that the US leadership struc-
ture appeared much more vulnerable in this respect and our problem 
here was mainly to fix our vulnerabilities.
