August 8–September 17, 1978 165 anon. Moreover, a declared American stand in this direction, would constitute a positive and constructive contribution. Undoubtedly, a continuation of the Israeli attitude constitutes a factor threatening the security of the region. 12. In conclusion, would reaffirm the objectives of our policy in Lebanon, namely the unity of the land and people of Lebanon, the sovereignty of the central government and the stopping of fighting. Acting on these principles, the Syrian forces in Lebanon practice a maximum degree of self-control, while efforts are being exerted to help the Lebanese Government by attempting to reach a political solution acceptable to the various parties and by taking measures conducive to maintaining security, upholding the authority of the law and safeguarding the country’s unity and integrity. Syria is as desirous to protect the safety of the citizens of Lebanon, regardless of their social or political adherence, as that of its own citizens. They are all our brothers for whose sake we have endured a great deal of suffering, burdens and sacrifices. With best regards and wishes, Hafez al-Assad President of the Syrian Arab Republic Damascus, September 10, 1978 End text. 2. Comment: Dabboul seemed very pleased with the contents of President al-Assad’s letter, obviously believing that they were responsive to the points made by our President in his letter. After reading the letter, I said I was glad to see that President al-Assad had alluded to “efforts being exerted by the Lebanese Government . . . to reach a political solution.” As he knew, we felt very strongly about this, believing that further military actions would only complicate the situation in Lebanon and risk escalation. The situation is very tense and unless Syria exercises caution, there is the ever present danger of Israeli intervention. Dabboul echoed the standard SARG position that the Syrian Army is merely reactive to provocations. 3. I then reminded Dabboul of our proposal that the Syrian Government reiterate publicly its ultimate intentions in Lebanon, including an eventual troop withdrawal. Dabboul enthusiastically showed me a copy of the daily newspaper Al-Ba’ath in which Assad was quoted in a German interview as not only reiterating Syria’s “honorable” intentions in Lebanon but also as saying that Syrian forces would withdraw from Lebanon the minute they were requested to do so by the Lebanese Government.
