August 8–September 17, 1978
165
anon. Moreover, a declared American stand in this direction, would
constitute a positive and constructive contribution.
Undoubtedly, a continuation of the Israeli attitude constitutes a
factor threatening the security of the region.
12. In conclusion, would reaffirm the objectives of our policy in
Lebanon, namely the unity of the land and people of Lebanon, the sov-
ereignty of the central government and the stopping of fighting. Acting
on these principles, the Syrian forces in Lebanon practice a maximum
degree of self-control, while efforts are being exerted to help the Leba-
nese Government by attempting to reach a political solution acceptable
to the various parties and by taking measures conducive to main-
taining security, upholding the authority of the law and safeguarding
the country’s unity and integrity.
Syria is as desirous to protect the safety of the citizens of Lebanon,
regardless of their social or political adherence, as that of its own cit-
izens. They are all our brothers for whose sake we have endured a great
deal of suffering, burdens and sacrifices.
With best regards and wishes,
Hafez al-Assad
President of the Syrian Arab Republic
Damascus, September 10, 1978
End text.
2. Comment: Dabboul seemed very pleased with the contents of
President al-Assad’s letter, obviously believing that they were respon-
sive to the points made by our President in his letter. After reading the
letter, I said I was glad to see that President al-Assad had alluded to “ef-
forts being exerted by the Lebanese Government . . . to reach a political
solution.” As he knew, we felt very strongly about this, believing that
further military actions would only complicate the situation in Leb-
anon and risk escalation. The situation is very tense and unless Syria
exercises caution, there is the ever present danger of Israeli interven-
tion. Dabboul echoed the standard SARG position that the Syrian
Army is merely reactive to provocations.
3. I then reminded Dabboul of our proposal that the Syrian Gov-
ernment reiterate publicly its ultimate intentions in Lebanon, including
an eventual troop withdrawal. Dabboul enthusiastically showed me a
copy of the daily newspaper Al-Ba’ath in which Assad was quoted in a
German interview as not only reiterating Syria’s “honorable” inten-
tions in Lebanon but also as saying that Syrian forces would withdraw
from Lebanon the minute they were requested to do so by the Lebanese
Government.
