1034
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
expand to a large area extending at some points up to 1500 miles from
the Latin American coast. While the authors of the Treaty presumably
intended this provision to have some constraining effect, our legal
analysis indicates that the activation of this “extended zone of applica-
tion” would not have any practical effect on U.S. obligations under Pro-
tocol I and II, and would therefore not in any way restrict U.S. freedom
of navigation on the high seas surrounding Latin America. However, to
insure against future controversy, we would want to place our inter-
pretation of this provision on record at the time we signed the Protocol
and deposited our instrument of ratification (presumably after con-
sulting with key treaty parties and determining that they would not ob-
ject to our interpretation).
Advantages of U.S. Adherence
—Would have a favorable effect on U.S. relations with Latin
America, particularly with Mexico, the principal sponsor of the Treaty,
and Panama.
—Would generate pressures for Soviet adherence to Protocol II,
which would obligate the Soviets not to store or deploy nuclear
weapons in any Latin American territory.
—Would enhance prospects for adherence to the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco by Brazil, Argentina and Cuba although the latter two would still
have the legal power to block the Treaty’s full entry into force if they
considered it in their interest to do so. (In the absence of such adher-
ence, there is a serious risk that Argentina and Brazil will follow the In-
dian route to a nuclear explosive capability.)
—Would not affect any current U.S. operational requirements or
deployments.
Disadvantages of U.S. Adherence
—Would rule out existing contingency plans for storing nuclear
ASW devices in Puerto Rico, although alternative (perhaps less op-
timal) means for implementing those plans would be available.
—Would limit U.S. flexibility to deal with possible future threats in
the Caribbean and South America by deploying or storing nuclear
weapons in our Protocol I territories.
—If we adhered without requiring adherence by other holdouts
(e.g., Cuba, USSR), could be perceived as giving up military options in
the Caribbean area without requiring reciprocal restraints and as re-
ducing the leverage we might otherwise have for inducing those
holdouts to take corresponding actions.
Options
(1) Continue existing policy.
