893.74/613: Telegram
[Document 770]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, September 21, 1925—4 p.m.
[Received September 21—3:33 p.m.]
405. Your telegram 258 of September 19, 11 a.m.
1. The Chief Executive assured me this morning in an interview that the
Federal Telegraph Company’s contract will be carried out and that whole-
hearted support will be given by China to the opendoor policy which China
considers necessary to its own interests. Tuan also stated that his Government
is most anxious not to have any one nationality control its wireless
communication.
2. Tuan was surprisingly frank in speaking of China’s weakness and of the
difficulties which could be created by Japan, especially in Manchuria, if
China should antagonize the Japanese on a question which he said they had
presented to him as a life and death matter because of fear that the more
powerful wireless station to be built at Shanghai would be able through
interference to dominate Japan’s system of naval radio communications.
3. Tuan requested earnestly that we allay the apprehensions of the Japanese
by agreeing to tripartite discussions. I insisted that we would not be in a
position to take part on a satisfactory basis in any discussions with Japan
until our interests had been placed on an equal footing with Japanese interests
and until the Chinese Government had proven its willingness to act according
to its obligations in this matter. Tuan then inquired whether I would be
willing to give assurance that after the Federal contract had been put into
effect we would be ready to discuss a mutual accommodation of interests
between the Federal and Mitsui Companies. I had conveyed this very
assurance to him in a conversation a month ago and I told him at once that I
was ready to renew the assurance on behalf of both our Government and the
American interests concerned and that we would be prepared at that time to
deal with the question on a most generous and friendly basis.
4. Tuan took this as a concession by us which would remove to a great extent
his difficulties in dealing with the Japanese. He intimated that if I would
