September 18–December 16, 1978 453 thing to try to do what is possible to encourage the Saudis and the Jordanians to support the West Bank discussions. If you can do that, I would be very grateful. President Sadat: I shall do this and you have my word. If the Israelis agree on my point, everything will be easy for both of us. They will see the results in the end. They will see that real autonomy in Gaza will move the hold [whole] thing, Mr. President. President Carter: I understand that. Is it possible for you to meet personally with Fahd and/or Hussein? President Sadat: Not yet. I am punishing them for what happened in Baghdad. I am in full control. Nothing makes me waver. There are forty million Egyptians, the supreme of the Arab world, behind me. There are more than 90 percent of the Arab world behind me. President Carter: I don’t disagree with that. I think you are absolutely right. But how soon do you think you might be able to meet the Saudis or Hussein? President Sadat: Give me Gaza. With the first phase of withdrawal and I am responsible to continue the whole thing. With that I make my whole proposal. The West Bank is a bit hard and I know their schemes for the West Bank. It is hard, but let us do in Gaza with the Sinai. As I tell you, it will be very easy after that. There should be something on the ground so their eyes see it. But the Israelis are considering now that they have much to do with the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, this makes the other camp think that this is a separate agreement. President Carter: I will try to work on the how the Gaza Strip issues impact on the others because there is a real limit to how much more time I can put on this effort and everytime we negotiate a final draft over here with the negotiators, including Israelis and Egyptians, they go back home and we have to do it all over again because new points are raised and new disputes arise. I just hope that if you’ll let me try to work on this Gaza question that you have just raised, that you will really try to be flexible on the other points. We have negotiated a good document, and I hope that you will go over it with Ambassador Eilts and be as flexible as possible on it and back me as you did at Camp David. President Sadat: I shall always respect you, Mr. President, but let me in all candor tell you. I must tell you the truth because we are saying together the same thing. President Carter: Well, you know we never have let the Iraqis and the Syrians negotiate for us before, and I think that the benefits of peace, as supported by you and me, will be obvious to all. I have very good hopes that the Saudis will give us support. I think Hussein will come later on. But, I don’t think that you and I can hope to please the more radical Arabs, no matter what we do.
