Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
517
ment. These concerns have helped give a special character to this Ad-
ministration’s policies. Our human rights policies, which I believe are
well conceived and managed, provide the philosophical core of our ap-
proach to the world.5
It will be especially important that we continue to work very
closely with our allies abroad. We may find ourselves increasingly
turning to them to share responsibilities in areas where we have in the
past been able to exercise power almost exclusively on our own.6 This
can be turned to our benefit by injecting increasing vitality and life into
our alliance relationships. As the international system becomes more
pluralistic and, during the next year or two, as the financial resources
we can use to support our diplomacy become more constrained, we
need to help our public think all the more in terms of Western interests,
influence, and power rather than exclusively in terms of U.S. interests,
influence and power. Our diplomacy in Africa and Europe over the
past two years, for example with regard to Namibia and Zaire, CSCE
and Cyprus, illustrates the advantages of such an approach.
We must also continue to project confidence in Western and Amer-
ican power and policies. We should emphasize our defense moderniza-
tion efforts and our strong ties to NATO, Japan, ANZUS and a growing
number of developing countries. While firmly responding to Soviet ac-
tivities in ways that emphasize our own advantages in the Third
World, we should be careful not to emphasize excessively Soviet
strengths and gains in our own statements.7 Doing so would create
fears within NATO and here at home that we cannot manage East-West
relationships effectively. If we were to let our rhetoric run ahead of the
practical responses realistically available to us, we would create expec-
tations about our ability to dominate events that we could not then
meet. This plays into the critics’ hands, and creates a damaging and er-
roneous impression of weakness. It would hurt us at home and abroad,
and could be especially damaging in SALT debates.
Running through this analysis is the point that we must, during
the next two years, give consolidation of gains on SALT, China, MTN
and the Middle East priority over other policies and new initiatives.
The following thoughts on our priorities for the next two years repre-
5 The President wrote “True” in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.
6 The President underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “increas-
ingly” and ending with “responsibilities” and added “good” in the left-hand margin next
to this sentence.
7 The President underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “not” and
ending with “gains.” In the left-hand margin, he drew an arrow to this sentence and
added: “Important for DOD & NSC.” In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, he
wrote: “Unfortunately, this is what we have been doing.” The President turned the mem-
orandum horizontally in order to write this comment.
