National Security Policy 173 weapons will be used them when required to achieve national objectives. Advance authorization for their use in either general or limited war is as determined by the President.” REASON: It is essential that U.S. policy, in an era of relative nuclear parity, be extremely flexible and provide for adoption of whatever forces and weapons best serve U.S. interests. 6. Page 5, paragraph 13—Change to read: “13. In carrying out our aim of deterring general war, the United States must develop and maintain under its own control, as part of its mil­ itary forces, sufficient its effective nuclear retaliatory power and must keep that power secure from neutralization or from a Soviet Knockout blow; even by surprise capability to reduce the Soviet powercomplex to impotency. To the degree that it approaches invulnerability, this force can be made progressively smaller without any decrease in the certainty of its avail­ ability for effective application. Security of the deterrent force is a crucial factor in obviating the requirement for immediate or automatic political decision as to its use. Thus, it would minimize the risk of hasty or ill-­considered deci­ sion in time of crisis. The United States must also develop and maintain adequate military and non-­military programs for continental defense. Defensive elements must be premised on acceptance of the fact that general war would probably result in large scale damage to the United States. The national effort devoted to defense should provide for early warning, defense of retaliatory forces, and a level of defense in vital areas sufficient to require a significant enemy effort to overcome it, leaving no single threat totally unop­ posed. So long as the Soviet leaders are uncertain of their ability to neu­ tralize the U.S. nuclear retaliatory power, there is little reason to expect them deliberately to initiate general war or actions which they believe would carry appreciable risk of general war, and thereby endanger the survival of the USSR.” REASON: To establish terms of reference for the deterrent force and defense requirements. 7. Page 5, paragraph 14—Delete and substitute the following: “14. a. There is a steadily increasing probability that armed con­ flicts of the future will be limited wars. Limited war can be defined as an armed conflict in which U.S. national survival is not directly at stake. It would probably be characterized by mutually accepted limitations on objectives, locale, weapons and participants. While maintaining our nuclear capability to deter general war, and during a period of relative nuclear parity, it becomes increasingly important further to develop and maintain a capability to oppose limited military aggression wher­ ever U.S. security interests are involved. b. In each case of limited military aggression, the United States must determine whether: (1) vital U.S. interests require the defeat of such limited aggression by prompt and resolute application of whatever
