98 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Right to Deploy Without Further Reference to ABM Treaty (S) All agree that Article XV of the ABM Treaty provides the United States with the legal right to withdraw from the Treaty (following six months prior notice) and thereafter to deploy ballistic missile defenses beyond the limits prescribed if it “decides that extraordinary event related to the subject matter of [the] Treaty have jeopardized its supreme national interests.” This article was intended to provide a broad right of withdrawal to complement rights under customary international law, providing parties maximum flexibility in future situations. (S) The terms of Article XV are deliberately general and, therefore, do not provide a specific legal standard which must be met in order to justify a decision by the President to withdraw from the Treaty to deploy effective ballistic missile defenses. Nevertheless, as a practical matter, the President’s flexibility would depend on the degree to which he could make a credible case that he faced “extraordinary events,” that these events are “related to the subject matter of the Treaty,” and that the “supreme national interests of the United States” have been “jeopardized.” Depending on the circumstances existing at the time of such a decision, (especially if the Soviets were in compliance with the ABM Treaty and a START agreement), it might be difficult to derive a politically sustainable rationale for withdrawal under Article XV. There are two views on the significance of this situation. (S) Removing Article XV an Important DST Objective—One view is that to avoid this potential political hurdle, it is in the interest of the United States to establish the right to deploy defenses in the future, should it wish to do so, without further reference to Article XV of the ABM Treaty. (S) Removing Article XV Not an Important DST Objective—The other view is that this divisive debate will not be mitigated by achievement of this DST objective. Those who oppose the withdrawal from the Treaty would oppose the exercise of the right to deploy, regardless of whether the Soviet agreed to the right to deploy without further reference to Article XV; they also might question whether it is in our interests to achieve this DST objective which would create a certain risk that the Soviets could gain a military advantage—­if they were to deploy and the United States did not. DST Objectives v. START Agreement (S) There also are two views concerning the question of whether the United States should continue to pursue the fundamental objectives of DST, even if it risks blocking a START agreement. (S) No Concessions on DST Objectives—One view is that at this point in the START and Defense and Space negotiations, this question need not be answered now and, in fact, may never need to be answered. In
