368 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement other programs, such as investments in power projects, that benefit them less obviously. The peasants, 65 percent of the population, are in a state of “turbulent unrest” (see Memorandum, same conversation, “Role of the Military”), aggravated by Communists, priests and agricultural and nutritional technicians who are telling them, “You don’t have enough food”. The peasants feel the government has deliberately abandoned and left them in misery. Their growing susceptibility to the appeal of Castro’s land “reform” heightens the urgent need for effective Colombian action with U.S. help in sound land reform. President Lleras said Colombia is attempting land reform of two types: (1) Colonization of Government lands, as in the Magdalena Valley; (2) “parcelization” (purchase and redistribution) and resettlement of private lands that are both rich and idle in areas “where the minifundio (small holding) problem is terrible”. In such areas parcelization is “politically indispensable”. In contrast to Castro’s program, Colombia’s is sensible and responsible and is implemented by a well established and reputable agrarian bank (state entity). For any private lands that it purchases, Colombia makes prompt and fair payment. President Lleras emphasized two difficulties that are impeding Colombia’s development of sound land reform projects: (1) Projects are complex, (2) They are costly. It is not enough merely to move peasants onto vacant land. They must have credit for tools, seeds, fertilizer, and community facilities such as roads and schools. Colombia has plans for but does not yet have under way a single pilot project. The Secretary said he fully concurred in the desirability of Colombia’s land reform, as described by President Lleras, and the question was to determine how the United States could most effectively help in it. Mr. Rubottom declared the United States would be glad to study ways in which it could assist with maximum economic and political effect, and Ambassador McIntosh said that if President Lleras were to desire it the United States could make available experts to help in preparing a sound pilot project. Mr. Mann observed that, in view of the population explosion, the United States possibly had been placing too much emphasis on industrialization and should shift some of this emphasis to increasing employment opportunities on the land. President Lleras heartily agreed, pointing out that Colombia annually has at least 120,000 newly employable persons seeking jobs in the cities, that industrialization has not and cannot provide enough work, and that Colombia must provide more inducements and opportunities for productive work on the land.
