1174
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(4) Scheduling of further PrepCom work and intersessional
working arrangements: we believe it will be important to maintain a
pattern of informal consultations and discussions during the summer
so that Delegations can gain a clearer understanding of the positions of
different governments and identify areas of likely agreement and pos-
sible disagreement to facilitate greater understanding of the expecta-
tions of different governments and identification of likely areas of
accord and disagreement. Since there appears to be a growing expecta-
tion that discussions at the 32nd UNGA will significantly shape the
course of preparations during 1978 as well as the Special Session itself,
it is essential that a groundwork of common understanding be laid be-
fore then.
We do not believe that elaborate arrangements need be made for a
series of informal meetings during the summer having a specific man-
date (e.g., to report to the PrepCom in September). But we would
strongly favor action at the May meeting to make possible periodic in-
formal meetings for exchanges of views on the proposed agenda items
and other issues. The Delegation should work with others to develop
support for such meetings and to take the necessary administrative
steps to make them possible.
Should it become obvious that the second Preparatory Committee
meeting will not go beyond the development of a skeletal agenda for
the Session (e.g., along the lines proposed in the Non-Aligned “infor-
mation” paper), we would be prepared to consider a 4th, and as yet un-
scheduled Preparatory Committee meeting to take place during the
spring of 1978 to allow further consideration of a detailed agenda by
the Preparatory Committee.
(5) Creation of subcommittees or working groups: the Delegation
should not object to a decision in principle on the creation of subcom-
mittees or working groups of the whole corresponding to the major ele-
ments of the agenda and to the anticipated components of the final
document. Care should be taken to avoid creation of a WDC sub-
committee or a sub-committee focused on the so-called disarmament-
development link. Further guidance on these issues will be provided as
needed in the light of developments at the PrepCom meeting and the
Delegation’s recommendations. Our major procedural concern with re-
spect to the establishment of sub-committees or working groups would
be to avoid an excessive amount of simultaneous meetings. We would
prefer that subcommittee meetings be held at different times during the
preparatory phase. If there is a proposal to establish any sub-committee
or working group with a mandate to continue its work on an interses-
sional basis, the Delegation should report the details and further guid-
ance will be provided.
Christopher
