802
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
therefore, focus on averting the further spread under national control of facil-
ities and materials capable of use for weapons purposes and on strengthening
safeguards and other controls over all peaceful nuclear activities.
Our non-proliferation policy must also take account of the legiti-
mate role nuclear power can play in contributing to world energy
needs and, specifically, in reducing reliance on costly and uncertain
sources of oil. Non-proliferation and energy cooperation objectives
need not conflict: even if national access to weapons-usable material is
limited, supplies of non-sensitive fuels and reactors can continue; con-
versely failure to contain proliferation risks will not only seriously re-
duce world security but will also result ultimately in serious setbacks
to, if not curtailment of, the continued application of peaceful nuclear
power.
The US has had a long-term interest in assuring that nuclear power
should be available, but only under the most rigorous safeguards, and
that the growth and direction of the industry should not outpace
progress in forging the necessary protective constraints and institu-
tions. To this end, important protective arrangements were developed
over the past two decades including bilateral constraints and controls,
IAEA safeguards, and the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Since the Indian test of 1974,4 which demonstrated that a devel-
oping country could produce nuclear explosives by misusing peaceful
nuclear cooperation, the United States has taken a number of initiatives
seeking broad supplier state acceptance of common export policies.
These include not only safeguards and control over nuclear exports
and strengthening of the international safeguards system, but also ef-
forts to forestall the acquisition of sensitive facilities by countries not al-
ready possessing them and minimizing access to and improving con-
trol over weapons-usable materials.
These and other related actions were stated in President Ford’s
October 28 nuclear policy message.5 The key decision was that repro-
cessing would no longer be regarded as inevitable and should not pro-
ceed unless there is sound reason to conclude that the world commu-
nity can effectively overcome the associated risks of proliferation.
Avoidance of proliferation must take precedence over economic in-
terests. In addition, the Ford statement called for a three-year morato-
rium on transfers of sensitive technology while alternative ways of
meeting fuel cycle needs were explored, coupled with a domestic pause
on commercial reprocessing pending evaluation of its proliferation
risks. This latter decision was taken in the context of reprocessing for
4 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–8, Documents on South Asia, 1973–1976,
Documents 161, 162, 163, 164, 167, 168, 169, and 170.
5 See footnote 2, Document 317.
