Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1167
heavy bombers shall be based only at training facilities for heavy 
bombers.
10. Each Party shall locate solid rocket motors for first stages of 
ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs only at locations where produc-
tion and storage, or testing of such motors occurs and at production 
facilities for ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs. Such solid rocket 
motors may also be moved between these locations. Solid rocket 
motors with nozzles attached for the first stages of ICBMs for mobile 
launchers of ICBMs shall only be located at production facilities for 
ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs and at locations where testing 
of such solid rocket motors occurs. Locations where such solid rocket 
motors are permitted shall be specified in Annex I to the Memorandum 
of Understanding.
11. With respect to locational restrictions on facilities:
(a) Each Party shall locate production facilities for ICBMs of a par-
ticular type, repair facilities for ICBMs of a particular type, storage facil-
ities for ICBMs of a particular type, ICBM loading facilities for ICBMs 
of a particular type, and conversion or elimination facilities for ICBMs 
of a particular type no less than 100 kilometers from any ICBM base 
for silo launchers of ICBMs of that type of ICBM, any ICBM base for 
rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs of that type of ICBM, any deployment 
area for road-mobile launchers of ICBMs of that type of ICBM, any test 
range from which ICBMs of that type are flight-tested, any production 
facility for mobile launchers of ICBMs of that type of ICBM, any repair 
facility for mobile launchers of ICBMs of that type of ICBM, any storage 
facility for mobile launchers of ICBMs of that type of ICBM, and any 
training facility for ICBMs at which non-deployed mobile launchers of 
ICBMs are located. New facilities at which non-deployed ICBMs for 
silo launchers of ICBMs of any type of ICBM may be located, and new 
storage facilities for ICBM emplacement equipment, shall be located 
no less than 100 kilometers from any ICBM base for silo launchers of 
ICBMs, except that existing storage facilities for intermediate-range 
missiles, located less than 100 kilometers from an ICBM base for silo 
launchers of ICBMs or from a test range, may be converted into storage 
facilities for ICBMs not specified for that ICBM base or that test range.
(b) Each Party shall locate production facilities for mobile launch-
ers of ICBMs of a particular type of ICBM, repair facilities for mobile 
launchers of ICBMs of a particular type of ICBM, and storage facilities 
for mobile launchers of ICBMs of a particular type of ICBM no less than 
100 kilometers from any ICBM base for mobile launchers of ICBMs of 
that type of ICBM and any test range from which ICBMs of that type 
are flight-tested.
(c) Each Party shall locate test ranges and space launch facilities 
no less than 100 kilometers from any ICBM base for silo launchers of
