554 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 not see this situation as unprecedented. In the case of the Pueblo,12 we had waited far longer than this, and the risks associated with escalation at that time were less than they are today in the Gulf region. Perhaps the Pueblo affair was not one of the high points of American diplomacy, but we have to consider the problem we have today with the Islamic nations and their possible reaction to a blockade or similar use of military force. Secretary Brown noted the dangers of a Soviet reaction or of pushing the Iranians closer to the Soviets by our acts. Mr. Carlucci noted that our evidence indicates that the Soviets are making gains inside Iran through the Tudeh Party. He observed that our problem remained what it had been all along: how to influence Khomeini. He felt that Khomeini would not respond to this kind of pressure.13 (S) Dr. Brzezinski said he did not believe that this situation was comparable to the Pueblo incident which had involved a U.S. Navy ship on an admitted spy mission. He was not convinced that the Islamic countries would necessarily respond negatively. He felt that our continued lack of action was losing us prestige and respect. He recognized the validity of the possible Soviet reaction, citing Gromyko’s speech this morning14 in which he had identified himself with the Iranians. Mr. Aaron disputed the CIA evaluation of Khomeini. At every point, Khomeini had taken extreme steps to assure his own personal security, and the Iranians had backed down quickly in the face of our warning on November 20.15 Khomeini wanted more than anything else to insure the success of the Islamic Revolution and he was not anxious to become a martyr. Secretary Brown cited a psychiatrist friend who observed that a man with a martyr complex seldom lives to become 79 years old. (S) The SCC agreed that it was necessary to consider seriously the option of a warning and possible intermediate escalatory steps. This would be discussed again at the SCC meeting on Thursday.16 (S) [Omitted here is material on Afghanistan.] 12 The U.S. Navy intelligence ship U.S.S. Pueblo and its crew were captured by North Korea in January 1968. After months of negotiations, the ship and crewmen were released in December 1968. For documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XXIX, Part 1, Korea. 13 Carter wrote in the margin: “Consider: Imposing sanctions, seize assets, expel diplomats, escalate condemnatory rhetoric & be prepared to move on any or all.” 14 At a dinner for visiting Hungarian Foreign Minister Frigyes Puja in Moscow, Gromyko accused the United States of following a global policy of expansion and aggression and praised Iran for defending its national interests against U.S. threats and blackmail. (“Soviets rip U.S. ‘deceit’,” Chicago Tribune, March 18, 1980, p. 2) 15 Presumably a reference to statements by both White House and Department of State officials on November 20 and 21 that asserted that Iran would be held accountable if the hostages were harmed and raised the possibility of military action. (Josh M. Goshko and Edward Walsh, “Washington: Toughening Stance, U.S. Raps Khomeini For Stirring Turmoil,” Washington Post, November 22, 1979, p. A1) 16 March 20. See Document 214.
