Chapter 2, January–June 1989  195
Annex B
Paper Prepared in the Intelligence Community30
Washington, undated
SSI
The following text addresses the contribution to monitoring that 
suspect site inspections (SSI) provide:
The suspect site inspection regime tabled by the U.S. could help 
deter the Soviets from some forms of cheating, could help resolve 
ambiguous situations in cases where Soviet actions were suspicious to 
us, and could provide us valuable information on missile-­related facil-
ities in the Soviet Union. We judge, however, that under the inspec-
tion regime as currently envisioned by the United States we would be 
unlikely to detect Soviet cheating because the Soviets would be able to 
refuse inspections of facilities that are not on the “SSI list.” (S/NF)
The Soviets are highly unlikely to cheat on START Treaty limits at 
sites subject to mandatory, short-­notice inspection, especially if non-­
inspectable sites are available. Any Soviet cheating would be designed 
to avoid such inspections and they would make every effort to thwart 
any inspection that threatened to uncover a violation. On the other 
hand, the Intelligence Community judges that an inspection regime 
that guaranteed access to undeclared production facilities, that is, with-
out a right of refusal, could help verify a START agreement in a number 
of ways:
— It would help deter the Soviets from cheating more effectively 
than an inspection regime that includes the right to refuse inspec-
tions of undeclared production facilities. If the United States had 
the right to inspect certain Soviet facilities without a right of refusal, 
it would increase the operational difficulty, risk, and cost for the 
Soviets to develop and maintain an effective covert missile produc-
tion capability.
— It could help us uncover cheating. Even if we did not see a 
“smoking gun,” short-­notice, on-­site inspections could reveal indica-
tions of illegal activity. In particular, we judge that a guaranteed right 
to conduct on-­site inspections of suspected missile production facilities 
could substantially improve our ability to detect covert production of 
treaty-­limited solid propellant motors at those facilities. (S/NF)
30 Secret; Noforn.
