874 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III hard loans from international financial institutions would continue to be used to meet other needs for aid to middle-income countries, e.g., discouraging emigration to the US and encouraging regional collaboration in the Caribbean. Because the poor countries have a limited capacity to design and implement projects, this strategy would allow only moderate increases in AID funding levels, unless we either moved toward a broader interpretation of current Congressional mandates regarding the kinds of projects that can be aided or resumed substantial aid to India. If these changes were made, this strategy would probably result in more aid going to poor countries than any other; as a result, US influence in seeking to improve these countries’ policies would probably be greater than under any other, and there would probably be more progress toward meeting basic human needs in poor countries than under other strategies.15 Important segments of the Congress, which have been pressing for elimination of bilateral development assistance to middleincome countries, would react favorably to the greater emphasis on poor countries. So would many poor developing countries; middleincome countries might well take a different view. There might be some Congressional objection to the broader interpretation of current Congressional mandates, which would allow AID to finance infrastructure programs in support of human needs. Strategy #2 would provide concessional assistance (both bilateral development assistance and PL–480) to meet the basic human needs of poor people, primarily in low-income countries, which would continue to receive top priority, but also in middle-income countries if enough aid were available.16 The dominant factor in allocating aid among countries would be where it would do the most good to help poor people; any aid to governments of middle-income countries would thus depend on the recipient’s commitment to helping its poor.17 Like strategy #1, this strategy would allow a sharp sectoral focus. In granting concessional loans to middle-income countries under this strategy, our terms would be stiffer and we would expect the recipients to contribute more of their own resources than low-income countries. Because our aid would represent a smaller part of the total resources available to middle-income countries, it would probably 15 Carter underlined these phrases in this sentence: “US influence”; “be greater”; and “meeting basic human needs.” 16 Carter underlined these phrases in this sentence: “poor people” and “middle-income.” 17 Carter underlined these phrases in this sentence: “most good” and “help poor people.”
