940 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Foreign Affairs While there is no evidence of any Soviet intention to move against Yugoslavia at this time, the Yugoslav defense forces have prepared themselves to defend the country against any threat. In talks in Belgrade in early February with U.S. Defense Security Assistance Agency Chief, General Graves, Defense Secretary Ljubicic noted the contingency measures which had been taken “for all eventualities,” but also noted that Yugoslavia was calm and not excited about the current situation.7 (Our military relationship with the Yugoslavs is modest, but growing.) The Yugoslavs have been typically outspoken in their opposition to Moscow’s move against Afghanistan and they have played a significant role in the mobilization of nonaligned sentiment in condemnation of the Soviet intervention. Previously, they had been almost equally concerned at what they saw as Moscow’s war by proxy in Kampuchea. A resultant exchange of open polemics in the Soviet and Yugoslav press has served to exacerbate further Soviet-Yugoslav relations.8 In addition, while Moscow was probably not surprised at the Yugoslav refusal to attend the April 28–29 meeting in Paris of European Communist parties, neither was it pleased by the Yugoslav decision. The U.S. is in a very good position with the new Yugoslav leaders. We have—particularly during this Administration—accelerated the pace of our bilateral relations in all key fields: political, economic, cultural and military. The resultant “web of relationships,” as Ambassador Eagleburger describes it, has helped to increase our knowledge of Yugoslav leadership attitudes as well as to increase Yugoslav confidence in the durability of our friendship and our support. Tito’s visit to the United States in March, 1978, contributed to this process and the President’s frequent correspondence with Tito was of great benefit in keeping up the momentum of improving relations. Yugoslav Ambassador Loncar expressed his Government’s appreciation for the President’s May 4 statement in which the President 7 See Document 280 and footnotes 3 and 7 thereto. 8 In telegram 2095 from Belgrade, March 15, the Embassy reported the sharp reaction of the Yugoslav press to publication in the Soviet press of commentaries on an article published in a Vietnamese newspaper which the Yugoslav Government considered highly offensive. The Embassy reported that “this is the sharpest criticism of the Soviet press we can recall for several years.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800132–1117) In telegram 2180 from Belgrade, March 18, the Embassy reported that the Yugoslav Government saw “a concerted Soviet campaign against Yugoslavia” and felt the Soviet campaign was “not directed toward Yugoslavia’s internal situation so much as toward Yugoslavia’s public opposition to Soviet moves in Afghanistan and its influence in the NAM.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800140–0408)
