132
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
prestige in the Middle East and Asia will reinforce this commitment. So
will any Soviet-perceived efforts by other outside powers—particularly
China—to support the anti-DRA insurgency.
5. Under foreseeable circumstances, we do not anticipate the large-
scale dispatch of combat troops to Afghanistan as an option that would
be seriously considered by the Soviet leadership for the following
reasons:
—such a move might worsen Soviet-U.S. relations during a delicate
period when SALT and a summit are high on our respective agendas;
—the popular opposition to Taraki might only be exacerbated by
direct Soviet actions, and would leave open the possibility that Taraki’s
survivability would require the continuing presence and possible ongo-
ing engagement of Soviet combat troops;
—the spectre of Soviet troops battling Islamic elements would
redound to Moscow’s disadvantage throughout the Moslem world,
especially in Islamic states which Moscow is currently courting, such
as Iran and Saudi Arabia;
—Moscow’s chief interest in the region is its ties with India. New
Delhi would presumably strongly oppose direct Soviet intervention,
which would make clear Moscow’s intention to consider Afghanistan—
like Czechoslovakia—part of the USSR’s “imperium”.
6. The provision of various forms of direct Soviet military assistance
to DRA forces short of the dispatch of regular Soviet combat units is,
however, more of a possibility. Such direct assistance could come as
a result of Soviet attempts to protect or defend Soviet personnel or
equipment already in Afghanistan, as may have already occurred at
Herat. Or, depending on circumstances in combat areas inside Afghani-
stan, for example, in Badakhshan adjoining Soviet Tadzhikistan where
the Soviet press has already reported some fighting has broken out,
the Soviets could decide to provide support through the dispatch of
Soviet aircraft, helicopter gunships, or increased advisory personnel
on the ground to assist the DRA anti-insurgent efforts. The temptation
to provide this type of direct if limited military assistance would be
heightened if the Soviets believed that foreign forces from Pakistan or
Iran had actually joined the resistance inside Afghanistan, or if the
fighting approached Soviet borders. Even in these situations, however,
we believe that Moscow, for the reasons cited above, would attempt
to minimize the scope and visibility of direct Soviet military participa-
tion in the fighting.
7. To check what they may see as passive or active Pak support to
anti-DRA insurgents, the Soviets, in coordination with the Afghans,
may become more direct in warning the Paks about possible retaliation
“in kind” through Soviet-Afghan support to Baluchi and Pushtu dissi-
