1979 521 —For the side attacked, residual forces are those available for retaliation—­that is, ICBMs calculated to survive hypothetical countersilo strikes plus bombers on alert and SLBMs at sea. The calculations assume that ICBMs ride out the attack without being launched from under attack, and assume that alerted bombers and at-­sea SLBMs are not vulnerable to first strikes. —Alternative first-­strike conditions are examined: surprise attacks, in which the forces of the attacking side are in a generated posture but those of the side attacked are on day-­to-­day alert; and preemptive attacks, in which the forces of both sides are in a generated posture. The former is a worst case assumption for the side attacked. The latter corresponds conceptually to the conditions the Soviets believe most likely. Soviet military doctrine anticipates that intercontinental warfare would likely arise out of a crisis or theater conflict, although it does not rule out the possibility of surprise attacks. 10. Charts 4 and 5 show that Soviet residual potentials will tend to grow throughout the next 10 years, whereas those of the United States will remain fairly constant until about the mid-1980s and then increase. Noteworthy specifics are: —In lethal area potential, shown in chart 4, the Soviet residual would far exceed that of the United States throughout the 1980s if the USSR struck first. The two sides would be about equal if the US struck first with surprise until about the mid-1980s, after which the Soviet residuals would be the larger. The Soviet residual potential would exceed that of the United States if the United States struck first preemptively. —In hard-­target potential, shown in chart 5, fairly steady increases in Soviet residuals would improve the USSR’s relative position considerably in the early 1980s, after which US advances would tend to parallel continued Soviet gains if the USSR struck first and would exceed the Soviet gains if the United States struck first. Except in the case of a Soviet surprise attack, US residual capabilities would be greater than those of the USSR in the middle and late 1980s. —In absolute terms, however, the residual potentials of both sides are already substantial and will remain so. In all circumstances of attack, each side would have residual capabilities sufficient to inflict massive urban and industrial damage on the other. Even in the early 1980s, a Soviet surprise attack, though it would reduce the US potential by half, would leave the United States with residual lethal area potential greater than the total urban area of the USSR. Soviet residual lethal area potential would grow from more than half the total US urban area today to about [less than one line not declassified] It should be noted that this analysis uses a very stringent damage criterion—­sufficient to destroy a reinforced concrete building. —Finally, a comparison of the surprise and preemptive attack cases displayed in charts 4 and 5 shows—­as would be expected—­that both the relative and absolute residual potentials of the side attacked would be improved in the preemptive cases because in these cases we assume that its forces had been alerted prior to the attack. In residual hard-­target potential, the improvement would be greater for the United States, largely because a greater proportion of its prelaunch potential
