meeting be held Saturday, and, with the additional reason in mind that my advisers would have opportunity to examine Chilean case, therefore I agreed to call off meeting.

I think Edwards’ request for delay was made in hope that it would be possible eventually to prevent further consideration of my resolution, and that Chile would thus be able to extricate herself from present situation without serious consequences. She would then be in position to say that she had always been ready to do all that had been asked if and when question of her refusal to comply with Arbitrator’s interpretation should arise. It is my opinion, strongly supported by my advisers, that an early meeting should be held and motion passed. Should motion not be passed and plebiscite should be suspended at this point, our position would be seriously weakened as no direct issue has yet been made and there are no grounds for appeal by Chile to Arbitrator even if she should decide to do so, nor is there any issue or default by either Government on which Commission could go to Arbitrator. Another reason for early meeting and passage of motion lies in fact that otherwise Peru would be left entirely without guarantees; and I greatly fear that we should forfeit confidence and support of Peruvian delegation and that Peru would withdraw, leaving field free for Chile and making my position impossible. Action on our demand, moreover, would have salutary effect on Chile, not only in regard possibly to inducing change of attitude on her part but also in regard to her proposals for a diplomatic settlement. The risk that Peru will be so encouraged as to become unreasonable is, I think, less than risk she will not prosecute negotiations in earnest if we weaken and fail to pass motion. Passage of motion will not increase Chile’s present embarrassment materially but it will make clear that we are in earnest. Anyway, Peru’s attitude toward any compromise is very doubtful. I have ventured to cable at this length only because of representations I know will be made to you at Washington by Chile; I think that I should advise you of my views in advance, so that if you agree with me, you will be able to reply to Chilean Ambassador in such a way as greatly to strengthen my position. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW
