The Federal reserve system is not a panacea for all economic or financial
ills. It can not prevent depression in certain industries which are
experiencing overexpansion of production or contraction of their markets.
Its business is to furnish adequate credit and currency facilities. This it has
succeeded in doing, both during the war and in the more difficult period of
deflation and readjustment which followed. It enables us to look to the
future with confidence and to make plans far ahead, based on the belief that
the Federal reserve system will exercise a steadying influence on credit
conditions and thereby prevent any sudden or severe reactions from the
period of prosperity which we are now enjoying. In order that these plans
may go forward, action should be taken at the present session on the
question of renewing the banks’ charters and thereby insuring a
continuation of the policies and present usefulness of the Federal reserve
system.
FEDERAL REGULATION
I am in favor of reducing, rather than expanding, Government bureaus
which seek to regulate and control the business activities of the people.
Everyone is aware that abuses exist and will exist so long as we are limited
by human imperfections. Unfortunately, human nature can not be changed
by an act of the legislature. When practically the sole remedy for many evils
lies in the necessity of the people looking out for themselves and reforming
their own abuses, they will find that they are relying on a false security if
the Government assumes to hold out the promise that it is looking out for
them and providing reforms for them. This principle is preeminently
applicable to the National Government. It is too much assumed that because
an abuse exists it is the business of the National Government to provide a
remedy. The presumption should be that it is the business of local and State
governments. Such national action results in encroaching upon the salutary
independence of the States and by undertaking to supersede their natural
authority fills the land with bureaus and departments which are undertaking
to do what it is impossible for them to accomplish and brings our whole
system of government into disrespect and disfavor. We ought to maintain
high standards. We ought to punish wrongdoing. Society has not only the
privilege but the absolute duty of protecting itself and its individuals. But
we can not accomplish this end by adopting a wrong method. Permanent
