National Security Policy  605
to develop policies in accordance with local conditions and nationalist 
sentiments will tend increasingly to dilute Moscow’s control over the 
Communist Bloc.
Relations with the Satellites
199. The Soviet approach to the European Satellites during the past 
year represents, in essence, an attempt to synthesize the post-­Stalin 
trend toward greater autonomy with the post-1956 efforts to re-­establish 
the stability of the Bloc structure. While this has meant renewed empha­
sis on Soviet hegemony, it has not led to a general resumption of police 
terror, nor has it involved an abandonment of Soviet economic aid and 
equitable trade relations. Further, the Soviet leaders—­though now 
playing down the possibility of “many roads to socialism”—­still con­
cede limited freedom of action to Satellite leaders and tolerate certain 
divergences—in the case of Poland substantial ones—­based on differ­
ing internal conditions.
200. The Soviet leaders thus appear to retain their belief that Stalinist 
methods were inefficient and dangerous; even if they should want to 
return to Stalinist policies toward the Eastern European Satellites, the 
example of Communist China’s relative independence and the special 
position of Poland would make such a move exceedingly difficult. The 
Soviet leaders still have not discovered any definitive answers to the 
basic questions concerning intra-Bloc relations: How best to reconcile 
the contradictions between a policy toward Eastern Europe which is 
at once “soft” (designed to insure the Satellites economic and polit­
ical growth) and “hard” (intended to guarantee stability and Soviet 
overlordship); and how best to adjust to the changes since 1953 in the 
USSR’s position as Bloc leader.
201. With the exception of Gomulka in Poland, and possibly Kadar 
in Hungary, all of the Satellite leaders have responded with vigor to the 
Soviet call for ideological conformity and fealty to the USSR. Needing 
no encouragement to combat “revisionist” trends, they have been able 
to thwart those elements which have sought basic reforms. Moreover, 
their efforts to assure internal security have been successful; there has 
been no serious threat to the stability of any of these regimes during the 
past year.
202. Popular hostility to the Communist system and to the USSR 
has probably not been reduced, however, although there may have 
been some diminution in public resentment in countries where there 
has been a gradual improvement in living standards. Popular unrest 
does not appear to be an immediate problem except in Poland, where 
it still could lead to strikes and riots, and in East Germany, where con­
tinuing emigration to West Germany reflects active discontent and 
remains a seemingly insoluble problem.
