the United States, an invitation to become one of the original parties to the
treaty for the renunciation of war now under consideration.
The Government of Canada is certain that it speaks for the whole Canadian
people in welcoming the outcome, in the proposed multilateral pact, of the
discussion initiated almost a year ago between the Governments of France
and of the United States. It is pleased to find that in this attitude it is in
accord with all His Majesty’s other governments. The proposals of the
United States Government, by their directness and simplicity, afford to the
peoples of the world a new and notable opportunity of ensuring lasting
peace.
The Dominion of Canada, fortunate in its ties of kinship and allegiance as
well as in its historic and neighbourly friendships, and with half a continent
as its heritage, is less exposed to the danger of attack or the temptation to
aggression than many other lands. Yet the Great War, with its burdens of
suffering and of loss, brought home the danger which all countries share,
and led Canada to turn with hope to the efforts to build up effective barriers
against war which took shape in the League of Nations; it will welcome the
present proposals as a manifestation of the same striving for peace.
The question whether the obligations of the Covenant of the League would
conflict in any way with the obligations of the proposed pact has been given
careful consideration. His Majesty’s Government in Canada regards the
League, with all its limitations, as an indispensable and continuing agency
of international understanding, and would not desire to enter upon any
course which would prejudice its effectiveness. It is, however, convinced
that there is no conflict either in the letter or in the spirit between the
Covenant and the multilateral pact, or between the obligations assumed
under each.
The pre-eminent value of the League lies in its positive and preventive
action. In bringing together periodically the representatives of fifty states, it
builds up barriers against war by developing a spirit of conciliation, an
acceptance of publicity in international affairs, a habit of co-operation in
common ends, and a permanently available machinery for the adjustment of
differences. It is true that the Covenant also contemplates the application of
sanctions in the event of a member state going to war, if in so doing it has
