National Security Policy 81 of the same may be made, but the official or package is traced to ascer­ tain the destination. 2. As a result of this discussion, the State Department undertook to examine and report on whether, if there were substantial evidence that any shipment entering the United States under diplomatic immunity contained radioactive material, the Department would be prepared to advise the diplomatic representatives of the country concerned that the shipment would be opened by United States officials in the presence of representatives of such country, to determine the nature of the radioac­ tive material. 3. The Secretary of State will now report on its study of the feasibil­ ity of adopting such a practice. 20. Memorandum of Discussion at the 356th NSC Meeting1 Washington, February 27, 1958 SUBJECT Discussion at the 356th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, ­February 27, 1958 Present at the 356th NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; and the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization. Also present were the Acting Secretary of the Treasury; the Attorney General (participat­ ing in Items 2–4); Mr. Maurice H. Stans for the Director, Bureau of the ­Budget; the Federal Civil Defense Administrator (participating in Items 2–4); the Acting Secretary of Commerce (participating in Item 1); the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; The Assistant to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President; the Director, International Cooperation Administration; the Deputy Under ­Secretary of State for Economic Affairs; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; the ­Special Assistants to the President for Information Projects, for National Security Affairs, and for Science and Technology; the White House Staff Secretary; the NSC Representative on Internal Security (for Item 4); the Director of Guided Missiles (for Item 2); Brig. Gen. Austin W. Betts, USA, Office of the Director of Guided Missiles (for Item 2); Mr. A.G. Waggoner, Office of the Director of Guided Missiles (for Item 1 Source: Agenda item 4: Shipments Entering the United States Under Diplomatic Immunity. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
