isolation. Various newspapers of this morning comment upon it in either special articles or editorials. Today’s Manchester Guardian in a despatch from New York speaks of the administration as definitely retreating from its resolution to discuss international disarmament with the League. “For the first time in recent years an anonymous semiofficial statement has been issued in Washington of the allies [pessimistically] discussing the state of Europe. The statement suggests that Europe has reverted to the theory of balance of power adding that this policy is an immemorial war breeder.” The Daily Express and Daily Chronicle refer to the report as in opposition to the League and to Chamberlain. Westminster Gazette states: “We sympathize with the resentment so widely spread in the United States that we should still be so brought as at Geneva to the cynical lead of France. It was quite wise and right for the United States to stand aloof until we establish a better order in Europe.” Diplomatic correspondent of the Daily Telegraph writes that British and European diplomatic circles yesterday were completely taken aback by the action of the American administration in communicating to the public press the substance of the report which Mr. Houghton had submitted to the President and the State Department. As possible reasons for this procedure the writer considers that it may be desirable to prepare American public opinion for a change of foreign policy towards isolationism and that the effect of this exposure may help to clear the air and deal a blow to the revival of secret diplomacy and intrigue. He further says that Mr. Houghton exerted himself on behalf of the Locarno Pact.66 “In this connection he (Mr. Houghton) brought his powerful influence to bear on Berlin. He was, however, disappointed at the sequel, holding that Germany had been forced into unwarranted concessions, e.g., in relation to her Eastern and Southern neighbors, and still more by the Allied refusal to evacuate the
