Negotiating Channels 461 176. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, February 4, 1980 I hope that you will have a chance to review this before our 2:00 meeting on the hostage situation.2 It may be a bit disjointed, but analyzes frankly the situation that we face. Our objective continues to be to get the hostages out safely at the earliest possible date without having to take risks that are unacceptable. If anything, our objective has been modified since the Afghanistan invasion to include, “and in a way that does not jeopardize the possibility of a reconciliation of US-Iranian relations”.3 Politically, I believe that we continue to have some flexibility on what we are able to do in the course of working toward the release of the hostages. The American people will tolerate a good deal more now than they would have before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan IF we have the successful resolution of the hostage situation. Let me review briefly what we know for a fact and those things that we are not sure of: 1. That in the final analysis, only Khomeini can insure the safe release of the hostages. It is doubtful that Bani-Sadr can get the militants to release them and very, very doubtful that Ghotbzadeh can get them released. 2. That a large number of the Revolutionary Council—possibly all—see the need to resolve the hostage situation, and that this includes the clerics as well as the “European group”. 3. That at least among the European group and other members of the Revolutionary Council, a clear consensus is emerging as to how the 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 2/80. Eyes Only. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Vance, Aaron, and Jordan from 1:58 until 2:22 p.m. (Carter Library) In his memoir, Carter wrote that the purpose of the meeting was “to get an update on the Iranian response.” “Apparently,” he wrote, “Bani-Sadr is sending word to us directly that he wants to proceed with a resolution of the hostage question. His inclination is to wait until after the 26th of February, when he can put his government together. (He also said he wanted to get rid of Ghotbzadeh.) He [Bani-Sadr] does not want us to identify him as a friend of the United States or as a moderate. He wants to be known as a revolutionary protecting the interests of Iran against both superpowers’ threats. We decided to maintain our multiple approaches to Iran.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 485) For Bani-Sadr’s message, see Document 175. 3 The quoted phrase represents Jordan’s perception of how the December 27 Finding had changed. See Document 110.
