El Salvador 569 Embassy, which informed Lemus that no funds were available for such a pact. As long as the neighboring countries, Honduras, Guatemala, and Nicaragua, have MDAP agreements with the United States and El Salvador does not, some residue of resentment on this score will continue to exist here. (8) United States Officers for the Escuela de Guerra. Some months ago officials of the Salvadoran Army put out feelers as to whether the United States could provide two officers to teach in the Escuela de Guerra as partial replacements for the departed Chilean Army Mission. The Chief of the United States Army Mission discouraged this request on the grounds that Salvadoran officers can be trained better in army schools located in Panama or in the United States. The United States Military Attaché informs us that two Chilean officers are en route to El Salvador, possibly to fill the positions mentioned. (9) Mrs. Lemus’ Welfare Program. Mrs. Lemus has been critical regarding failure of the United States to assist her in her welfare program, alleging that the Embassy promised to provide such help. The Embassy made no such promise but said it would see what could be done regarding any request she made. No such request has been forthcoming. Nevertheless, Mrs. Lemus again criticized the Embassy, along with other international agencies of the United Nations, for failing to help her with the program. (10) Development Loan Fund Application. We have had to be lukewarm in dealing with El Salvador on the $8,000,000.00 loan sought for improvement of the conditions of the campesino, primarily because many projects contemplated do not seem to fall within the criteria of the fund. This may account for the delay on the part of the Salvadoran Government in submitting a formalized application for the loan. This list of issues is not exhaustive. As already stated, the items taken together add up to a possible cooling off by the Lemus Government. Not only has this been reported by a member of the President’s Staff, but our own sources bear it out, and members of the Mission have sensed some change in attitude. The change in attitude is the result of what might be termed negative actions on the part of our Government rather than any sudden reversal based on any single item. As already noted, each United States action can be justified on political, legal, or other grounds, especially when taken in its individual context. Nevertheless, the net effect is adverse from our standpoint. Interpreted from the Salvadoran point of view, we are either lacking in understanding or out of sympathy with Salvadoran aspirations. It should be emphasized that the Mission here has at no time been in conflict with the Salvadoran Government on matters at issue. On the contrary, in spite of the unfavorable positions we have
