National Security Policy  753
Paragraph 24 (p. 16), which is unchanged from present policy, says 
that the U.S. should consider the long-­term development of a NATO 
nuclear weapons authority.
The consultants were generally of the opinion that our policy 
should combine the first part of the majority proposal in paragraph 
23 with paragraph 24. That is, our attitude toward providing nuclear 
weapons or weapons information to additional allies should be nega­
tive; but if pressed by an ally, such as France, for example, we should 
consider the matter not on a bilateral basis, but in a NATO context. The 
Planning Board seemed receptive to such an approach.
(Call on: SECRETARY HERTER
MR. McCONE
SECRETARY McELROY
ADMIRAL BURKE)
Paragraph 25–­a (p. 18) is a revised general guidance paragraph on 
providing military assistance to nations “whose increased ability to 
defend themselves and to make their appropriate contributions to col­
lective military power is important to the security of the United States.”
Paragraph 25–­b (p. 19) is new and deals with military aid to other 
nations, including uncommitted nations. It reads:
(Read Paragraph 25–­b, p. 19)
Paragraph 25–­c (p. 20) is also new and grows out of the OCB conclu­
sions on the overseas internal security program.
Paragraph 26 (p. 20) is a new item of guidance and would encour­
age, in less developed nations, the participation of indigenous military 
forces in economic, social, and psychological programs.
Paragraph 28 (p. 21) is the general paragraph on military research 
and development which is in existing policy, with two new sentences 
added on nuclear weapons R & D. They read:
(Read Paragraph 28–­a, p. 21, last two sentences)
Par 29 [p. 23] is a new paragraph which amplifies and strengthens 
a similar statement in the old policy [last sentence of old 22]. It takes the 
position that, given an adequate Free World deterrent posture, the Bloc 
will place chief reliance on non-­military means and that the U.S. should 
accordingly give increased attention to non-­military aspects of the con­
test. As a result of its discussion with the consultants, the PB decided 
it would be wise to recognize here that the Soviets also use military 
assistance, and to include language to reflect this.
Par 30 [p. 23] is a revision of old 22 and 23 which stresses that:
“The ability of the Free World to deal successfully with the compe­
tition of the Sino-­Soviet Bloc will depend in large measure on demon­
strated progress in meeting the political, economic and ideological 
aspirations of Free World peoples. In the long run, it is in the interest
