238
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
to terminate in such countries where AID assistance “directly benefits
needy people”.9
As a result of the “New Directions” in development assistance,10
mandated by Congress, the focus of regular U.S. bilateral economic
assistance has increasingly been directed to meeting the basic human
needs of the poor majority in the developing countries, such as nutri-
tion, health care, education and human resource development, and less
on large-scale capital transfers for major infrastructure development.
Such programs, which assist the poor majority in developing countries
gain access to participation in decisions which shape their lives,
strongly and independently promote group two economic rights, as
well as create a climate supportive of a broader observance of political
and social rights.
As a rule then, bilateral development assistance which directly
benefits the needy should not be used as a policy instrument to sanc-
tion a government for its human rights violations. (Where assistance
benefits the needy, but a country’s human rights record is poor, we
should consider the extent to which our aid is or can be provided
through non-governmental institutions thus reducing our identifica-
tion with the government.) There may be instances, however, in which
a particular government’s human rights violations are so flagrantly
gross and systematic that the need to disassociate from that gov-
ernment outweighs the development assistance goals in that country.
Such a balancing of considerations will require case-by-case analysis.
Reducing economic assistance that does not directly benefit the
needy is a more appropriate means to disassociate the U.S. from a re-
pressive or corrupt government, but such bilateral programs are now
the exception.
Security supporting assistance is extended to a limited number of
countries in which the U.S. has special interests of high political pri-
ority. Currently, 80% of our security supporting assistance goes to Is-
rael and the three confrontation states in the Middle East. Food assist-
ance under PL 480 Title I can also be used to leverage human rights
improvement. However, the distribution and terms of Title I aid have
traditionally been affected by political factors. In addition, its use
would entail the considerable political risk of appearing to provide or
deny food to hungry people in order to achieve U.S. political objectives.
An increase in aid that directly benefits the needy can be an effec-
tive way to encourage positive human rights conduct. Such increases
directly promote our overall human rights objectives by contributing to
9 See footnote 4, Document 1.
10 See footnote 30, Document 29.
