Chapter 4, February–April 1990 613 agreement ratified. So what is the solution—­you want limits, we don’t think they can be verified in a legally-­binding agreement. In our view, the solution is in the form of a politically-­binding understanding, which would be inevitably enforced in our political system. Akhromeyev: I understand. Burt: Given our system, if we were to declare that we were to deploy some number for these five years, that would be the maximum we would be permitted to deploy. Akhromeyev: I understand. Burt: We need to get out of this dilemma, and have real limits without facing the problems of explaining how they will be verified. Bartholomew: Which would open to attack the entire START agreement. Akhromeyev: So you are ruling out the possibility of reaching agreement on a ceiling on nuclear SLCMs on both sides? Burt: What we are suggesting is that both sides issue parallel statements. Akhromeyev: Answer my question about both sides. You are against an agreed limit on SLCMs for both sides. Burt: What do you really mean? Akhromeyev: I mean the US and the USSR would agree to limit SLCMs by a certain number for both sides. Are you ruling out this possibility? Burt: In a politically-­binding agreement? Akhromeyev: In order to proceed I must know. Do you rule out the possibility of US and Soviet agreement on establishing a certain number of SLCMs for the US and the Soviet Union and this level will not be exceeded? Burt: Could that number be the number the US plans to deploy for the next five years? Akhromeyev: The limit would be proposed and accepted, and would have to be formally recorded. Under your approach the number would be recorded unilaterally by the US. The Soviet Union would not have the power of influencing these numbers. Bartholomew: (Holding up the Moscow bracketed draft declaration) In the second year that we present this declaration, we would have a politically-­binding limit not to exceed the numbers we presented this year, this year, this year, and this year (pointing to the declarations for years 2, 3, 4, and 5). This would be a politically-­binding limit on us, just as your declaration would have that effect on you. And this document would be public. There would be no way we could have a number that would exceed that number. If anyone tried to exceed it, someone would say we have a political understanding with the Soviet Union. Bartholomew: In the character of these informal talks, let me say we discussed the idea of a politically-­binding limit for a long time before we proposed a draft in Moscow. The reason it was so difficult is because it was regarded as being a real undertaking.
