793.00/93
[Document 658]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, July 23, 1925.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your notes Nos. 701, 702 and 703,
all dated July 20, 1925, with further reference to the suggested reply to the
representations recently addressed by the Chinese Government to the Corps
Diplomatique at Peking. The Government of the United States is in complete accord
with the opinion of the British Government that it would be inadvisable to make any
delay in acquainting the Chinese Government with the attitude of the Powers. It is
gratified to learn from your note No. 701 that the British, Japanese and Italian
Governments agree with the views of this Government that the best way to meet the
questions raised in the Chinese Government’s note is to announce the willingness of the
Powers concerned to proceed at an early date to the fulfillment of the undertakings
entered into at the Washington Conference in regard to the calling of the Special
Conference on Tariffs and the sending of the Commission on Extraterritoriality. At
present the only point at which there appears to be any lack of accord in the views of
the Powers is in regard to the precise phraseology of the communication whereby the
attitude of the Powers will be communicated to the Chinese Government.
Careful consideration has been given to the view of the British Government that the
reply of the Diplomatic Body at Peking should embody “an emphatic statement that
there can be no discussion of particular reforms, much less a review by the Powers of
their treaty relations with China until the Chinese Government have given evidence of
their ability and willingness to suppress disorders and to enforce respect for the safety
of foreign lives and property and put an end to strikes and agitations which are harmful
to Chinese and foreign commercial interests.” The American Government believes
itself to be in substantial accord with the attitude of the British Government upon this
point in the sense that it is obviously impracticable for the Special Conference to be
convened in the midst of civil war or under conditions of anti-foreign agitation which
might in any way prejudice or hamper its deliberations or its complete freedom of
action. As a matter of practical policy, however, this Government is of the opinion that
it would be preferable not to make the complete restoration of order by the Chinese
Government a condition precedent to the discussion of particular reforms or a review of
treaty relations because of the possible difficulty of attaining subsequent unanimity
among the Powers as to the fulfillment of the condition desired. This Government
believes that it will suffice to convey fair warning to the Chinese Government of its
responsibility for the preservation of order, the suppression of antiforeign agitation, the
