Chapter 6, June–December 1990 929 As you see, we have tried hard in this proposal to meet both side’s concerns. Can we resolve this important issue on this basis? ALCMs and Bombers US position: Inspection of weapons storage areas at bases for heavy bombers other than long-­range nuclear ALCM heavy bombers, once long-­range non-­ nuclear ALCMs are deployed there, to confirm long-­range ALCMs there are non-­nuclear.

No inspection of B–2 (unless it is tested with long-­ range nuclear ALCMs).

Count B–1s not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs as 1 (except only for two test B-­ls that are so equipped). Sov position: Inspect all heavy bomber bases and all heavy bombers.

Don’t accept distinguishability between ALCM and non-ALCM B–1s. Talking points: We have addressed ALCMs all year, ever since the February ministerial in Moscow. While many major ALCM issues have been settled, the draft text in Geneva still contains a large number of unresolved ALCM issues. If we are going to complete a treaty, we need to settle all of these issues once and for all. During the long history of our discussions, the US has agreed to an extensive set of measures to control long-­range nuclear ALCMs: — Despite the formidable Soviet air defense network in which billions of rubles have been invested, the US agreed to a range threshold of 600 km. — We agreed to ban ALCMs with multiple nuclear warheads. — We agreed to make non-­nuclear ALCMs distinguishable from long-­range nuclear ALCMs. If they are not, they will be considered nuclear. — We agreed to exchange data on long-­range nuclear ALCMs, and on the distinguishing characteristics of long-­range non-­nuclear ALCMs, and on heavy bombers. — While non-­nuclear ALCMs are not constrained by the treaty, we agreed to exhibit any long-­range non-­nuclear ALCM we deploy, to confirm the distinguishing features. — [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] — We agreed to on-­site inspection of heavy bombers of types tested with long-­range nuclear ALCMs to verify their distinguishing features, and confirm they are equipped within treaty limitations. — We agreed that US heavy bombers will be equipped for no more than 20 long-­range nuclear ALCMs.
