International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
991
Interdepartmental Policy Panel and the establishment of an Inter-Agency
Committee to Coordinate International Health Activities: My basic feeling
would be that we should not establish these organizations in quite the
form recommended by the report. Better options are available in-
cluding: in place of abolishing the NSC Ad Hoc Committee on Popula-
tion Affairs we might consider giving to that committee responsibility
for population, health and nutrition which would parallel our recent
policy emphasis in trying to integrate these sectors in our assistance
programs.12 Another alternative would be to establish a separate NSC
Ad Hoc Committee dealing with health issues chaired by the Assistant
or Deputy Assistant Secretary in OES. Finally, the last alternative could
have a White House chaired committee on international health perhaps
run by OSTP or Peter Bourne with the State Health Office acting as Ex-
ecutive Secretary.
New International Health Attache Program: I believe we should op-
pose the creation of this corps. We are already under-going an exami-
nation of our Science Attache program and perhaps we might look at
how science attaches can increase their responsibilities in the health
sector. But unless we wish to have every U.S. Government agency send
attaches to every Embassy, in effect duplicating the entire U.S. bureau-
cracy in each capital abroad, we need to find better alternatives to the
suggestion in the report rather than accept such a proliferation. We
might alternatively recommend that Foreign Service personnel be
trained and involved in international health policy issues in their regular
assignments abroad to a greater extent than has been the case hereto-
fore. AID itself would probably be opposed to this idea since it would
duplicate their health program officials that exist in many AID recip-
ient posts.
Annual Report on International Health: It seems to me not an unrea-
sonable requirement, but the difficulties are that such a report could be-
come merely an exercise in description and not a mechanism for im-
provement of programs. Far better would be policy papers with
recommendations on specific issues rather than a pro forma report.
III. General State Position and Response to White House
Finally, I believe the report should be considerably shortened and
more focussed in its recommendations. At the very least pros and cons
should be set forth for various controversial recommendations or alter-
natives offered. A sense of realism must be incorporated with respect to
resources which might be available in this area.
12 An unknown hand placed a check mark in the margin next to this sentence.
