1128 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Nevertheless, we see no signs of any meaningful progress in the negotiations. The twenty sixth of May is approaching in a matter of a few weeks. If the negotiations fail to produce the necessary progress to keep the process alive, the consequences will be very grave indeed. Many people will question the wisdom of continuing the talks.4 On the other hand, the violation of the fixed date, be it a target date or a deadline, might give the impression that the talks have become open-ended since no other date is fixed. All this will expose us to charges and suspicions of procrastinating or lacking the sense of urgency which is required under the circumstances. The door will be wide open before any other efforts to seek a solution to the problem. It would be quite difficult for us to oppose such efforts or prevent any move within the United Nations for the purpose of establishing new terms of reference.5 On the other hand, this will give credence to the allegations that the peace accords we signed constitute a separate peace arrangement. We reject this categorically. As I told you in our first meeting6 in Camp David, I would never accept a separate or partial agreement. I need not emphasize this any further. —Likewise, the success of our endeavor necessitates that you refrain from taking any action or making any statement that might poison the atmosphere or exacerbate the situation. Certain actions taken by your government lately have not been sensitive to the delicate stage of the negotiations. Statements made by Israeli officials lately have not been helpful, to say the least. This is not likely to generate the kind of response we would like to see on the part of the Palestinian people in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, whose cooperation is vital to the success of our mission. —In the coming few days, our representatives will be meeting to pursue their discussion.7 These talks will provide an indication of the manner in which the negotiations are developing. It is essential that they address themselves seriously to the major issues of substance with full awareness of the consequences of success and failure. It is also essential to set up a commitee that would be entrusted with the task of discussing the issue of security8 for it is obvious that such issue is adversely interferring with many aspects of the negotiations. Hence, a real attempt to define it and clarify it would be a good step in the right direction. If the committee on security starts its function promptly and 4 Carter underlined this and the previous sentence. 5 Carter underlined this sentence.
