640
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
or the other, the matter of the transfer should be finally decided
tomorrow.3
Villalon said that if the decision went against the transfer, the U.S.
would have made a full effort and would be justified in taking whatever
steps it felt appropriate against Iran. I asked Villalon if he sensed that
the Iranians wanted some further clarification from us. He said that
was a dead issue and that we should not make any further move to
give the Iranians anything by the way of clarification or conciliatory
statement. I asked whether he knew of any reaction to the message of
Ambassador Probst.4 Villalon had no knowledge.
Finally, Villalon commented that the major obstacle had been the
weakness and lack of capacity of Bani Sadr. He lacked the courage to
act, or had acted ineptly throughout the recent critical days.
3 On April 6 Villalon reported to Precht that a four-man delegation composed of
Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh, Moinfar (an Oil Minister with good religious credentials) and
an unnamed mullah, would visit Khomeini the morning of April 7. Villalon told Precht
that in view of past experience, “he was not optimistic about the outcome of the meeting
tomorrow.” (Memorandum of conversation; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran Update 6/80)
4 See Document 240.
244.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 6, 1980
SUBJECT
NSC Meeting on Iran, April 7, 1980 (C)
There are three sets of questions which need to be addressed:
1. Should we proceed now with sanctions against Iran? If so, when
should the announcement be made? (S)
2. What should be included in the text of the announcement and
the communication to the allies? (U)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 100, Meetings File, 4/7/80 NSC Meeting re Iran. Secret. All tabs are attached but
not printed.
