1980 893

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense2 Washington, undated BASIC ISSUES AFFECTING STRATEGY AND FORCE POSTURE IN THE 80s I. THE PROBLEMS WE CONFRONT A. The “catch-­up” problem. The cost of the Vietnam War ($236B in FY 80 $) and its aftermath (a 35% cut in real annual defense spending 1969– 75) created a substantial imbalance between a diverted or declining US effort and steady real increases in Soviet defense spending. While real US defense spending 1976–80 increased 10%, this increase was least in the investment sector, where inflation most outran budget predictions of its level. In fact the differential between US and Soviet defense investment runs (according to CIA estimates) about $240B over the decade of the 70s, as measured in FY 1980 dollars. True, total NATO plus Japanese defense spending is still comparable to that of the Warsaw Pact, because fortunately we have rich Allies and the USSR only poor ones. But in the crucial investment sector the alliance still lags behind—­and alliance investment is only partially additive to ours, because of overlap, duplication, and inefficiencies. Yet we must confront this problem squarely in the 80s and address the related strategic issues. B. Strategic nuclear parity. Preserving strategic deterrence naturally takes overriding priority, and will be more expensive than in the recent past even if we can arrange a continuation of the SALT II limits on Soviet forces. We will have to spend a lot more on a strategic arms race if SALT II fails—­and modernize forces/strengthen C3 even with SALT II. Nonetheless, the chief strategic consequence of nuclear parity is to compel greater reliance on much more costly conventional forces. In short, nuclear parity requires a better (more favorable to us) conventional balance as well. C. The Strategic Vacuum in the Persian Gulf. Since PD–18 was written the revolution in Iran, invasion of Afghanistan and now Iran/Iraq war have underlined the vulnerability of the oil-­rich PG region to Soviet exploitation. Moreover, the President has already made the policy decision to repel such a threat by force if need be.3 This compels us to face 2 Secret. 3 Reference is to Carter’s January 23, 1980, State of the Union Address, in which he declared that “an attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.” (­Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. I, Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 138.
