Arms Control and Disarmament  1625
450.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
USDel/MC/12
Washington, April 4, 1959, 3 p.m.
SUBJECT
Geneva Nuclear Test Negotiations
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Nuclear test suspension negotiations. Secret; Limit Distribution. 2 pp. 
NARA, RG 59, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199.
United Kingdom:
Mr. Selwyn Lloyd
Sir Harold Caccia
Sir William Penney
Mr. John Roper
Department of State:
Mr. Christian Herter
Amb. James J. Wadsworth
Mr. Philip J. Farley—­S/AE
Mr. Ronald I. Spiers
Mr. Lloyd suggested that the discussion begin with a consideration 
of our position when the Geneva nuclear test negotiations resume April 
13. Mr. Herter asked Sir William Penney to report on his impressions of 
the technical position he found in his discussion with U.S. scientists this 
week. Sir William said that the most important issue related to the pos­
sibilities of decoupling or concealment. He said that he had carefully 
reviewed the theoretical treatment of the U.S. scientists which be found 
accurate and “almost certainly right”. However, there were many 
uncertainties in geophysics and it was impossible to tell whether what 
was theoretically possible would be possible in practice. He strongly 
supported the idea of a testing program to check on the theoretical 
possibilities of decoupling as well as on improvements in instrumen­
tation worked out by Berkner and his panel. He did not know whether 
nuclear tests should be part of this program or whether high explosive 
detonations would be sufficient. This was a question with many polit­
ical implications.
Mr. Lloyd said that, as he understood it, it now appeared that 
there would be no certainty of detecting underground tests under 
50 kilotons or more. Mr. Herter said that this brought us to the prob­
lem of what our position would be if the Soviets dropped their veto 
demands, and whether there would be a sufficient deterrent to vio­
lation to make it possible for us to accept the agreement. Mr. Herter 
said that we had this afternoon despatched a letter from the Presi­
dent to Prime Minister Macmillan regarding our position on April 
13, a copy of which be handed to Mr. Lloyd. After reading the letter 
Mr. Lloyd asked whether the following sentence in the draft letter to 
Khru­shchev was not somewhat disingenuous: “If you are prepared
