1955 385 278. Letter 18 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 18 Washington, October 10, 1955 Dear Alex: I have just taken Peter Colm, who is leaving for Geneva tomorrow morning, in to meet Messrs. Robertson and Sebald and to get a sense of Mr. Robertson’s reaction to the course of the talks. He should be able to give you something of the feel of things at this end. He has not seen the Secretary but I don’t think there is any particular new development in the Secretary’s thinking to be conveyed to you at the moment. Every­ one seems to be well satisfied with your conduct of last week’s meet­ ings. The feeling is that the lines which you have blocked out yourself for the near future are sound. The feeling in FE is that it will be desirable for you to make your presentation on “unaccounted for military personnel” at the next meet­ ing. American public opinion demands that a high priority be given to this item. We cannot afford to take any chance on some untoward development causing us to fail to get this on the record. Hence it may be necessary to present this before touching on the trade embargo ques­ tion. We do not see that there is anything to lose by putting the military personnel statement in now, particularly since we are trending in the direction of a more flexible and less systematic approach to the Agenda items under Point Two. With a less formalized treatment of the Agenda list under Point Two presumably topics may become intermingled and reverted to. After talks with D’Orlandi, the COCOM and CHINCOM Chair­ man, we are more than ever convinced that the present time would be highly inopportune for relaxation in the multilateral system of trade controls. It is significant that D’Orlandi was strongly of this opinion. The Japanese Ambassador Iguchi has indicated to us that the Japanese Government may not be as strongly committed to a program of relax­ ation as we are sometimes led to believe. The critical time of decision will probably be at the CG meeting at Paris early in December. With strong U.S. leadership at that time we may be successful in holding the line. But it cannot be done without aggressive U.S. leadership. Pressure will have to be exerted on the French and British particularly. All this indicates that any disposition to give on the embargo question at Geneva before December will be premature. In any event we do not have the say unilaterally on multilateral controls. As for our own 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official– ­Informal.
