shipment which likewise shall not have been made under proper
license.
There is enclosed, for convenient reference in connection with this
instruction, a copy of the draft convention45a in the form in which, the
Department understands from the reports of the Legation at Berne,
mentioned above, it is to be considered by the T. M. C. on July 7th. In case
the Department’s understanding on this point is incorrect and if the draft
which is to be considered by the T. M. C. differs in any material respects
from that enclosed herewith the Department desires to be informed by
telegraph.
The Department desires you to summarize by telegraph the discussions of
the T. M. C. and to submit a full written report with the text of the minutes
of the various meetings with your comments thereon.
 
Subsequent to the preparation of the foregoing instructions the Department
has received your despatch No. 20 of May 2746 enclosing the minutes of the
meeting of the Permanent Advisory Commission for military, naval and air
questions of the League of Nations which, together with the Naval Sub-
Committee of this Commission, considered certain features of the draft
convention for the control of the traffic in arms and ammunition as prepared
by the T. M. C. and as enclosed herewith. The Department understands
from these minutes that the Permanent Advisory Commission has suggested
certain modifications in the draft convention particularly with respect to the
categories of arms and ammunition with which the convention is to deal.
From the minutes it appears that three categories have been suggested to
replace the two categories of the draft of the T. M. C. and in addition the
instruments of warfare listed under these categories differ slightly from
those listed under the two categories of the earlier draft. The Department
has particularly noted that the enumeration under Category I of the list
prepared by the P. A. C. does not appear to include naval vessels. If the
Department’s understanding on this point is correct and if the
recommendations of the P. A. C. are adopted it might not be necessary for
you to call the attention of the Commission to the possible effect of the
