North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
1045
energy investments in non-OPEC LDCs than to income earned in
OPEC states.
—Food:
• Food Assistance: We may be heading for another difficult period
regarding availability of adequate food assistance. We anticipate a poor
Russian harvest and a mediocre one in Europe. The monsoon in India is
late, but it is too soon to predict whether there will be difficulties. It is,
however, realistic to assume that grain prices in FY 80 will be at least
25% above those of FY 79. In the case of the US, our PL 480 budget for
FY 80 will be about the same level as FY 79, which implies a cut in
volume of food assistance of at least 25%. Egypt has requested a 500,000
ton increase in food aid for FY 80, in addition to the 1.5 million ton com-
mitment it already has from us. A detailed memo is being prepared for
you on this issue.
These developments increase the urgency of the kind of action
called for in your Seattle speech. The US had already pledged to meet
its higher levels of food aid commitments which were negotiated as
part of a new Food Aid Convention, and called on other countries to do
likewise, even though negotiations on a new International Wheat
Agreement are not complete. This week the EC announced it will
follow our lead and meet its higher commitments. We have also asked
other countries to agree to a new Food Aid Convention independently
of progress on the IWA. Finally, the Administration’s Food Security
Act has been introduced in the Senate and will be in the House. It
would allow the USG to set aside four million tons of wheat in an Inter-
national Emergency Wheat Reserve to meet our volume commitments
to the Food Aid Convention in times of short crops and high prices.
Chances for passage of the legislation this year are considered reason-
ably good, but we may need a push from you at some point.
• Research on New Crops and Marginal Lands: The establishment of
the ISTC in October will allow us to press forward in these areas. Fur-
thermore, USDA and Interior now seem more inclined to step up re-
search in these areas out of their own budgets. For example, USDA
hopes to expand its research program on guayule (a latex producing
plant which grows in arid regions) from $250,000 in FY 80 to $2.5 mil-
lion in FY 81. This undertaking will involve cooperative work with
Mexico on new crops and dry lands agricultural techniques.
We need to find a way to insure that these kind of programs get a
fair hearing within the Administration’s overall budget planning. Do-
mestic and cooperative research programs such as these often have
trouble in fighting for budgets within their own agencies and with
OMB. Budgets for such activities are often relatively small and are low
on a domestic agency’s overall priority list. Programs which ran into
difficulty last year included tropical medicine and immunization re-
