540  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
discussions a recognition by both the United States and Soviet Union 
that the threat to stability posed by land-­based MIRV systems will have 
to be addressed. It seems to be a view we both share. As we move to the 
final stages of negotiations and look at the political developments that 
seem to have overtaken our arms control efforts, President Bush asked 
me to share with you some ideas we have developed for resolving 
issues in START but in a way that would boost the stabilizing effects of 
the current treaty and lay the basis for a follow-­on agreement. I would 
like to present them to you now so that you will have a chance to con-
sider them before you come to Washington.
Shevardnadze: Thanks, that is very important.
Baker: These ideas are known to only a very few people in our gov-
ernment, and we hope to keep this quiet. I know it is contrary some-
times to our usual practice, but I think if we can keep this private we 
can facilitate the consideration of these ideas. Before I mention them, I 
do want to emphasize that we do not want to do anything that would 
delay our two Presidents from initialing a START agreement at the 
Summit. That is an overriding concern for us. Our approach has two 
elements focused on land-­based MIRVs.
The first element is a total ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs. This 
element could be incorporated into our current START agreement. We 
would be banning mobile MIRVs. We would cancel our rail garrison 
system in exchange for your eliminating your mobile SS–24s. I real-
ize that you have deployed several SS–24 trains but you should know 
that we have a developed system, we have a budget to deploy rapidly 
and we have the political ability to proceed if necessary. I have got two 
additional comments.
First, it makes sense to eliminate MIRV mobiles before so much 
is invested in them that it becomes difficult to ban them. Second, ban-
ning mobile MIRVs does not prevent either of us from seeking stability 
through the deployment of single warhead missiles. For example, your 
SS–25 program would not be affected by this ban.
The second element of the proposal is that we would agree to elim-
inate over a longer period of time the remaining land-­based MIRVs, 
namely, those MIRVed missiles in silos. We recognize that this part of 
the proposal would require very extensive negotiations, but if we are 
able to jointly agree to this two step approach on de-MIRVing, I believe 
that it would be possible for us to side-­step the remaining difficulties 
and differences that we have had on heavy missiles in the current nego-
tiations. I think this should make it easier for you.
If you see any merit in this approach, we could work out the details 
either before or during the Washington Ministerial and then Presidents 
Bush and Gorbachev could announce after the Ministerial that there has 
been agreement to (1) ban mobile MIRVs in START; (2) initial a START
