Uruguay  1155
(6) The original application of the countervailing duty appears, in 
any event, to have been not entirely consistent with the spirit of United 
States fundamental laws.
(7) The United States can now gain an additional good-­will benefit 
by taking the initiative and not awaiting a formal Uruguayan request 
for the countervailing duty to be removed.
(1) Careful calculation reveals that the average weighted exchange 
rate for all Uruguayan imports and exports is at present and for some time 
has been substantially above the officially established exchange rate for 
exports of Uruguayan wool tops. Therefore it is clear that the basis no 
longer exists, under the provisions of United States law, for considering 
that the officially established export rate for Uruguayan wool tops con-
stituted a “subsidy” against which a countervailing duty is applicable. 
It appears that no basis has existed for the countervailing duty at least 
since November 11, 1957 whom the overall exchange rate structure was 
sharply depreciated; and, although no calculations have been made to 
prove it, any basis for the duty may have been eliminated even earlier. 
In other words, the U.S. Government appears at present to be in a dubi-
ous situation in applying this countervailing duty. Not only should our 
Government properly take initiative in complying with United States law 
but further delay in corrective action may create additional problems.
There is enclosed, as Enclosure 1, a calculation by this Embassy 
of the average weighed Uruguayan exchange rate for all Uruguayan 
exports and imports together with an indication of the comparison 
between this average rate and the existing officially established 
exchange rate for exports of Uruguayan wool tops. The calculation 
above that the current official tops rate is roughly below the weighted 
average rate for all Uruguayan exports and imports.
(2) It has become increasingly apparent that the U.S. Government 
has been permitting itself to suffer unnecessarily a serious disadvan-
tage in its relations with Uruguay by awaiting an official request from 
the Uruguayan Government for removal of this countervailing duty. 
The Uruguayan Government has, for several years, apparently encour-
aged the widespread impression throughout Uruguay and in other 
countries that Uruguayan export trade and the Uruguayan economy 
have been suffering a more serious disadvantage than has really been 
the case, from the countervailing duty on wool tops applied by the 
U.S. Government. This impression has now gained such widespread 
currency within Uruguay that the removal of the countervailing duty 
would result commensurately in much more favorable publicity for the 
United States then the practical effect on Uruguayan trade would jus-
tify. The removal of the countervailing duty would, in fact, probably not 
work any appreciable benefit at this time to Uruguayan exports or the 
Uruguayan country. The Uruguayan Government and wool merchants 
know this but the Uruguayan public have an unclear understanding
