1956  1139
released from prison, all had served full term sentences. I had also been 
disturbed note that in spite his statements here and public statements 
his govt, one half of persons in prison never communicated with UK 
Charge. That this not entirely matter of their choice confirmed by fact 
Father Clifford told us he had specifically been refused permission 
write UK Charge or to see British ConGen. Father Phillips stated he 
specifically told agreed announcement issued Sept 10 not applicable 
him. Apart from all other consideratons this stands in strong contrast 
to offer of which I had informed him to Indian Embassy to visit any 
Chinese in prison in US whether had written or not.
14. I continued whole situation is case in which his govt even yet 
had in its power bring about improvement in relations between us. 
My govt noted fact his authorities invited certain US newspaper cor­
respondents radio commentators visit his country. My govt welcomed 
free exchange information between different countries irrespective of 
whatever political or social differences might exist between them. 
Impediment to such exchanges between our two countries was one 
which had been set up by his country and could only be removed by 
his country. Dept State issued public statement in this regard. In order 
that he might have exact text, I giving him copy. I particulerly drew 
his attention to last sentence that statement.
15. Wang said had always held view we should base our discus­
sion issues between on basis principle mutual benefit. We should not 
base discussion on unilateral or one-­sided benefit of one side. Problems 
could only be readily resolved if we based our discussion on former 
principle. No problem could be considered it we only considered ones 
own unilateral benefit. We all talk about the principle and we all agree 
with it. However, great contrast between two sides in practical carrying 
out this principle.
16. Wang asked permission cite few instances in relationship 
between China and US. What US had in fact maintained was to pursue 
its own unilateral benefit at expense other side. It was as matter of fact 
US which occupying territory China rather than China occupying terri­
tory US. It was US which carrying on economic embargo against China 
and not China which carrying on such policy. It quite obvious that what 
US doing today was to pursue its unilateral benefit at expense China. 
Facts being so how could my govt still cling to policy of own benefit 
while prejudicing benefit this country. How could such policy one-­sided 
benefit contribute to improvement relationship between two countries.
17. Wang could only term absurd all charges agains his country 
which without regard to actual facts. I seemed to him to have said their 
side proposed policy embargo be abolished solely because abolition 
would be in interest of China alone. He must point out such categoriza­
tion wrong. Original objective of US in imposing such policy embargo
