1979 559 for the PRC. Subsidiary issues such as MX basing, targeting policy, etc., no matter how important in their own right, should not displace an evaluation of the adequacy of our programs to carry out the policy of essential equivalence. As for IC, our announced policy is to have “the capability, in conjunction with (our) allies, to stop a Warsaw Pact attack with minimum loss of territory and ultimately to restore prewar boundaries.” The analyses in the CG give little if any reason for confidence in our ability to carry out that policy. However, at least as important an issue is whether the force balances we calculate are adequate to deter a Pact attack, quite apart from any consideration of restoring prewar boundaries. The judgement of the PRC on that issue would be important.7 A possible additional issue for consideration in connection with NATO is the allocation of forces to the flanks as distinct from the Central Front. We could lay out the opposing forces as an aid in making a judgement of this issue (which is of great importance to the Navy). However, we must guard against loading down the principals with so many subsidiary issues that they never arrive at the all-­important central judgement as to adequacy in the aggregate. Much depends, of course, on how much time you believe will be available.8 1D on the agenda is a particularly difficult issue—­whether our forces are adequate to handle non-NATO contingencies. We have reasonable confidence in our estimates of the military balance for Korea, but not for areas such as the Persian Gulf, where our analyses still have a ways to go, and where our understanding of the issues is nowhere near as developed as it is in our more traditional areas of interest. Yet, the issue cannot be ignored, and I would suggest that we do the best we can. One special point worthy of consideration by the PRC is the CG’s assumption—­based on our estimated capability—­that we will not have to cope with a mobilization or war in Europe sooner than 45 days after we start a deployment to the Persian Gulf.9 We can calculate the cost of being able to cope with greater degrees of simultaneity, but adequacy is a matter for PRC consideration. Part 2 of the agenda deals with the general subject of affordability—­ whether the current programs will “fit” within the likely fiscal 7 Brown drew a vertical line and put a check mark in the right margin next to this and the preceding sentence. 8 Brown wrote “This is one issue we ought to include” in the right margin next to this paragraph. 9 Brown drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this sentence and wrote: “worth asking for judgments.”
