308
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Karmal is probably a long-term prospect. In view of last night’s ac-
tions, we sadly anticipate Soviet troops will now overrun all important
cities and strategic areas and will directly enter the fray against the
insurgents.
Amstutz
109.
Memorandum From Robert Blackwill of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
The President’s December 28 Telephone Calls to European Leaders (C)
I will do a full record tomorrow of the President’s calls to Thatcher,
Schmidt, Cossiga and Giscard d’Estaing, but I wanted you to have a
quick summary now.2 (C)
The President used the talking points at Tab A almost verbatim
except for #4, the one on SALT.3 He put that issue in the following
way: “We are going ahead with SALT independently of what happens
in Afghanistan, but we are not going to allow our concern about SALT
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–1981,
Box 57, NSC–026, 01/02/80, Afghanistan Invasion, Christopher/Brown, Pakistan/
Afghanistan/China. Confidential. Sent for information.
2 Blackwill’s full record was not found. The memoranda of conversation of Carter’s
calls to Thatcher and Giscard are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–
1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
3 Attached but not printed. The talking points are as follows: “1. We regard the
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan as an extremely grave development. 2. It has profound
consequences for the stability of the entire region. 3. We believe that it is essential that
we make this action as politically costly as possible to the Soviet Union and to that end
will be approaching a number of governments, particularly the non-aligned and the
Muslim countries, to speak out. 4. We are not going to be deterred from making an issue
of this because of SALT. The Soviets have clearly made a decision that this intervention
is more important than SALT. 5. We also are prepared to carry it all the way to the
United Nations; however, because of our own efforts in the UN with regard to the
hostages, we would appreciate it if others could take the initiative there. 6. We also
believe the North Atlantic Council should meet immediately at a high political level to
assess the matter and coordinate allied strategy. (For France: I hope that France can
work within the North Atlantic Council and show solidarity on this issue.)” For the
approach to other countries (point 3), see footnote 4, Document 107.
