558
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
B. I can see at least two circumstances in which the Soviets would
not eschew local hostilities. One would be that they consider their own
vital interests directly engaged, therefore giving them—in their eyes—
no choice. The other, less likely but not outside the realm of possibility,
is that the Soviet leaders would conclude that the U.S. must be taught
a more powerful lesson by being forced to back away from nuclear
confrontation as the USSR did in 1962. However misguided, the calcula-
tion could be that if U.S. theater forces were defeated in, for example,
the Persian Gulf area, the U.S. would decline to go nuclear and that
the shock of this decision would reinvigorate forces in the U.S. and
the rest of the world seeking an accommodation with the Soviet Union.
C. But I believe it would be a grave error on our part to continue
assuming that the Soviets want to avoid at all costs any confrontation
which could go nuclear; I can even envisage some Soviet leaders want-
ing such a confrontation if they expect (however naively) to be able to
pre-ordain an American backdown by arranging it at a time and place
of their choosing. At the moment they face a new arms race—both
strategic and theater—even if SALT II is ratified; the U.S. may be
seen as moving toward a military alliance with China; and the Soviet
economy is rapidly losing momentum. They may feel that if a confronta-
tion must come, it should be sooner rather than later.
D. My point is that we should not bluff in moving toward confronta-
tion with the Soviets at this stage in history and at a point near their
borders: tripwire forces may not deter them, and might even invite
their attack; they may not believe any threats to use tactical nuclear
weapons; and if we are forced to use them I personally believe the
worst predictions about escalation will come true.
9. I also have some other policy suggestions, flowing from the
above analysis and in most cases not much different from what we
are already doing.
A. A general point is that we should not give Moscow grounds to
believe that the U.S. follows a policy of trying to destroy, fragment
or overturn the Soviet regime; if the Soviet leadership comes to that
conclusion its inferiority complex could result in a “cornered rat” syn-
drome and a turn toward calculated confrontation.
B. Our remaining “China cards” should not be played this year,
particularly those which appear to be intended to build up Chinese
military potential, because that too could support any inclinations here
to seek a confrontation with the U.S. sooner rather than later. Moreover,
once played they lose their usefulness as leverage and become excuses
for Soviet counterreaction. And they help unify the Soviet people
behind the Soviet leadership.
C. Obviously the various sanctions imposed after Afghanistan must
be maintained for an extended period unless Soviet policy gives us
