230
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Aaron suggested that we take advantage of the upcoming consul-
tations with allied and other western countries to build a strong con-
sensus as a basis for US agreement to CD involvement. We would make
clear that we have not yet decided, but are considering a shift in our
past position if satisfactory assurances are received that we will have
strong support to avoid expansion of the CD’s role or erosion of our po-
sition on verification. To reduce the problem of raising false expecta-
tions, we will emphasize that we would take this step because of the
lack of progress in the bilateral, and need to be sure that it will
strengthen, not weaken, prospects for a satisfactory bilateral outcome.
We would then take a final decision before the opening of the CD ses-
sion on February 6, in the light of responses to this approach. (C)
There was general consensus with this approach, except for the
JCS representative who said that he was unable to concur. (C)
105.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Chemical Weapons (U)
A Mini-SCC chaired by David Aaron2 has discussed whether the
US should change its negotiating tactics to allow the Committee on Dis-
armament (CD) to begin limited multilateral discussion of a CW treaty.
State, ACDA, and OSD favor such a shift on the grounds that it will end
our present and costly isolation on the question and will be helpful to
our position in the US-Soviet bilateral negotiation. The JCS strongly op-
poses the shift; they believe it will increase expectations for a treaty and
eventually create pressures for relaxation of our substantive positions.
It was decided that in upcoming consultations with key allies and other
western nations, we will indicate that we are considering a shift if we
can be assured of strong support to keep the CD’s mandate narrowly
limited, and in protecting our substantive position. A final decision will
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Box 81, Chemical and Warfare, 1–6/80. Secret. Sent for information. Carter
initialed the top of the memorandum.
2 See Document 104.
