528 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX the impact on Moscow, and to encourage those countries which have had the temerity to take autonomous stands on foreign policy; for the Romanians, we serve as a partial counterweight to the Soviets, and as a demonstration that independence is reciprocated by mutually advantageous relations, especially in commerce, and by enhancing the voice of Romania in international councils. Thus, by receiving Ceausescu’s special emissary early in your term, you are demonstrating a basic continuity and our willingness to continue a reasonably close relationship. Beyond this general aspect, Pungan will be probing for a willingness to invite Ceausescu to Washington, probably later in the year if he visits Canada. He will leave Washington for New York and then join Ceausescu, who is currently touring West Africa. B. Participants: Mr. Pungan will be accompanied by the Romanian Ambassador Nicolae Nicolae; Vice President Mondale, Secretary Vance, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and a notetaker. C. Press Plan: The meeting has not been announced in advance; after the meeting, Jody Powell could simply say that you received Mr. Pungan as an emissary from President Ceausescu, and that you discussed Romanian-American relations. III. TALKING POINTS American Romanian Relations Economic: The main concern of the Romanians is that the new Administration continue the policy of its predecessor in granting a waiver under the Jackson-Vanik amendment that requires free emigration as a condition for Most Favored Nation treatment. As a result of a carefully negotiated understanding, Romania permits a small emigration of Jews to Israel, which satisfies the letter of the law. Since this waiver is granted under a Presidential finding, Pungan will probably seek an indication that you will continue this policy. (In fact, emigration has fallen off, but Israel is not yet concerned because it does not appear to be a result of any internal crackdown.) Technology-Nuclear: The Romanians are negotiating with Canada for a nuclear reactor, and are seeking assurances that we will grant licenses to American parts; they understand our non-proliferation problems, though Ceausescu recently told our Ambassador that Romania could make nuclear weapons if it wished at any time (an exaggeration), and that no one could foresee where technology would lead in ten years. In any case, the Romanians have been clearly forewarned about our reservations concerning a full fuel cycle or manufacture of heavy water.
