18  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
industry and to serve as a forum for discussion of coffee problems. 
Membership is presently limited to producing countries; however, it 
is understood that consumer representation would be welcomed, and 
that provision would be made for the admission of consuming coun-
tries on a limited basis, without obligation to finance the trade promo-
tion activities but with full participation in the economic research and 
informational activities of the organization.
By indicating an interest in participating in an international coffee 
study group, the United States would obtain the following benefits:
1. It would reassure the coffee producing countries regarding our 
interest in their welfare and our willingness to discuss with them com-
modity problems in which we have no interest as a producer.
2. It would give the United States an opportunity to influence the 
producing countries to develop coffee programs which are consonant 
with long-­term equilibrium between supply and demand.
3. It might strengthen somewhat the current marketing position of 
the producing countries by indicating that the world’s principal con-
sumer is cooperating with them in devising a solution to the problem 
of surpluses.
It should be recognized, however, that an offer by the United States 
to participate in multilateral discussions would not solve the immedi-
ate problem.
It would not be the intention of the United States in such multilat-
eral discussions to consider participating in or financing any buffer stock 
or retention plans which might be proposed. Similarly, we do not pro-
pose to discuss price with the Latin Americans at this time because to 
suggest a reduction in current high price levels would be resented espe-
cially since price decreases would largely be absorbed by governments 
rather than producers. On the other hand, if there should be a decline in 
prices below what we consider to be the danger point, it would prob-
ably be necessary for us to impose import controls to maintain prices 
at a level fair to the producer and consumer. Unless and until there is a 
price break, our intention is to resist Latin American pressure for United 
States import controls. In any case the imposition of United States import 
controls raises certain legal questions concerning the need for legislation 
which require further study.
Our proposal to participate in the study group raises a policy ques-
tion in view of a 1955 decision of the Council on Foreign Economic 
Policy that we should not participate, or make any implied commit-
ments regarding participation in an international commodity agreement 
“until approved at the inter-­agency level within the Executive Branch.” 
(Tab A).2 We anticipate opposition to a departure from our present policy 
in this regard.
2 Not printed as an attachment.
