Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 351 Our first and most fundamental concern is to prevent nuclear war. The horrors of nuclear conflict and our desire to reduce the world’s arsenals of fearsome nuclear weapons do not free us from the need to analyze the situation objectively and to make sensible choices about our purposes and means. Our strategic forces must be—and must be known to be—a match for the capabilities of the Soviets. They will never be able to use their nuclear forces to threaten, to coerce, or to blackmail us or our friends. Our continuing major efforts in the SALT talks taking place every day in Geneva are one means toward a goal of strategic nuclear stability. We and the Soviets have already reached agreement on some basic points, although still others remain to be resolved. We are making good progress. We are not looking for a one-sided advantage. But before I sign any SALT agreement on behalf of the United States, I will make sure that it preserves the strategic balance, that we can independently verify Soviet compliance, and that we will be at least as strong, relative to the Soviet Union, as we would be without any agreement. But in addition to the limits and reductions of a SALT II agreement, we must make other steps to protect the strategic balance. During the next decade, improvements in Soviet missiles can make our landbased missile forces in silos increasingly vulnerable to a Soviet first strike. Such an attack would amount to national suicide for the Soviet Union. But however remote, it is a threat against which we must constantly be on guard. We have a superb submarine fleet, which is relatively invulnerable to attack when it’s at sea, and we have under construction new Trident submarines and missiles which give our submarine ballistic missile force even greater range and security. I have ordered rapid development and deployment of cruise missiles to reinforce the strategic value of our bombers. We are working on the M–X intercontinental ballistic missile and a Trident II submarinelaunched ballistic missile to give us more options to respond to Soviet strategic deployments. If it becomes necessary to guarantee the clear invulnerability of our strategic deterrent, I shall not hesitate to take actions for full-scale deployment and development of these systems. Our strategic defense forces, our nuclear forces, are a triad—landbased missiles, sea-based missiles, and air-breathing missiles, such as bombers and cruise missiles. Through the plans I’ve described, all three legs of this triad will be modernized and improved. Each will retain the ability, on its own, to impose devastating retaliation upon an aggressor. For 30 years and more we’ve been committed to the defense of Europe, bound by the knowledge that Western Europe’s security is vital
