These three Annexes, together with the Lists of “A” Grade and “B” Grade
Luxuries, may be found on p. 9 et seq., of the Minutes of the Committee on
Provisional Measures, November 6, 1925. Following the presentation of
these documents, Mr. Yoshizawa read a statement on behalf of the Japanese
Delegation, giving in considerable detail the views of that Delegation on the
subject of the Washington Treaty surtaxes and interim surtaxes, likin and
tariff autonomy (See pp. 16 and 17 of the Minutes mentioned next above).
Mr. Strawn made a detailed explanation of the proposals submitted by the
American Delegation on November 3. He declared that it was the intention
and purpose of the American Delegation to accord, so far as possible, with
the wishes of the Chinese Delegation, and that primarily it was the duty of
the American Delegation to fulfill the provisions of the Washington Treaty
authorizing the 2½% surtax on necessities and the 5% surtax on luxuries.
He suggested the implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes with as
little delay as possible. As for a new treaty granting larger surtaxes, Mr.
Strawn stated that this was a constitutional function which must be
exercised by the President with and by the consent and advice of the Senate
of the United States, and that the American Delegation could go no further
than to fulfill the provisions of the Washington Treaty and to recommend a
new treaty to its Government. He then explained the American proposal
regarding Article VI of the Washington Treaty concerning the rates of duty
on land and maritime frontiers,92 and proceeded to a discussion of the
question of abolishing likin, devoting particular attention to the rates of
surtaxes. He referred to the advisability of continuing the present Customs
Administration both for the collection and custody of the customs funds as
contemplated by Paragraph 7 of Article 3 of the American Plan.93 He
referred also to the various small internal taxes related to likin, stating that
he realized that all local activities of the provinces could not be stifled and
that some arrangements would be necessary whereby some local taxes
should be collected. In explaining Paragraph 5 of the Plan Mr. Strawn said
with a view to keeping the funds intact and appealing to the business
sagacity of those financiers who might be in a position to help China work
out a plan of financial readjustment, the American Plan provided that if
likin should be collected anywhere in violation of the Agreement for its
abolition the tax payers should be entitled to a refund from the Customs
Administration of the full amount paid as likin, the rebate being charged
