376 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I step by step our relationship with China. In your comments to the press you might consider placing more emphasis on Japan, Korea, and China [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 77. Address by Secretary of State Vance1 Cincinnati, Ohio, May 1, 1978 Foreign Assistance and U.S. Policy Today I want to discuss with you a subject about which I care deeply because of its importance to our nation. I speak of foreign assistance. Over the years the League of Women Voters has endeavored to explain and support our foreign assistance programs. You have done this as an essential part of your nonpartisan program of public education. Your interest in and knowledge of foreign assistance has been a key element in making people aware of what their government is trying to achieve with these programs. The United States has a profound stake in its relationships with the nations and peoples in developing countries. Our response to their problems, needs, and aspirations tests not only the quality of our leadership in the world but our commitment to economic and social justice. Let me begin our discussion by posing three questions. First, why do we have foreign aid programs? Second, what are these programs designed to accomplish? Third, do they work? During the past 15 months as the Carter Administration fashioned aid budgets, reorganized aid programs, and discussed aid issues with Congress, we have thought with great care about these three questions. Today, in discussing our conclusions, I want to return to the basic elements of our aid programs. Why Foreign Aid Our foreign policy flows from what we are as a people—our history, our culture, our values, and our beliefs. One reason this nation has a foreign aid program is that we believe we have a humanitarian and 1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, June 1978, pp. 14–17. Vance delivered his address before the national convention of the League of Women Voters. The text of the question-and-answer session following his address is ibid., pp. 17–19.
