Human Rights 603 rights in U.S. foreign policy HA is still a very junior partner in the decision making process. We are often excluded entirely. The rationale in some cases is that HA’s need to know disappears in any crisis and that the issues are now “political”, not human rights. We saw that in the Nicaragua special mission2 in its most discouraging form. We were routinely cut off from cables, meetings, and discussions. Frequently we are told that our views are “known” and taken into consideration. However, we don’t get to make our case. This is bad for policy. It is bad for our standing in the bureaucracy. It does not serve the President to present him papers so sanitized that there are no real choices in the human rights field. There have been some pluses for him in human rights and some severe criticisms for failures on issues which I believe he never had a chance to consider adequately. Our calling things back or raising issues again after the decisions have been made is handicapping and inefficient. We should participate in the SCC meetings on certain countries; someone should be able to make the case for human rights considerations. The result too often across the board is: “The President has decided”, when we have no sense of the human rights issue being raised and argued. Correcting this situation will require your and Mr. Christopher’s attention. It will also necessitate a more active effort by HA to overcome still formidable bureaucratic resistance to the policy within the Department and the Foreign Service. —Adequate Staffing From the outset HA has been hampered by too few slots and inadequate staffing. The Foreign Service personnel system has failed to produce the quality officers we require to staff our positions. Consequently our officers have been enourmously overburdened. The system is exceptionally slow in replacing officers who have completed their tours in HA. Our AF officer3 left in late June and we do not have a replacement even now. Our Security Assistance/PM officer left in January and was replaced six and a half months later.4 Our country reports officer5 2 Reference is to Bowdler and Pezzullo’s June 1979 mission to Latin America to meet with Sandinista officials and leaders of Andean governments. The Carter administration favored a four-step program, including the resignation of Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza, to end the civil struggle in Nicaragua. (Graham Hovey, “2 U.S. Diplomats Off to Nicaragua In Growing Bid to Replace Somoza,” The New York Times, June 28, 1979, p. A–3) Documentation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XV, Central America. 3 Reference is to Robert Maxim. 4 Reference is to Ellis “Ollie” Jones, III. Robert Jacobs had replaced Jones by the fall of 1979. 5 Reference is to Frank A. Sieverts, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State and Coordinator for POW/MIA Matters, who subsequently assumed additional responsibilities as the Director for Country Reports during 1979.
