60 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX b. I do not think the BIB should be involved at all; it has enough to do keeping the radios going. Perhaps in years ahead, it might take on publications tasks . . . but these were all segmented out of the radios when they went under the BIB. Putting them back would invite congressional problems. c. State, especially under its external research authorization, could undertake some activity legally, I believe—but without some imaginative person to push it continually, I doubt that it could add up to much. d. It may be possible for the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities to engage in marginal activity directed toward Eastern Europe and the USSR (I have a very constructive relationship with the Arts Endowment, as you know) but they have legal restrictions and the problem that they are basically domestically oriented, not foreign affairs operating agencies. e. American publishers might do something . . . but talk is not likely to be matched by much money. f. Other private funding sources need to be explored—something can be turned up, I am sure, but it will take a lot of consistent work. The most hopeful thing Luers had to say was that he thought he had a good chance of getting Abe Brumberg detailed to him for a period of several months (perhaps longer) to work on this problem. Having a dynamic and motivated man such as Abe working on these tasks is about the only hope there is that anything could be done. I propose that we not have an SCC/SAWG discussion of this subject6 and that I send INR a short memorandum stating that we consider review of State’s (i.e. Luers’) proposed initiatives unnecessary since they already have all the authority they need to do so. Do you AGREE DISAGREE?7 6 In the December 15 SAWG meeting, Aaron again stressed to the Department of State representatives that the White House “expected initiative from the State Department in exploring overt and private possibilities for support of activities directed at the USSR and Eastern Europe.” He reminded the Department that it had agreed to produce proposals as early as May, and “questioned whether State was allocating enough energy to this effort,” asking that they focus on generating new activity. He continued: “If new activities proved viable, then they might eventually replace or take over some of the CIA operations.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–020, Minutes—SCC Special Activities Working Group, 1977) 7 Brzezinski did not mark either option. However, on December 6, Henze sent a memorandum to INR Director William Bowdler stating that Brzezinski “has reviewed your paper and has concluded that the subject does not require new action by the SCC/ SAWG at the present time.” Stressing that CIA operations were undergoing separate review, Henze wrote that “the exploration of possibilities for new or increased overt activity can be conducted by the State Department without any necessity for new policy authorization.” Henze also noted that the White House, through Aaron, had reiterated that point in the October 5 SAWG: “At this stage at least, the explorations which the State Department is undertaking should not be directed toward finding alternate sources of support or funding for existing CIA activities, but should concentrate on new or parallel activities which could be overtly supported by the U.S. Government, if reliable funding arrangements can be made, or financed through private sources.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box 1, Chron File: 12/77)
