462 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II policy. Canada, the UK and the FRG cited the need for actions in the IFIs to be consistent with a country’s bilateral assistance program, and France pointed to advantages of using bilateral contacts first. German officials noted the results of pursuing human rights issues in such fora as the UN, the Council of Europe, and CSCE. Some other governments said there may appear to be inconsistencies in their actions in the IFIs because of the varying interests they have in their relations from country to country. Some of the governments noted that actions toward different countries which may appear to be inconsistent if only human rights conditions in the countries are compared, may actually be consistent if a broader spectrum of foreign policy interests is considered. The more narrow legal issue of whether IFI charters allow human rights to be taken into account in the IFIs has been raised both in direct consultations and in other ways.10 While donor countries with whom we have consulted often raised the issue, it seems clear to us that the broad concerns outlined above—rather than questions of legal interpretation—would be the underlying reasons why other countries might curtail the extent to which they would take human rights concerns into account in the IFIs. On the merits of the legal issue, they appeared to share our view that human rights concerns can legitimately be taken into account because economic development necessarily includes questions of equity, welfare and social justice. Consulted donors appeared to be concerned with the legal issue mainly because affected LDCs might seize upon it. In general, it is still too early to know whether other donors will significantly increase the relative weight they accord to human rights considerations in the IFIs. Some members of the Interagency Group believe there is cause for optimism on this issue; others are not optimistic. We have seen some evidence that some LDCs consider our human rights initiatives in the IFIs to be both improper and illegal. They believe it is improper because it introduces a new and extraneous issue which could lead to confrontation as well as jeopardize country program levels. They argue that introducing human rights concerns violates IFI charters and thus is illegal. They claim the issue threathens the basic integrity and apolitical character of the IFIs, making it difficult to discuss development issues rationally and without posturing between donors and recipients. The issue has generated considerable contro- 10 The Charter of the IBRD provides in pertinent part that the “Bank, its officers and employees should not interfere in the political affairs of any member, nor shall they be influenced in their decisions by the political character of . . . [the recipient government]. Only economic considerations should be relevant to their decisions . . .” The charters of the other IFIs contain comparable provisions. [Footnote and brackets in the original.]
