1979 671 On the other hand if we and our NATO allies achieve a 3% real growth rate, the military balance likely will roughly stabilize after a few years. Even then it would still not meet the PD–18 criteria. —We would have essential equivalence in strategic nuclear forces, but the general purpose forces situation would be far less satisfactory, in (small) part because of the diversion of resources to the higher priority strategic force investments. —The conventional force balance would give us only a questionable ability to stop a Warsaw Pact attack and practically no confidence in our ability to restore prewar boundaries. —Our ability to cope with some plausible crises involving local and Soviet forces in the Middle East, Persian Gulf or Korea would still be severely limited, depending both on generous warning times and on freedom from crises elsewhere, particularly in Europe. To redress the balance and meet the criteria of PD–18 by 1990 will require an average annual real growth in the US defense program well in excess of the 3% we have discussed; it would also require increased allied efforts. 146. Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Charles Stebbins of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 6, 1979 SUBJECT PRC on M–X Basing Mode (U) Tomorrow Harold Brown will recommend to the PRC that the M–X be deployed in a mode involving multiple horizontal shelters among which the launcher could be moved surreptitiously or, in extremis, dash on warning. The basing concept is adequately described at Tab A.2 (S) All in all, we believe the DOD has come up with a satisfactory basing mode against the difficult criteria of survivability, verifiability, environmental impact, and cost. State, ACDA, and OMB are expected 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 125, Weapons Systems: 8–12/79. Secret. A stamped notation in the upper right-­hand corner of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.” 2 Attached but not printed is a July 23 paper prepared in the Department of Defense, entitled “The Horizontal Dash MX System.”
