3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 355 times before to frighten the Soviet Union with speeches of this kind, but they never had any effect. Nor had the Soviet Union engaged in attempts to frighten anyone; the Soviet authorities did not like to pursue their objectives by such methods. What was essential was reason, a calm and patient approach, and complete awareness of the fact that the kind of peace that would prevail in the world depended on our two countries, as did the question of whether there would be peace at all. The Secretary said he would respond very briefly. First, he wanted to make clear that, as he had indicated in Moscow and on many other occasions, we believed deeply that it was in the best interests of our two nations and in the best interest of the world that a SALT TWO agreement be reached as soon as possible. What we were both seeking was an agreement that would enhance the security of each of us by limiting and subsequently reducing the numbers of nuclear weapons, and by putting constraints on the qualitative improvement of strategic nuclear weapons. What we were both seeking was equal security, and we were seeking to move toward equal security by stopping the arms spiral and by reducing the numbers of nuclear weapons which, as President Brezhnev had said, were now many times more than was needed to destroy the whole world. Therefore, there should be no question at all that we have the same objective: i.e. to achieve a SALT TWO agreement at an early date and then move on to discussions on how to achieve further reductions at SALT III negotiations. That was clearly the view of President Carter, the Secretary himself, and the US Government. He was sure that President Carter would make this clear to Gromyko on Saturday. The Secretary would agree that peace in the world was in the hands of our two countries. We had the awesome responsibility to see to it that we reached the kind of agreement that would ensure peace and would give us, our children and our grandchildren prospects of a better life in a peaceful world. Not wishing to go into substance, the Secretary nevertheless wanted to touch briefly on the two questions to which Gromyko had referred. As far as the question of new missiles was concerned, as Gromyko knew, it had been our belief that there should be no new ICBM’s for the period of the Protocol to the Treaty. At the same time, we recognized the importance to the Soviet Union of one exemption to the ban on new types of ICBM’s. For that reason we had indicated that we would be willing to agree to one exemption for each side, provided it was an exemption for the period of the Treaty and that each side could make its own determination of whether the new missile that each would be permitted to develop and test would have a single reentry vehicle or MIRVs, depending on the needs of each side. We felt that we had made a major move in agreeing to consider the exemption to the
