Negotiating the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty,
Part I: September 18–December 16, 1978
58.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, September 18, 1978, 12:37–12:47 p.m.
SUBJECT
President’s Telephone Conversation with King Hussein of Jordan
The following conversation took place between President Carter
and King Hussein of Jordan on September 18, 1978, at 12:37–12:47 p.m.
President. I think we have had a very successful Camp David con-
ference. We have come out with a tremendous improvement in the
status of the Arabs in general and the Palestinians in particular. Let me
just summarize briefly some of the provisions in the settlement which I
think you would like. Then I would like to make a request of you.
—First of all, the Israelis accept the proposition that, in the West
Bank, Resolution 242 applies in all its parts, all its principles and all its
provisions.
—Secondly, the Israeli military occupation will be concluded im-
mediately as soon as a self-government can be set up in the West Bank/
Gaza and the provision calls for full autonomy for the Palestinians who
live in the West Bank area. It also provides for a strong police force for
the local inhabitants who can also be joined by Jordanian citizens of
course, and with strong liaison directly with you or Egypt or Israel to
control terrorism and to promote internal security.
—The Palestinians would have complete and full and equal in-
volvement in negotiating the final status of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, and, if you have no objections, when the treaty is negotiated be-
tween you and Israel, the Palestinian Arabs will have full rights to par-
ticipate in those negotiations. The Israelis have agreed. Of course, if you
have objection, they cannot attend. But that will be up to you.
—After the negotiations take place between you and Israel and
Egypt and the Palestinians, there will be a separate vote by the Pales-
tinians themselves to either accept or reject the agreement that has been
worked out. There would be an immediate withdrawal of Israeli secu-
rity forces. I would say a substantial reduction. And the Israeli security
forces could only remain in specified points that you, the Egyptians
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 56, Jordan: 8–10/78. Secret.
208
