720 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Unfortunately their economic health can be seriously damaged by US import restrictions. Our import quotas on petroleum, lead and zinc, and cotton, for example, have had that effect on Mexico, Venezuela, Peru, Indonesia, Egypt, the Sudan and other less developed countries. The Soviet Union, of course, recognizes clearly the major role that trade can play in furthering its objectives. The evidence clearly shows that friendly countries, when denied access to our market, are forced to increase their economic dependence on the Soviet Bloc. As a specific example, after the imposition of restrictions against Uruguayan wool tops in 1953, the Soviet Bloc steadily increased its purchases, and as a result it is now the most important outlet for Uruguayan wool tops. Recently our countervailing duty on wool tops was removed. As you know, our action to impose quotas on lead and zinc was followed by violent anti-­American reactions in Peru and there have been sharp reac­ tions in Venezuela to our oil import policy. In assessing where we stand today it is important, of course, to keep the picture in balance. On the one hand, since 1953 we have pursued an active policy for the promotion of international trade. We have taken part in two successful trade conferences in 1955 and 1956. It is true that many of the tariff concessions we gave at those conferences were small, amounting to no more than a 15% reduction in the existing duty. Nevertheless imports of the products affected by the concessions were valued at approximately $1 billion. A great deal of attention has been given to escape clause actions that we have found it necessary to take in recent years. Unfortunately little account is taken of the applications that were turned down. Other countries often fail to acknowledge that out of 27 cases in which escape clause action was recommended by the Tariff Commission no action was taken in 19 cases. On the other side of the balance, there are the various restrictive measures that have been taken. You will note from the chart that since 1953 we have taken restrictive action on 29 commodity groups exported from 45 free world countries. NS TAKEN TO RESTRICT IMPORTS, SINCE JANUARY 1, 1953, AND COMMODITIES AFFECTED Commodities Affected (29) No. of Countries Affected (45) Type of Action* Date of Action Cattle 2 TAR APR ’53 Wool Tops 1 CD MAY ’531 Butter and/or Butter Oil 5 22 JUL ’53 Cheese 8 22 JUL ’53 Dried Milk Products 4 22 JUL ’53
