284 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement (3) to develop infra-­red reconnaissance techniques; (4) to act as a line-­ of-­sight relay station for communications purposes. In conclusion, Secretary Quarles noted that substantial sums had been budgeted for the reconnaissance satellite program. Mr. Gray then continued his briefing, and read a Defense recom­ mendation on the subject (as submitted to the NSC on July 3, 1958, NSC Action No. 1941–­a) and Dr. Killian’s proposal of July 28 for modifica­ tion of the Defense recommendation. Dr. Killian said his review of the subject had been addressed to a proposed NSC Action, not to the budgetary aspects of the reconnais­ sance satellite program nor to the number of vehicles. He then read from his memorandum (as transmitted by the reference memoran­ dum of July 29) in order to explain his proposal for modification of the Defense recommendation. The Secretary of Defense said he was in full accord with Dr. Killian’s proposed modification of the Defense recommendation. Dr. Killian had said better than Defense did what Defense thought it was saying. The President approved the Defense recommendation as modified by Dr. Killian’s language. The National Security Council: a. Discussed the amendment to the recommendation on the subject by the Department of Defense contained in NSC Action No. 1941–­a, proposed by the Special Assistant to the President for Science and ­Technology and transmitted by the reference memorandum of July 29, 1958; in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as reported at the meeting, and of an oral summary of the advanced reconnaissance satellite program as pre­ sented at the meeting by the Deputy Secretary of Defense. b. Noted that the President approved for planning purposes the advanced reconnaissance satellite program presented by the Depart­ ment of Defense, including the eight test vehicles which will orbit over the USSR; with the understanding that Presidential authorization with respect to the launching of the eight development satellites capable of reconnaissance over the USSR and the subsequent scope of the opera­ tional capability of the program, will be sought by the Department of Defense in early 1960 or prior to the launching of the first of the above eight satellites, whichever date is sooner. c. Noted that the total number of test vehicles and the amount of funds required for the advanced reconnaissance satellite program were subject to further review. NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, sub­ sequently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense for implementation. The action in c above, as approved by the President, subsequently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense, the Director, Bureau of the ­Budget, and the Special Assistants to the President for National Secu­ rity Affairs and for Science and Technology, for appropriate action. Marion W. Boggs Director NSC Secretariat
