26
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
9.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State1
Tel Aviv, August 15, 1978, 1104Z
10418. For the Secretary, Atherton and Saunders from Ambas-
sador. Subject: Some Thoughts on Camp David Strategy.
1. The big problem at Camp David will be to get Begin to agree to
certain phrases in a declaration of principles which will be like castor
oil for him. Dayan and many others are skeptical that he will bring him-
self to swallow the medicine, since he would have to walk away from a
lifetime conviction about Israel’s right to rule over the West Bank. But
there is a chance he will rise to the historic moment, which he knows
may be his last and best chance to become the Prime Minister who
brought peace to Israel.
2. To have any hope of bringing Begin around will require far more
than just another vague indication that with “satisfactory” language
about the West Bank and Gaza in hand, Sadat would then go to Hus-
sein to seek his participation, and if refused, might then shoulder the
Palestinian problem himself. Begin will need much more than that to
show for abandoning his ideological position, especially with his asso-
ciates in Herut.
3. Put another way, the GOI will be asking what Israel will get
from Sadat for acquiescing publicly on the principle of withdrawal.
(Explicitly promising eventual Arab sovereignty is, I think, out of the
question for Begin.) To get from Begin what Sadat needs will require
him to make concrete certain understandings at which he has only
hinted to the Israelis thus far. The goal should be a mutually agreed,
specific framework coming out of the summit for a final, if phased, set-
tlement in Sinai. Less from Sadat will bring less from Begin. Sadat’s se-
riousness about peace will be judged here by his seriousness about a
concrete agreement over Sinai, whatever is said about the West Bank
and Gaza.
4. Nobody knows how far Begin is willing to go to reach an agree-
ment with Sadat, probably not even Begin himself. What I am sure of is
that the Prime Minister’s final fallback will not emerge unless Sadat
shows flexibility that has been notably absent from recent Egyptian
statements, both public and private. In order to leave his past behind,
Begin will have to be sure that Sadat will make a deal—not just talk
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 5, Preparations for Camp David
Summit—August 1978. Secret; Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent for informa-
tion Immediate to Cairo and the White House.
