3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
315
whether I had any ideas as to how we might enhance our “consulta-
tive” relationship. Without being specific, I did indicate to him that it is
very important that we not only negotiate specific issues but that we
periodically review the wider pattern of our relationship, discussing
candidly those issues regarding which we have conflicting viewpoints.
In this connection I explicitly mentioned the Middle East and Africa as
examples of areas regarding which each of us seems to have different
perceptions. I also added that in our view their recent conduct in Africa
was not compatible with a stable and increasingly cooperative relation-
ship. Dobrynin did not try to rebut me on that specific point but kept
pursuing the question as to how we could best enhance our communi-
cations so as to narrow down such differences.
I believe that his concerns will provide a useful opening for some
of the points that you intend to make in your general opening presenta-
tion. I told him that I would report on our conversation to the President
and that I would inform you fully. Finally, towards the end he again in-
quired whether you would be coming with forthcoming proposals and
expressed eagerness to learn more about them from Warnke. When
asked if the Soviet side was also planning to make constructive pro-
posals, he indicated that he at this time did not know.
98.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Soviet Criticism of US Foreign Policy and Leadership
1. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
2. [1 line not declassified] characterized his wide-ranging conversa-
tion with Kirilenko as one in which the latter was extremely critical and
deprecatory of US foreign policy, including Washington’s approach to
the SALT negotiations. The initial target of Kirilenko’s criticism was Dr.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 79, USSR: 2–4/78. Secret; Sensitive. Brzezinski underlined numerous passages,
including the portion of paragraph 6 that described the United States as a “paper tiger.”
An unknown hand made checkmarks in the margin next to the passages.
