620  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
basic objectives of their policy. These are the main purposes of all their 
maneuvers and proposals aimed at achieving “European security.” 
The more immediate Soviet objectives are to prevent an increase in 
West German military strength and the establishment of additional 
missile bases in Western Europe. Soviet disarmament policy and its 
attendant propaganda is directed largely at these targets. Moreover, 
the Soviet policies in the Middle East, Asia, and Africa, apart from 
their intrinsic importance, are themselves calculated to impose mate­
rial and political losses on Western Europe and to encourage divisions 
there.
251. The current Soviet diplomatic offensive over the status of 
Berlin is the most striking example of Khrushchev’s activist foreign 
policy. The Soviet leader must be aware that there is virtually no point 
of controversy between East and West on which the West has so thor­
oughly committed itself, and that there can scarcely be a more danger­
ous international issue to push to the point of crisis. In raising the issue, 
the Soviets have had in mind the achievement of a number of major 
objectives. They seek to compel the Western Powers to deal with East 
Germany and thus to accord at least tacit recognition to the GDR. This 
in turn would constitute an important step toward a ratification of the 
status quo in Eastern Europe, a development which the Soviets have 
long sought. Further, the removal of the Western presence from Berlin 
would permit the Soviets to handle the escapee problem and generally 
to reinforce the internal security of their East German Satellite. They 
probably further calculate that the Berlin initiative, even if only par­
tially successful, will stimulate a more receptive atmosphere for other 
Soviet proposals on Germany, particularly disengagement and peace 
treaty negotiations. In addition, the Soviets probably expect that a seri­
ous Western retreat on Berlin would bring into question for many West 
Germans the desirability of the NATO alliance.
252. It is not clear why the Soviets have chosen the present 
moment to raise the Berlin issue, but their action is certainly in accord 
with the generally hardening tone of their foreign policy. This in turn 
is related to their growing conviction, manifest over the last year or 
so, that their relative power position has improved. They are presum­
ably acting on the assumption that what they describe as “a shift in 
the relation of forces in the world arena” in their favor gives them an 
opportunity to test the solidarity of the Western Alliance over a major 
issue. The Soviet leaders probably intend to be cautious and tactically 
flexible. We believe that they will try to direct Soviet and East German 
maneuvering in a manner which will avoid military conflict with the 
Western allies, while at the same time they will be prepared to take 
advantage of any signs of weakness on the part of the West, or of 
inclinations to compromise on major issues. Nevertheless, they have
