36 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 15. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, November 8, 1979 I know that you are pressed from all sides with free advice and ideas on the situation in Iran. I don’t want to contribute to that problem, but need to state frankly my views to you. There is no doubt that we will be ultimately judged on two fronts: what happens to the Americans and what we do after their release/ murder to retaliate against Iran. Having said that, we must also be in the correct public posture to minimize the public and political damage to your Presidency and our country’s image in the world if we have a bad result and/or to maximize the benefit of a good result if the Americans are freed. This gets to the question of your trip to Canada. The American people are frustrated at our country’s inability to do anything to free the prisoners and retaliate in a fashion that makes us feel better about ourselves. There was a person-on-the-street interview this morning on NBC asking citizens what they would do. I found the individuals surprisingly sympathetic to the plight which faces you as to the rescue of the hostages. Having said this, there were a couple that wanted you to consider foolish things, i.e., send in the Marines. We will never convince or satisfy the hawks on this question, but we don’t need to lose the understanding and support of those who share your own frustration. I believe that if you leave for Canada tomorrow, you will be very vulnerable on two fronts. First, you will be perceived as not taking the “crisis” that exists seriously. It makes no difference that you will only be an hour away by plane or that you have left Vance and Zbig or that you have good communications. It will be perceived at the time of an international crisis involving the lives of American citizens, their President is traveling to a foreign country for a reason not obvious or relevant to them. At this point, you will seem irrelevant to the crisis. I realize that there is not much more that you could do if you were here, but the American people want to have a sense that you are on top of the situation, minding the store, exploring every possibility, etc. An even worse possibility would be that violence is done to the hostages while you are in Canada. If that happens, you will be ravaged 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 11/79. Eyes Only. Carter initialed “C” in the upper-right corner.
