723.2515/2389: Telegram
[Document 308]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, June 2, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received June 3—6:51 a.m.]
188. The Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs offered me late last night, for
transmission to you, his telegram of instructions to Cruchaga. I intimated
that as it was addressed to the Ambassador it should be sent direct to him,
thus avoiding delay and possible errors of translation. The Under Secretary
accepted my suggestion, but at noon today he told me that the telegram was
in process of being coded but would soon be sent. He then gave me copy of
which following is résumé: It answers memorandum telegraphed in your
No. 93, May 26, 10 p.m., and appears to have been drafted with idea of
being transmitted through me in order to call attention to what Foreign
Office regards as an irregularity in answering Cruchaga’s notes through me;
it states that study of origin of good offices shows they could lead to
nothing practical, and that Chile’s acceptance of offer of good offices is
proof of her desire to find equitable settlement, but that no obligation is
thereby created to accept any proposition that may be submitted; it then
refers to your account of your efforts to find acceptable formula and quotes
at length the Foreign Office telegram of April 4 to Cruchaga in which long
argument was made against suspension of plebiscite and against creation of
an independent state but willingness was expressed to accept division along
present departmental boundaries, Chile to retain Arica and the railway, etc.;
telegram states supposition that Cruchaga has fully acquainted you with
these ideas. There is brief reference to alternative proposition of April 15
and to the proposed modification, viz, the corridor plan; and says that you
misjudge Chile’s purposes. It discusses next your criticism of proposition
for a corridor lying north of railway and your statement that this proposition
shows intention to make impossible a solution by good offices; this
supposition, it is stated, is remote from Chilean thoughts. Bolivia’s right to
