Haiti 779 HA–22. Memorandum from the Acting Director of the International Cooperation. Administration (Saccio) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1  Washington, June 20, 1960. SUBJECT Budgetary Support for FY 1959–1960 to Haiti. The Haitian request for budgetary support for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1960 was submitted by a committee representing the Government of Haiti on May 24, 1960. This request was for $5 million for the months of June, July, August and September, 1960. In view of the size of this request it is doubtful if the provision of $1 million will do much to satisfy the desires of the Duvalier Government. The Haitian request for $5 million includes $2.4 million for an alleged shortfall of “fiscal” receipts, $1.3 million for unbudgeted annual payments on international debts and contributions, and $1.8 million for restoration of salary cuts and other desired expenditures. Both the Embassy and the USCM have recommended a negative response to this request and have reported that the Haitian presentation has not been justified, that there is no reason for expecting a shortfall in fiscal receipts and that the request fails to establish a real need for the aid. If the $1 million is made available during the present Haitian current fiscal year, it will undoubtedly results in a demand for at least $7 million and possibly more for budgetary support for the coming fiscal year 1960–1961. In view of the prospective decline in receipts as the result of a short crop of coffee in FY 1960–1961, some budget support appears likely to be required—­but the asking price will be much larger if we provide budgetary support this year when it is not needed. It must be assumed that supplying $1 million for the remainder of this fiscal year will be interpreted by the Haitian Government as an indication that its refusal to carry on a constructive development program which the United States is financing is a sure way to secure budgetary support from the United States and will make any constructive program of economic development practically impossible. This is particularly true when it is taken into consideration that during the present fiscal year the Government of Haiti has followed the policy of not only refusing to help itself but of rejecting constructive help designed to bring economic development. It is believed that if it is considered necessary for political reasons to make available $1 million for budgetary support during the next two 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.5-MSP/7–2060. Secret.
