634 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement to the overthrow of the Lemus regime. I think that they are now coming to realize that they have a bear by the tail—­genesis Russian—­and are now very much concerned about how to get rid of it. That it will be gotten rid of, at least in the form of the present Junta, I am convinced. Just how soon the very careful preparations that will be necessary for success will be ready is anyone’s guess. I don’t believe, however, that we will find the present situation existing at the end of this month. I hope we will be able to convince our peers in Washington to hold off for at least this long. . . ..3 Most sincerely, Donald P. Downs 3 Four dots appear in the source text. ES–36. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1 Washington, November 11, 1960. Mr. Gray said Mr. Gates was terribly concerned about recognition of the new government of El Salvador. He was not in agreement with State. He was strongly opposed to going ahead as were the Joint Chiefs. He acknowledges that this was political and he understood that Allen Dulles was also opposed. Mr. Gray said he could not speak for Mr. Dulles but he thought this was correct information. He told Mr. Gates that he had not been in on the matter except for what came up in the National Security Council.2 He did not consider this to be an NSC matter and therefore had not inserted himself in the process, and he didn’t intend to except to pass along his point of view which is the same as Mr. Gates’. But this is an individual point of view because he would think the President would look to the Secretary of State for primary advice. However, [illegible in the original] would like to know how State felt it should be done—i.e., how do the people at the top feel—and more specifically how did Mr. Merchant feel about it. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.02/11–1160. 2 Reference is to the NSC meeting of November 7; for the memorandum of discussion, see Document ES–32.
