642 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 107. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 6, 1990, 2–3:15 p.m. PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D012, Dennis Ross Files, US/Soviet Memos of Conversation—1989/1990. Secret. U.S.: Secretary Baker Ambassador Bartholomew Dennis B. Ross, Notetaker Interpreter USSR: Eduard Shevardnadze General Akhromeyev Pavel Palazhenko Sergey Tarasenko, Notetaker Interpreter Shevardnadze: I requested the meeting now because after meeting with the President and seeing how close the dates are on the Summit, I think we really have very little time left if we are going to get everything done and accomplished in time. My question, given the shortage of time, is what do we do now? I think it might be helpful if you would comment on your reaction to the elements of the Akhromeyev package that was outlined. I think it’s important to know what the US reaction to this package is. Also, I think we need to think about how we create an arrangement for further discussions on this and the remaining questions. I don’t think we can rely only on the negotiating mechanism in Geneva, because there are questions that are going to require political decisions, and maybe on a very regular basis. So I think what we need is an exchange of information, maybe including a mechanism of special envoys, so that we can establish meetings as needed. I really do believe strongly that the main issues really need to be decided pretty much before you visit in May. Baker: I’m glad to hear you say that because I really don’t relish the idea of going to Moscow ten days before the Summit with major issues like the current ones outstanding. My reaction to the Akhromeyev package doesn’t really differ a lot from the reaction I gave you yesterday and repeated to some extent this morning. There are several problems, and they are serious problems. If we have any chance of reaching an agreement at all at the Summit, we’re going to need some process that is different than the one that we have leading. [Page 2 is missing in the version on file.] Congress a provision that we have no good way of verifying. We just can’t have a limit that is not in any way verifiable. It certainly would open you up to the same criticism in the Supreme Soviet. In fact, you
