810  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
intermediate points. The fact that an unreasonable U.S. opening position 
was allowed to get through cost us a great deal of time and effort here.
8. On the subject of heavy ICBMs, an additional important point 
has arisen. The Soviets have asked if they could convert the remaining 
154 silos for other missles. The current U.S. language would forbid this, 
although the intent was to ban increases in capability, not decreases. 
Some here argue that only destruction of these silos is acceptable. 
I would think that it would be a good deal if we could get rid of heavy 
ICBMs through conversion to a less threatening system, since we might 
get rid of them faster and without the high negotiating cost of reducing 
them in START II. Naturally, the procedures would have to be such that 
reconversion for heavy ICBMs would be infeasible.
Submarine Package
9. Another good compromise has emerged in this case. The sides 
could have up to 72 SLBM launchers under conversion or modification 
(48 after 7 years), 50 ICBM launchers under conversion or modification 
and 48 SLBM launchers on subs which are nearly constructed (afloat) 
but not yet on sea trials. More than 48 would be allowed, but counted 
under the central treaty limits. We also agree to allow conversion of 
SSBNs to other uses. The detailed procedures for moving things in and 
out of these categories is still the subject of tough debates in the conver-
sion or elimination working group, but progress is being made.
Other Issues
10. We have also been having intensive discussions on the tough 
issues of deployed/non-­deployed systems and test and training launch-
ers. I am hopeful we can get ad ref agreements on these before too 
long. The Soviets have said they will have an answer on the produce/­
develop controversy soon. If we can get all this material nailed down 
by mid-­August, things will look a lot brighter.
Discussions with the UK
11. Rick and Lint had good discussions in London July 18–19. 
These covered Holy Loch, Diego Garcia, a possible British statement 
regarding the ratio of their future forces to reduced Soviet forces, etc. A 
reporting cable is being sent from Embassy London.2
Burt
2 In telegram 14608 from London, July 23, the Embassy reported: “During July 18–19 
meetings in London, Senior British Officials told NST Negotiator Richard Burt that HMG 
favors a no compromise/no negotiation approach” to the non-­circumvention issue.” 
“They indicated, however, that they would be willing to emphasize in public statements 
issued for other purposes (including the forthcoming defense White Paper) that they 
had no plans to expand the size of their independent deterrent, which, even after START, 
would be a smaller fraction of Soviet strategic forces than in 1963.” (Department of State, 
Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D900671–0426)
