144 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX comments. This message represents a refinement of our assessment in light of the responses from the field. We have cast paras 3–6 of this message in the form of talking points which the action addressees may share with host governments on a confidential basis. Action addressees may also draw on the substance of paras 7–93 which discuss U.S. policy in light of the recent events in Poland. 3. The present situation in Poland: —Events in Poland have not yet run their course and the question of whether the workers are ultimately successful in achieving a major liberalization of Polish society will have a significant bearing on the impact of these events on other Eastern European countries. —Although Polish workers have already won some signal victories, e.g., securing agreement in principle to an independent trade union structure, acknowledgement of the right to strike, access by the church to the media, and apparently some relaxation in censorship, the new Polish leadership seems certain to try over time to pare back some of these concessions. Nevertheless, in the short run, the situation in Poland seems likely to stabilize and the gains of the workers seem likely to be preserved. 4. Impact of Polish developments on Eastern Europe: —The unique characteristics of the internal situation in Poland reduce the chances of any immediate, direct spillover of Polish developments into other parts of Eastern Europe—let alone the USSR. —At least some of the other Eastern European Governments are likely to heighten the degree of vigilance toward dissidents and be more alert to the possibility of discontent among workers. At the same time, they are likely to pay more attention to agricultural performance and supplies of foodstuffs and consumer goods. —Several Eastern European Governments are likely to pay increased attention to the possibility of structural economic reforms— perhaps along Hungarian lines—as a way of dealing with worsening economic problems. —Over the longer term, developments in Poland are likely to have a significant impact. The workers’ gains, especially if they are to some degree consolidated and institutionalized, will serve as an example of the kinds of evolutionary change which may some day be possible elsewhere in the area. 5. Reaction from Moscow: 3 In telegram 253501, September 22, the Department corrected this sentence to read “draw from substance of para 7.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800453–1198)
