72  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Comparison of Option 2 with Option 3A/B shows that either of 
the Option 3 variants will be significantly cheaper over the next five 
years. Further, if you choose Option 3, and by 1980 find that the cruise 
missile path (Variant A) is the way to go, you save a great deal of money 
any way you look at it. In addition, if you choose Option 3 and find you 
want the B–1 after all, Option 3 (Variant B) provides the entire 240 B–1s 
sought by the Air Force by 1987 at little or no increase in real costs.
Finally, in budget dollars, although Option 3 (Variant B) will be 
more expensive than Option 2 over the next 10 years by about 15%, it 
will produce 35% more B–1 bombers over this period.
Strategic Implications
The two most important contributions that a strategic bomber 
force conceivably makes to our security are:
(1) It provides an objective capability to cause great damage to 
anyone we attack; and
(2) it contributes to subjective impressions of the state of the 
US/USSR strategic forces balance.
In terms of the first contribution, the differences between the four 
options we are examining are not significant, at least for the next 10 
years. Over that period, no matter which option is chosen, we will have 
far more than enough deliverable weapons to give us very high confi-
dence in our ability to destroy virtually all of the significant targets in 
the Soviet Union. This will be true even if we have absorbed the most 
effective counterforce strike that the Soviets can make against us and 
even if we are caught completely by surprise.
The options may differ significantly in their impact on subjective 
impressions of the strategic balance, however. In order to assess this 
possibility, we have constructed the attached plots showing the relative 
numbers of deliverable inventory warheads, and amounts of deliver-
able inventory equivalent megatonnage and throw weight, for both 
the Soviets and ourselves—­plots are given for each of our four bomber 
modernization options.
These three measures are probably as reasonable a set of determi-
nants of the perceived strategic balance as any others. My own view 
is that number of deliverable warheads is probably the single most 
important determinant; amount of deliverable equivalent megatonnage 
is slightly less important. Inclusion of throw weight seems somewhat 
redundant since this measure is really only an indicator of each side’s 
ability to deliver nuclear weapons or equivalent megatonnage, an abil-
ity that is included to a large degree in the first two measures. I have 
included throw weight, however, because it has become the focus of so 
much attention in recent years.
