Special Session on Disarmament 1219 co-chairmanship in particular, we should not take positions which are less flexible than we otherwise might be prepared to take just to maintain a common front with the Soviets. With respect to consideration of the SSOD final document, the US Del should make every effort consistent with basic US policy on arms control issues to ensure that consensus procedures are used and that voting is avoided. 4. Declaration on Disarmament. The declaration is essentially a political statement by governments which outlines the problem of the growth of armaments and serves as a “call for action.” The US can support the concept of such a statement. At the same time, the US Del should seek to moderate any language which may be advanced which does not recognize that achievements have occurred in past negotiations, which questions our will for progress, which carries overtones of criticism of our alliances and overseas deployments or which is contrary to US policy in such areas as nonproliferation. US Del should work for a balanced declaration which can be adopted, preferably as a part of the final document, or separately, by consensus. Del may agree to language in the draft declaration on an ad referendum basis but should submit language to Washington for USG approval of substance. Del is authorized to accept minor editorial changes in final text which in Del’s judgement do not involve questions of substance and should report such changes for information purposes. 5. Program of Action. Previous work on the draft program of action indicated a considerable divergence of views. The US Del should work for a realistic program which is applicable to the years ahead. We wish to avoid raising expectations on issues which are clearly not ready for active negotiations. The CCD has been given the task of preparing a longer-range comprehensive program of disarmament. The USG believes that the CCD is the most appropriate body to carry out this talk and is prepared to participate actively in such work. US Del should resist efforts to set fixed timetables in a program of action for future negotiations. US Del may accept giving primacy to nuclear issues and setting as our ultimate goal the complete elimination of nuclear weapons from the arsenals of states. However, it should also be recognized that this process must be carried out in a way that increases stability and makes the likelihood of conflict less. US Del should seek to ensure that it is recognized that the reduction of nuclear arms by nuclear weapon states is not an isolated process but there must also be conventional arms reductions by both nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states. However, Del should not concede the necessity of a specific link between nuclear and conventional arms reductions. Del should encourage support for recognition of conventional arms restraints, especially with respect to arms transfers, in the program of action. The general US objective with re-
