appears to be no substantial source, therefore, from which the United States could satisfy its claims in absence of special arrangement with Austria or Hungary, which might meet with objection from Allied Powers, except from proceeds of the liberation bonds. Value of these bonds is to be credited on Austro-Hungarian reparation account, and if distributed among powers the receiving powers will be debited on reparation account. In this connection see article 2 of Spa Agreement8 and paragraph 3, annex to Finance Ministers Agreement, March 11, 1922.9

4. Czechoslovakia’s liberation bonds have value as to same degree, as have also bonds of Poland. Probable that other states will have reparation claims so large as to outweigh their liberation bond issue. 5. I think that we have an interest in the distribution of these liberation bonds on account of our claims. I suggest that we take no action in the Conference of Ambassadors until March and then request that delivery of bonds should be made to Reparation Commission as trustee with instructions to it to make no disposition of the said bonds or of their proceeds except in agreement with the United States. In Conference of Ambassadors we could indicate that we had unsatisfied claims against Austria and Hungary and in consequence could claim share in amounts distributed. 6. In past negotiations on participation in German reparation payments we were criticized for delay in not advising the Allies that we intended to collect damages from Germany. I think it good tactics, therefore, in present matter to state our position in advance. As far as I am able to gather from present conditions apart from use of Austrian-Hungarian property in the United States and possible separate financial arrangements with Austria and Hungary, I am inclined to believe that the proceeds of the reparation [liberation?] bonds offer the most promising outlook for some payment in near future. It is desirable, therefore, to make statement. Logan HERRICK 3 Telegram in two sections. 4 See agreement between the United States and Austria and Hungary, Nov. 26, 1924, Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 152. 5 See ibid., 1925, vol. II, p. 133. 6 See ibid., 1922, vol. I, pp. 613 ff. 7 Neither printed. 8 Foreign Relations, 1920, vol. II, p. 406.
