National Security Policy  123
Pilot Studies (page 7)
44. Decisions under the Committee’s recommendation to provide 
Federal funds for pilot shelter and site studies in five cities, determined 
by FCDA to be representative, may be complicated by political con­
siderations. The Planning Board believes that one solution might be 
to invite cities, so determined to be representative, to come forward 
on a sharing basis, matching on a stated basis local funds with Federal 
funds. Under such an arrangement, selection might be made on the 
basis of the first five cities to volunteer within a specified time, appro­
priately distributed among representative categories. Only if such an 
offer prompted inadequate response would the Federal Government 
undertake the studies with 100% Federal funds.
Improvement in Active Defenses (See page 12)
5. The Committee did not address itself directly to the provisions 
of NSC Action No. 1842–­d–(2) which specifies one of the conditions 
upon which adoption of the concept of fallout shelter is based:
“Improvements in active defenses can give reasonable promise, 
together with fallout shelters, of limiting estimated civilian casualties, 
in the event of nuclear attack on the United States, to a level which will 
permit the United States to survive as a nation and will in no case be 
greater than a similar casualty ratio in the USSR.”
The Committee did not make a determination under the foregoing 
condition because it did not have enough information on prospec­
tive improvements in active defenses to make a finding on this point 
and because its proposed measures were only partial in nature. The 
Planning Board does not consider itself competent to make a judgment 
on this point on the basis of information available at this time.
General
6. In the light of the above comments and recommendations:
a. The State, JCS, ODM, FCDA and AEC Planning Board repre­
sentatives endorse the report by the Interdepartmental Committee on 
“Measures to Carry Out the Concept of Shelter” (NSC 5807).
b. The Treasury,5 Defense and Budget Planning Board Members 
recommend that the Council endorse those proposals contained in the 
report by the Interdepartmental Committee on “Measures to Carry Out 
4 (1) The Treasury Planning Board Member objects to the Planning Board’s solution 
as not being politically practicable. However, the Treasury Planning Board Member does 
believe that research on site-­planning should be conducted.
(2) The ODM Planning Board Member favors the pilot studies but believes that, in 
addition, research on site-­planning should be conducted. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 For additional Treasury comments, see Annex. [Footnote is in the original.]
