World Hunger and Food Policy
725
tive changes designed to make development assistance and food aid
policies more human needs oriented reflect Congressional interest on
which a Presidential initiative might build. A substantial number of
members in both Houses plan to introduce on September 27 a resolu-
tion calling on you to establish a Presidential Commission on World
Hunger.3 Their efforts are in principle supportive of your interest in a
hunger initiative.
—International Organizations. The world hunger issue has received
priority attention in recent years in organizations such as the World
Food Council, the U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization, the Inter-
national Fund for Agricultural Development, and the World Bank;
these and other organizations could be important vehicles for helping
to implement a Presidential initiative.
—Private Sector. Interest includes both experts and organizations
wishing to participate in the development of policies and to organize
public support for appropriate Presidential actions once announced.
In addition, several foreign policy and food studies have been con-
ducted or are in progress. These studies include departmental reviews,
such as USDA’s International Food and Agriculture Assessment (re-
cently submitted to you)4 and OMB’s Food and Nutrition Reorganiza-
tion Study5 as well as inter-departmental and private sector reviews
such as the National Academy of Science’s World Food and Nutrition
Study,6 the Development Coordinating Committee Study on Foreign
Aid,7 the National Security Council PRM–8,8 the Vance-Blumenthal
Study on Foreign Aid as it relates to multilateral assistance,9 the
Brookings Institution study of foreign aid,10 and the International
Health Assessment (currently being conducted by my office).11
3 Leahy introduced Senate Resolution 271, co-sponsored by 55 Senators, on Sep-
tember 27. The resolution called on the President to establish a commission on domestic
and international hunger and malnutrition and directed the resultant commission to es-
tablish the causes of domestic and international malnutrition, identify and critique Fed-
eral programs related to hunger, and develop for the President and Congress initiatives
designed to reduce hunger and malnutrition. (Letter from Bennet to Zablocki, October 26;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770175–0151) Nolan introduced a
companion resolution in the House (H. Res. 784) that same day, cosponsored by 24 Rep-
resentatives. The Senate approved S. Res. 271 by voice vote on October 27, and the House
approved H. Res. 784 on November 1.
4 Attached to Document 223.
5 See footnote 3, Document 223.
6 See Document 212 and footnote 2 thereto.
7 See footnote 8, Document 216.
8 See footnote 7, Document 219.
9 Not further identified.
10 See footnote 9, Document 216.
11 See Document 293.
