470 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV progress over the past year in defining issues and proposing specific solutions, much remains to be done to follow up on this report. Among those matters that we intend to move on promptly within DoD are the development of the following: —More discrete building blocks which would provide increased flexibility in the SIOP. —An improved intelligence data base, particularly for command and control targets and other military forces. —A launch-­under-­attack option for our land-­based ballistic missile force, which will become vulnerable in the early 1980s and remain so to a substantial degree for a number of years even though we take prompt steps to deploy it in a less vulnerable form. —[less than 1 line not declassified] —Possible alternative criteria for the targeting of Soviet [less than 1 line not declassified] —Specific program proposals to enhance endurance of strategic C3I. —More detailed guidelines for the Secure Reserve Force. —Exercises that will test and provide the basis for refinement of non-SIOP options. We also plan to develop a program of additional studies. These will explore such issues as how we might target Soviet general purpose forces more effectively, [2 lines not declassified] In addition, there are some issues that are broader in scope and, therefore, should receive NSC consideration. Among the most important of these is identifying and electing a broad and coherent set of policy objectives that will give focus to our nuclear weapons employment plans and related acquisition policies. This report identifies four such broad policy options. It is my view that we should adopt, at a minimum, alternative b, described on page ix of the Executive Summary, and that we should consider moving some distance toward alternative c, insofar as budgetary constraints allow. We also should review in the NSC the extent to which we should adjust our targeting policy with respect to Soviet industry which now focuses on “impeding recovery.” The study suggests modification in light of our evaluation of deterrence requirements and our limited understanding of the recovery process itself, as distinct from simply targeting industrial capacity. Another important unresolved issue, also addressed in the separate ICBM Modernization Study,2 relates to counterforce capabilities; the range of capabilities we require and the extent to which we should develop quick reaction hard target capabilities. The issue of future ICBM requirements and Hard Target Capability have also been the 2 See Document 102.
