August 8–September 17, 1978 185 the displaced persons. It is different from UN Resolution 194,6 which covers the Palestinian refugees. These two concepts, el-Araby asserted, should not be amalgamated. El-Araby also was unhappy with the inclusion on page 12 of a reference to Egypt and Israel reaching agreement on “Arab and Jewish refugees.” On Arab refugees, it is the Palestinians who are involved. In the case of Jewish refugees, El-Araby noted that this can only apply to Egyptian citizens of Jewish faith who left Egypt after 1967 or before. Egypt is agreeable that such individuals may return to Egypt at any time they wish. The Secretary noted that we are aware of the refugee program. It has not been adequately dealt with. Our paper is trying to show that the entire refugee problem needs to be handled. El-Baz stated that the Egyptians object to equating the Jewish refugee issue with the Palestinian refugees. The Palestinian refugees, he reiterated, are separate from the displaced persons and should be so treated. They are also separate from Jewish refugees. He saw no real problem with Jewish refugees. If an individual has a claim, it is his or her right to seek redress through the courts or through international adjudication. The Secretary asked if the Egyptians object to the use of “Arab” and to the inclusion of Jewish refugees also to the non-reference to the UN Resolutions. Saunders pointed out that there is a separate Jewish refugee problem. He did not think it sufficient to cite UN Resolution 194. Israel must somehow be brought into the action in order to solve the refugee problem. El-Araby suggested the matter be taken piece-by-piece: displaced persons should be cited, Palestinian refugees should be cited, but in a manner where their rights are not prejudiced during the interim period. (He made no reference to Jewish refugees.) El-Baz referred to our reference to a continuing committee to handle by unanimous agreement unresolved issues. He asked what we have in mind with this provision. Saunders observed that the reference is a purely technical one. He recalled the mixed commission that was set up in the Sinai II Agreement. There are certain issues which such a group could discuss and, hopefully, resolve. El-Baz responded that putting problems into hands of the two parties might in effect result in a stalemate. He pointed out that mechanisms do exist to handle this sort of a situation and referred again to the ICJ. El-Araby noted that day-to-day operations in the West Bank/Gaza should be within the competence of the local, self-governing authority. 6 The status of Palestinian refugees is specifically addressed in Article II of Resolution 194–(III), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 11, 1948. For the complete text of the Resolution, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1948–49, pp. 174–176.
