Afghanistan
461
took Afghan sentries by surprise at most locations and after brief fire-
fights succeeded in securing and disarming the troops. In addition,
airborne forces moved to secure Afghan army garrisons ringing the
capital. Amin and his entourage were reportedly executed that night.
(TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Simultane-
ously, two Soviet motorized rifle divisions poised on the border appar-
ently invaded on two axes. One division moved south to Kabul along
the road previously secured by the Bagram forces and arrived in the
city on 29 December. The other division crossed into western Afghani-
stan and occupied the key Afghan cities of Herat and Shindand. These
are the only confirmed ground force divisions in Afghanistan. How-
ever, elements of two additional divisions may now have entered the
country—one along each of the previously used axes of advance.
(TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Information
on the tactics employed in the operation, is sketchy [less than 1 line not
declassified]. It appears that both divisions conducted a tactical road
march south to their respective objectives with the western division
reportedly encountering some resistance in Herat. The rise [use] of
reconnaissance aircraft in support of ground formations’ advance along
major routes has been confirmed as has the use of helicopters for
medical evacuation missions. As yet, there is no reliable evidence of
heliborne assaults or air strikes in conjunction with the Soviet campaign
and, indeed, no indications of active Soviet counterinsurgency opera-
tions have been noted to date. As a footnote, despite the lack of hard
evidence, it is believed some airborne elements may have been flown
into key outlying cities during the 25–27 December airlift to secure
important airfields prior to the subsequent arrival of regular combat
units.
3. (TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Airlift: Cur-
rently, Soviet military transport aviation (VTA) is supporting military
operations in Afghanistan with an average of 15–30 flights a day. These
flights are bringing in important supplies as well as providing some
medical evacuation support.
(TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) During the
Christmas airlift into Kabul, the Soviets apparently committed 50 per-
cent of their AN–22/COCK and IL–76/CANDID assets to the air opera-
tions in addition to 35 percent of their more numerous AN–12/CUB
fleet. These aircraft were drawn primarily from the western USSR but
some came from the Soviet Far East. The actual airlift was conducted
in two phases. The first phase conducted on 24–25 December repre-
sented an airlift of 150–200 VTA sorties into bases in the border region
from the western USSR. This was the relocation of major elements of
an airborne division. The second phase consisted of the movement of
these airborne forces into Kabul and possibly other key cities by an
