826 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 43. I said having said that and in conjunction with that, we each say we will settle disputes through peaceful means. One without other did not give real meaning to our expression of desire to settle disputes by peaceful means. 44. I said having said that, how could he say that it was unrea­ sonable on my part to suggest that we say that both of these aspects apply to dispute that we both agree is most serious between us? How could he say that it was unreasonable for each of us in stating that, that if either is attacked in violation this declaration or by others we will defend ourselves? Objection to either of these simple and fundamental principles I found hard to interpret as other than desire avoid issuing of meaningful declaration that would genuinely be real first step toward settlement our differences. 45. I said if he thought that this position on his part would appear reasonable to public, it certainly his choice as to whether or not he desired again to initiate public exchanges between us. I reiterated view that I had expressed previously that I genuinely did not see how such public exchanges advanced agreement between us or could be recon­ ciled with real desire for agreement. I therefore regretted and deplored issuance of a public statement by his side and hoped that they would reconsider it. 46. I said however if it was their decision to issue such statement I was perfectly willing that public judge as to which of us was genu­ inely willing to renounce force and willing to seek peaceful settlement. I entirely willing let public judge which side was in fact obstructing issuance of meaningful statement between us. 47. Wang said he felt all these points I just raised had been con­ cretely answered by December 1 draft their side. They had given much discussion to these points in our previous meetings. Therefore he did not think it necessary for him to repeat all views he had advanced previously. 48. Wang said their intent and attitude is quite clear and definite. They had accepted proposal I had put forward to effect that we make declaration between us as first step in actual settlement. This first step, as we have characterized it, is expression of determination of two sides to settle disputes peacefully without resort to force. And merits of ­practical disputes might be left for settlement at next step. There was nothing ambiguous in it and there was nothing hidden which could not be brought out for public scrutiny. 49. Wang said I had questioned public airing of discussion and I had termed it as not advancing our talks. However if discussion was to go on in same manner as we were, how could anyone expect to make any advances in talks? They believe public would be able make fair
