Eastern Europe Region
43
notable progress toward greater internal liberalization or greater autonomy
from the Soviet Union before granting them MFN and credits. As greater
autonomy is extremely unlikely in Czechoslovakia (and the GDR)
where Soviet troops are present and Soviet security concerns great, or
in Bulgaria which draws marked economic benefits from the Soviet
connection, our decision would turn on indications of greater
liberalization.
Proponents of Option III would maintain that to fail to differentiate
clearly in our treatment of Eastern European countries according to
the degree of repressiveness of their regimes would be inconsistent
with our commitment to human rights in general and CSCE objectives
in particular. It would suggest an indifference to the plight of the
different peoples, which could cause us serious domestic political prob-
lems and even loss of support for continuation of the detente process.
Finally, it would represent a failure on our part to utilize the benefits
of improved relations with the US to encourage those regimes with
better records and to inhibit those who do worse. Option III proponents
would hold that withholding our cooperation could, over time, induce
improved performance from the more repressive regimes along the
lines of our CSCE objectives. Since it is likely that US policy can have
only marginal effects on the human rights practices of such regimes,
the Option III approach would at a minimum make clear our continued
disapproval in the absence of such improvement.
Under Option IV, following modification or suspension of Jackson/Vanik,
we would proceed without delay to negotiate trade agreements making MFN
and credits available to both Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia, provided that the
normalization steps noted above had been virtually completed and their behav-
ior on human rights matters was not offensive.
Those favoring Option IV would point out that changes in the
character or behavior of Communist regimes—including their behavior
in human rights—are most likely to come in the context of an evolution-
ary process of detente rather than as a result either of US proffered
cooperation (as a carrot) or of US pressure (as a stick), especially in
the absence of a similar strategy on the part of our Western European
allies. They would emphasize that the basic impulse for greater atten-
tion by the respective regimes to human rights comes from the indige-
nous populace and that the US position should play a supporting role.
To make that role effective will entail steady and persistent pressure
over time and, if US influence is to be effective even in a supplementary
role, the US must be more engaged, more present, and more important
to the regimes. It can achieve this additional involvement through
expansion of cultural and scientific exchanges and other official and
private exchanges, and through greater emphasis to trade promotion.
In their view, an enlarged stake in the US relationship and the interplay
