Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII treaty—a step which would, from the DRA’s vantage point, represent a complete break with past Afghan regimes and would codify the two countries’ special relationship.2 We have no firm evidence, however, that this subject has been under active consideration by either party. The Afghans are also expected to ask the USSR for food and increased economic assistance. We anticipate that Moscow will not want their guests to go away empty-handed, and that the visit will, therefore, produce some concrete results which would help to identify the future direction of this rapidly developing relationship. End of summary. 2. Departure of the Afghan party: Taraki was accompanied by the following Cabinet officers (names are in the order listed in the official media): Hafizullah Amin, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister; Dr. Shah Wali, Minister of Public Health and Acting Minister of Planning; Dr. Saleh Mohammad Ziri, Minister of Agriculture and Land Reform; Professor Mahmud Sooma, Minister of Higher Education; Mohammad Mansoor Hashimi, Minister of Water and Power; Eng. Mohammad Ismail Danesh, Minister of Mines and Industries; and Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoi, Minister of Communications. With the exception of the last three men, all members of the travelling party are members of the PDPA Politburo. The “pecking order” of the top officials bidding farewell to the Taraki party was: Dastagir Panjshiri, Minister of Public Works; Abdul Karim Misaq, Minister of Finance; Major Mohammad Awlam Watanjar, Minister of Interior; Abdul Hakem Sharaie Jauzjani, Minister of Justice and Attorney-General; Mohammad Hassen Bareq-Shafiee, Minister of Culture and Information; Abdul Qudus Ghorbandi, Minister of Commerce; and Dr. Abdul Rashid Jalili, Minister of Education. Panjshiri and Misaq are known members of the Politburo. When the Ambassador asked one protocol official who has been left in charge, the reply was “Watanjar.” The Chief of Protocol later told the Ambassador that the Revolutionary Council was in charge of Afghanistan collectively—and that any urgent important problems would be forwarded to Moscow for decisions. (We find this version more credible; Watanjar appears to lack sufficient presence or intelligence for the “charge” role.) In trying to set up top-level appointments 2 The Soviet-Afghan Friendship Treaty, signed by Brezhnev and Taraki in Moscow,
