80
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
treaty—a step which would, from the DRA’s vantage point, represent
a complete break with past Afghan regimes and would codify the two
countries’ special relationship.2 We have no firm evidence, however,
that this subject has been under active consideration by either party.
The Afghans are also expected to ask the USSR for food and increased
economic assistance. We anticipate that Moscow will not want their
guests to go away empty-handed, and that the visit will, therefore,
produce some concrete results which would help to identify the future
direction of this rapidly developing relationship. End of summary.
2. Departure of the Afghan party: Taraki was accompanied by the
following Cabinet officers (names are in the order listed in the official
media): Hafizullah Amin, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister;
Dr. Shah Wali, Minister of Public Health and Acting Minister of Plan-
ning; Dr. Saleh Mohammad Ziri, Minister of Agriculture and Land
Reform; Professor Mahmud Sooma, Minister of Higher Education;
Mohammad Mansoor Hashimi, Minister of Water and Power; Eng.
Mohammad Ismail Danesh, Minister of Mines and Industries; and
Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoi, Minister of Communications. With the
exception of the last three men, all members of the travelling party are
members of the PDPA Politburo. The “pecking order” of the top officials
bidding farewell to the Taraki party was: Dastagir Panjshiri, Minister
of Public Works; Abdul Karim Misaq, Minister of Finance; Major
Mohammad Awlam Watanjar, Minister of Interior; Abdul Hakem Shar-
aie Jauzjani, Minister of Justice and Attorney-General; Mohammad
Hassen Bareq-Shafiee, Minister of Culture and Information; Abdul
Qudus Ghorbandi, Minister of Commerce; and Dr. Abdul Rashid Jalili,
Minister of Education. Panjshiri and Misaq are known members of the
Politburo. When the Ambassador asked one protocol official who has
been left in charge, the reply was “Watanjar.” The Chief of Protocol
later told the Ambassador that the Revolutionary Council was in charge
of Afghanistan collectively—and that any urgent important problems
would be forwarded to Moscow for decisions. (We find this version
more credible; Watanjar appears to lack sufficient presence or intelli-
gence for the “charge” role.) In trying to set up top-level appointments
2 The Soviet-Afghan Friendship Treaty, signed by Brezhnev and Taraki in Moscow,
December 5, was reported in telegram 30123 from Moscow, December 7. The Embassy
noted that the treaty covered “cooperation in the military, political, economic, scientific,
and cultural fields” and committed both countries to “open-ended” consultations on
security issues. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780504–0924)
A Voice of America report, December 7, quoted Brezhnev’s speech at a Kremlin dinner
for Taraki on the significance of the treaty: “The traditional good relations between our
two countries have assumed, I would say, a qualitatively new character.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–47, Afghanistan: 8 May
1978–7 Dec 1978)
