178 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I tions share our faith that, in the longer run, expanded trade will best help developing countries to help themselves. But the immediate problems of hunger, disease, high infant mortality, illiteracy and stunted “life chances” cannot and should not be expected to await a longer-run answer. If our nations did not have the knowledge and the resources needed to overcome these problems of meeting basic human needs within the next two decades, perhaps we could excuse ourselves from making any special effort to overcome the so-called “absolute poverty” problem. But the knowledge of the development process and the knowledge of how to construct a viable approach to the resolution of this acute poverty problem is now within our grasp. What is missing is the joint willingness of developed and developing countries to recognize that the North-South dialogue is about human beings as well as nation-states, and that “equality of opportunity” for a richer and more meaningful life only makes sense as it applies to people. In order to give proper focus to this aspect of the North-South dialogue, the United States proposes to proceed as follows. First, we, ourselves, will develop specific programs to overcome the absolute poverty problem globally. We have already determined the essential ingredients and objectives of such a program. It must deal with: —Basic education, particularly in rural areas; —Essential health services, again with emphasis on rural areas; —increased food production and the provision of adequate nutrition; —clean water. At the June meeting of the OECD, we plan to ask the member countries to jointly cooperate with us in developing these programs as a principal part of the OECD’s general work program.5 Within a year, we would hope to be able to present to the developing countries a major set of programs for discussion. Our objective would be then to develop a joint effort that will effectively tackle the problem of meeting the basic human needs of the world’s poorest billion people. We recognize that this effort will require a substantial commitment of political will and resources on the part of all countries who choose to participate—North and South; developing and developed. To carry this out and to conduct the North-South dialogue, we believe that serious consideration should be given to developing appro- 5 The Council of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development was scheduled to meet in Paris June 23–24; for the text of Vance’s intervention at the meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, July 25, 1977, pp. 105–109.
