802
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Office of Management and Budget
White House
John White, Assistant Director
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Edward Sanders, Assistant
David Aaron
Director for Nat’l.
Henry Owen
Security & Internat. Affairs
National Security Council
Arms Control and Disarmament
William Odom
Ralph Earle, Director
Thomas Thornton
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy
Director
Muskie: Expressed his appreciation for the opportunity of consider-
ing our current policy towards Pakistan to determine if it is relevant
to the problems that we may be facing. He asked Adm. Turner to begin
with an estimate of Soviet intentions.
Turner: Summarized the CIA paper which is Tab A of the package
for the meeting.2 He reiterated that the Soviets are likely to concentrate
their efforts on the Afghan side of the border. We have noted the use
of a large number of land mines already and a strong pressure on
food supply. He believes that they will also continue to probe against
Pakistan on a small scale but the degree of Pakistan resistance is likely
to be the measure of how aggressive they get. (That is, if the Pakistanis
resist effectively, the Soviets will hold back.) He does not expect a
change in that policy barring a drastic further deterioration of the
situation in Afghanistan or a belief that the western countries are back-
ing the insurgents more openly.
Muskie: To what extent are the Olympics a factor? After they are
over will the Soviets increase their pressure within Afghanistan or in
cross-border raids?
Turner: They certainly will within Afghanistan, although we have
not yet seen any build-up yet. I do not think that the end of the Olympics
will have much impact on their intentions towards Pakistan.
Jones: Said that he agreed with Turner’s estimate. The Soviets would
be very ruthless internally and would try hard to seal the border. There
might then perhaps be some increase in incursions after the Olympics.
Turner: Estimated that the Soviets would need from 200,000 to
250,000 men to suppress the insurgency in the major border areas. It
would take them from six to twelve months to achieve that kind of a
build-up. He also noted that October–November is the beginning of
the bad weather.
Muskie noted that a build-up of Soviet forces within Afghanistan
would be likely to trigger an enlarged flow of equipment to the insur-
2 The briefing package for the meeting was not attached and not found.
