American Institute at a special meeting in Habana, laid before the
Governing Board of the Pan American Union on February 3, 1926,20 by Mr.
Hughes’ successor, Secretary of State Kellogg, [and] transmitted to the
Governments of the American Republics to be by them laid before the
International Commission of Jurists. Therefore when this body met in Rio
de Janeiro on April 16, 1927, it found itself in possession of thirty projects
of international public law, and a code of private international law of no less
than 435 articles.
The members of the International Commission of Jurists met in Rio de
Janeiro under very different conditions from those of its predecessor of
1912. It was ready to go to work, and it lost no time in getting to work. In
advance of the opening meeting the delegates already in Rio met informally
at the residence of Mr. Rodrigo Octavio, the second of the Brazilian
delegates, and himself a person of great and deserved distinction in the
domain of private international law. Mr. Epitacio Pessôa, who had been
President of the first Commission and, in the interval between the two,
President of the Republic of Brazil, was also present. This informal and
unofficial exchange of views great[ly] facilitated the future labors of the
Conference. It was there suggested that Mr. Pessôa should be asked to
preside over the Commission; that the rules of the first Commission with
sundry modifications and additions should be adopted, and that the
Commission should be divided into two sections, to be composed of
delegates from all of the Republics represented: Subcommission A, for
public international law; Subcommission B, for private international law;
that a Subcommission C, of five members, should be appointed to consider
the ways and means of continuing the work of codification after the
adjournment of the Commission; a Committee D, likewise of five members,
for the uniformity of international legislation. These suggestions proposed
by Mr. Victor M. Maurtua, delegate of Peru, met with unanimous approval.
It was also suggested by the members present, upon the motion of Mr.
Bustamante, delegate of Cuba, that Mr. Maurtua should respond in behalf of
the Commission to the address of welcome of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Brazil, at the formal opening of the Commission.
Saturday, the 16th of April, had been agreed upon for the opening session of
the Commission, but as this was a holiday, and as some of the delegations
