March 27–December 31, 1979
957
nately, Waldheim felt unable to make any statement in the letter indi-
cating that UNTSO’s mandate would be to supervise the Treaty,5 and
Dayan remained insistent that without this Israel could not accept
UNTSO as having responsibility for verification in any of the zones. At
the end of the day, however, Dayan indicated that he would be willing
to recommend to the Cabinet that an UNTSO “presence” could be “in-
tegrated” into the peacekeeping arrangements. He and General Ali
agreed that this “presence” (not spelled out in any detail) would be pri-
marily in the buffer zone but could also extend to Zones A and B if the
Egyptians agreed and we found it useful—and providing it was under-
stood UNTSO would have no repeat no responsibility for supervision.
As a first step, we are seeking clarification from Waldheim as to
whether he would be willing to have UNTSO play this kind of limited
role; the second step would be for Dayan to recommend this to the Is-
raeli Cabinet as part of the overall package.
4. Dayan pressed hard for further U.S. commitments about the per-
manent arrangements at the end of the 3 years. He stated his position
several times that Israel would not be expected to begin its withdrawal
from Zone C until the multilateral force was in being. He also said he
would be approaching us shortly with a proposal for the size and func-
tions of this force. We made no commitments on these points, although
we did agree to sit down with the Israelis a year before the completion
of final withdrawal and begin to plan for the formation of that force.
5. Copies of memcons and associated documents will be pouched
to Tel Aviv and Cairo ASAP.
6. The next few days will be a delicate period during which Dayan
and Weizman will be putting this proposal to the Israeli Cabinet; Ali
will be taking it to President Sadat and we will have to go through our
own decision making process here, including consultation with the
Congress about our own involvement. Therefore, you should not go
into detail in discussing these terms with others beyond what you will
have seen in the Secretary’s remarks to the press following the conclu-
sion of our meeting today.6
Vance
5 The U.S. Mission to the United Nations clarified this point in telegram 3871 from
USUN, September 20, pointing out that Waldheim was “most willing” to “accommo-
date” the United States by making UNTSO available and to provide “written assurances
that UNTSO could be expanded and its functions altered in consultation with Israel and
Egypt.” What Waldheim could not commit to in writing “was an explicit reference to the
treaty because by doing so he would invite a Soviet-Arab reaction which would make
UNTSO’s continued participation impossible.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P840137–2342)
6 The text of Vance’s remarks was not found. The text of the Department’s daily
press briefing for September 20, during which the talks were discussed, was transmitted
in telegram 247721 to multiple posts, September 21. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790431–0946)
