September 18–December 16, 1978 333 territory of Palestine. As shown on the map at Annex II, without prejudice to the status of the Gaza Strip. The parties regard this boundary as inviolable. Each will respect the territorial integrity of the other, including their territorial waters and airspace. Article III Future Relations —1. The parties will apply between them the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law governing relations among states in times of peace. In particular: —A. They recognize and will respect each other’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence: —B. They recognize and will respect each other’s right to live in peace within their secure and recognized boundaries: —C. They will refrain from the threat or use of force, directly or indirectly, against each other and will settle all disputes between them by peaceful means. —2. Each party undertakes to ensure that acts or threats of belligerency, hostility, or violence do not originate from and are not committed from within its territory, or by any forces subject to its control or by any other forces stationed on its territory, against the population, citizens or property of the other party. Each party also undertakes to refrain from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in acts of billigerency, hostility, international terrorism or violence against the other party, anywhere, and undertakes to ensure that perpetrators of such acts are brought to justice. —3. The parties agree that the normal relationship established between them will include full recognition, diplomatic, economic and cultural relations, termination of economic boycotts and discriminatory barriers to the free movement of people and goods, and will guarantee the mutual enjoyment by citizens of the due process of law. The process by which they undertake to achieve such a relationship parallel to the implementation of other provisions of this treaty is set out in the annexes protocol (Annex III). Article IV Security Arrangements —1. In order to provide maximum security for both parties on the basis of reciprocity, agreed security arrangements will be established, described in detail as to nature and timing in Annex I–C, including limited force zones in Egyptian and Israeli territory, United Nations forces and observers, and other security arrangements.
