September 18–December 16, 1978
333
territory of Palestine. As shown on the map at Annex II, without preju-
dice to the status of the Gaza Strip. The parties regard this boundary as
inviolable. Each will respect the territorial integrity of the other, in-
cluding their territorial waters and airspace.
Article III
Future Relations
—1. The parties will apply between them the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law
governing relations among states in times of peace. In particular:
—A. They recognize and will respect each other’s sovereignty, ter-
ritorial integrity and political independence:
—B. They recognize and will respect each other’s right to live in
peace within their secure and recognized boundaries:
—C. They will refrain from the threat or use of force, directly or in-
directly, against each other and will settle all disputes between them by
peaceful means.
—2. Each party undertakes to ensure that acts or threats of bellig-
erency, hostility, or violence do not originate from and are not com-
mitted from within its territory, or by any forces subject to its control or
by any other forces stationed on its territory, against the population,
citizens or property of the other party. Each party also undertakes to re-
frain from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in acts of
billigerency, hostility, international terrorism or violence against the
other party, anywhere, and undertakes to ensure that perpetrators of
such acts are brought to justice.
—3. The parties agree that the normal relationship established be-
tween them will include full recognition, diplomatic, economic and cul-
tural relations, termination of economic boycotts and discriminatory
barriers to the free movement of people and goods, and will guarantee
the mutual enjoyment by citizens of the due process of law. The process
by which they undertake to achieve such a relationship parallel to the
implementation of other provisions of this treaty is set out in the an-
nexes protocol (Annex III).
Article IV
Security Arrangements
—1. In order to provide maximum security for both parties on the
basis of reciprocity, agreed security arrangements will be established,
described in detail as to nature and timing in Annex I–C, including lim-
ited force zones in Egyptian and Israeli territory, United Nations forces
and observers, and other security arrangements.
