Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  331
launcher. Burt suggested that the sides try in the subgroup to identify a 
phrase that would include both missiles and launchers.
SLCMs
39. During his opening remarks Nazarkin repeated the Soviet 
feeling, expressed during Round XI, that SLCMs were an extremely 
important issue. In Geneva the sides should focus on SLCM verifica-
tion, just as they had done on mobile ICBM verification; if they could 
do this, he said, a solution to the SLCM problem would be in sight; this 
would be a step in that direction.
40. In a final comment during his own opening remarks, Burt said 
that while he didn’t like to end on a negative note, the U.S. side had 
very serious problems with any concept of effective verification of 
SLCMs. The U.S. side was always open to hearing Soviet ideas, but was 
convinced that effective verification was not possible. The declaratory 
approach was well worth consideration, Burt said.
41. Replying, Nazarkin said that in the Soviet view the correct 
approach was to discuss verification; the Soviet side would like to show 
the U.S. side the possibility of solving the problem of verification, just 
as the sides were trying to do with mobile ICBMs. Therefore the Soviet 
side was calling for a joint effort.
Defense & Space (D&S)
42. At the close of his opening remarks, Burt said that Amb. Cooper 
would respond to the Soviet questions concerning Defense & Space and 
the Vice President’s remarks on SDI.
43. In opening the discussion on Defense & Space, Bartholomew 
said that, as in START, the fundamental U.S. interest in Defense & Space 
is to reduce the risk of nuclear war by strengthening deterrence and sta-
bility; he said U.S. positions on SDI and on Defense & Space remained 
unchanged. The president had said the U.S. would develop SDI and 
deploy it when it was ready. The vigorous research program was con-
tinuing, Bartholomew said, with bipartisan support from the congress 
and substantial, sustained funding. Important advances had been 
made, though more work was needed to determine feasibility. Because 
of the work already completed, the advances made thus far, the prom-
ise of advanced, effective defenses and their potential to reduce fur-
ther the risk of war, Bartholomew said it was the strong view of the 
U.S. side that a Defense & Space Treaty must not foreclose new and 
stabilizing technologies, and indeed must permit their exploration and 
eventual deployment. Bartholomew noted that Nazarkin had raised 
questions on this subject, and turned the floor over to Cooper.
44. Cooper said that regarding the reference to changes in the U.S. 
SDI Program, he wanted to re-­emphasize what Bartholomew had said:
