Czechoslovakia
325
publicly at the CEMA summit in June. Although this role will increase
Strougal’s popularity with the Czechoslovak public and enhance his
stature among moderates within the leadership, Moscow may try to
ensure that Husak’s successor represents a viewpoint more amenable
to Soviet wishes. [classification not declassified]
The possibility of a dark horse cannot be excluded. Sentiment must
be strong in both Prague and Moscow for removing the shadow of
1968 from Czechoslovak political life. It is also highly desirable that
the next party leader be competent in economics, an area where the
current leaders have proved deficient. These considerations suggest
the possibility of a younger contender with a technical background.
One such candidate is party secretary Josef Haman, 46, who was elected
to his present post in March 1978. A graduate of the Leningrad Institute
for Finance and Economics, Haman was active in the party’s youth
movement before occupying a series of administrative posts. He served
in the Central Committee’s economic department and economic com-
mission in 1971–73, then joined Husak’s staff in the office of the KSC
General Secretary. He became head of the office of the President in
1976. A recent indication of Haman’s standing was his selection in May
1979 to deliver the keynote speech at the annual ceremony commemo-
rating Czechoslovakia’s liberation; in recent years this honor has been
reserved for younger members of the leadership whose stars are on
the rise. Haman, like Kempny, could eventually find Husak’s patronage
a liability, but in the event of a factional struggle over the leadership,
his relative newness to the political scene would be a powerful asset.
[classification not declassified]
Policy Implications
If these trends continue, Gustav Husak will probably remain the
General Secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party for at least
the next several years. Developments within the party will tend to
lessen the influence of the conservative ideologues, while increasing
that of the moderate pragmatists. When Husak relinquishes some or
all of his functions, his successor will probably come from the latter
group. [classification not declassified]
These developments within the leadership will have a gradual
but significant effect on policy. Strict political controls will continue.
Economic experimentation will proceed, probably at an accelerating
pace. Czechoslovakia will continue to cultivate Western markets for its
exports and will bargain harder in its economic dealings with Moscow.
Overall foreign policy, however, will remain closely aligned with that
of the Soviet Union. The pace of improvement in relations with the
West will remain limited and, for the near term at least, may even slow
down. [classification not declassified]
