Covert and Overt Operations
837
3. Payment of Interest on Blocked Iranian Accounts. Banks and other
institutions holding blocked Iranian accounts have the use of this
money without paying interest on it, which is a clear case of “unjust
enrichment.” The Treasury Department believes that interest should
be paid into these blocked accounts in order to increase the amount
available for claims by hostage families and others at some future
point rather than letting the holding institutions reap the benefits. The
amount of interest on these blocked funds is very large, up to about
$1 billion per year. The SCC agreed that it would be preferable to have
the interest available to claimants rather than oil companies and banks;
however, the public perception would probably be that we were forcing
U.S. companies to pay interest to Iranians. In fact, Iranians might
acquire some or all of this interest at some future date depending on
the negotiations leading to release of the hostages. The SCC agreed
that there was no logical basis for starting accrual of interest at this
point, eight months after the freeze. Beginning at this point would
constitute a windfall of about $600 million for the institutions holding
blocked accounts. The Attorney General believes that a retroactive
order will be tested in court and will probably fail eventually. However,
all agreed that the outcome of litigation was uncertain, and there was
no adequate explanation for why we should begin accrual of interest
today as opposed to last month or next month. It would be better to
make it retroactive and take our chances in court. Treasury has already
informally advised companies that interest would probably be
required. (S)
All agreed that those institutions holding blocked Iranian accounts
should be notified that they are required to pay interest on the Iranian
funds retroactive to the date of the freeze, with the interest to remain
in the frozen accounts. Treasury will take all possible steps to insure
that this is understood as making these funds available to future claim-
ants rather than the banks and oil companies holding these funds and
explain that the timing of our decision is related to the preliminary
completion of our census of frozen assets. (C)
Approve.4
Disapprove payment of interest.
Disapprove retroactive payment of interest.
4. Sanctions Against Iran. Through intelligence, we have identified
132 cases of material being transshipped to Iran via third countries as
4 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and wrote in the right margin:
“Do not specify too tightly ultimate use of accrued funds. Ok not to go to banks and/
or oil companies.”
