North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 1021 HEALTH Diseases in LDCs result in high infant mortality, adult disability and lower productivity. Waterborne diseases are particularly prevalent, and children are still not immunized against most diseases for which vaccines are available. We suggest two initiatives: —UN Water Decade: A strong commitment might be made, using projected AID resources, to support the UN Water Decade goal of bringing clean water to one billion people in rural areas over the 1980–1990 period. A plan of this kind has been approved on behalf of the Department by Undersecretary Benson.6 —Worldwide Immunization Program: We could announce we were ready, in cooperation with other donors, to back a global WHO program to innoculate children with multiple antigen vaccine for measles, smallpox, yellow fever, tetanus, whooping cough, and diptheria. Cost to donors per shot would be about $1. LDC CAPACITY FOR DEVELOPMENT LDCs have taken a renewed interest in the availability of technology appropriate to their development needs, and in their institutional capacity to apply it. We want to steer them away from sterile exercises on international codes on technology transfer and focus attention on building their capacity to obtain, generate, adapt, and utilize technology. We suggest several initiatives; the two most important being: —Foundation for International Technological Cooperation (FITC): The launching of the FITC will be the Administration’s main effort in the technology area. We could ensure that the FITC emphasize our priority subjects (energy, food, health), center its activities in LDC institutions where feasible (to build local institutional capacity), and support projects which include a regional focus, often located in upper tier LDCs, but with participation by lower income LDCs. —US Agency Mandates: We may wish, through executive and legislative means, to broaden US agency mandates to allow greater activity in R&D in our priority areas. For example, NIH and DOD could expand their research in tropical medicine, DOE could do more in LDC-oriented non-conventional energy research, and USDA could increase its tropical and subtropical research programs. INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS FOR DEVELOPMENT The international economic system has already undergone many modifications to make it more responsive to LDC development needs. 6 Documentation on U.S. planning for the UN Water Decade is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
