706
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
“inshallah”. Sensing his intense interest in the subject, Newsom prom-
ised to keep Ambassador Aggrey informed as appropriate regarding
progress of Ambassador Linowitz’ negotiations, so that GOR could
be informed.
13. Given Ceausescu’s great stress during discussions on non-inter-
ference of great powers with small nations, Newsom could not resist
temptation to indicate that we are not in a position, regardless of
impression of U.S. power, to force or order another nation to do what
it does not consider to be in its interest. We have the difficult and
lonely task of persuading Israel to grapple with complex autonomy
issues as well as questions of settlements and status of Jerusalem and
to achieve sufficient results to bring Palestinians into negotiations.
Ceausescu interrupted Newsom’s presentation to point out that Roma-
nia also is addressing these problems with the Israelis and Arabs.
14. Comment: We did not detect any significant change in Ceauses-
cu’s well-known position on international issues during discussions.
His criticism of Soviet behaviour in Afghanistan came through strongly,
although carefully couched in terms of non-alignment and balanced
but implied criticism of U.S. security measures in reaction to Afghan
situation. Only new elements were Ceausescu’s suggestion that U.S.
acquiesce to an initiative regarding Palestinian rights which would
involve the Soviets and his stress on CSCE issue of military disengage-
ment with specific reference to nuclear missiles. Ceausescu received
Under Secretary graciously and engaged in a lively give and take on
the major current international issues. He seemed genuinely pleased
with letter and consultation. We believe he has a better idea of current
U.S. policy assessments which could be helpful in permitting him to
chart accurately the course of cautious non-alignment which he is
pursuing despite proximity to the Soviet Union.
Aggrey
222.
Editorial Note
On February 24, 1980, Nicolae Ion Horodinca, a Romanian intelli-
gence officer, together with his wife and infant son, drove to a U.S.
Army barracks in the Washington area and asked for asylum. The
Department informed the Embassy in Bucharest in telegram 50348,
February 25, of a February 24 Washington Post article describing the
