3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
278
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
fire and a negotiated settlement. He expressed the belief that the time
had come to work through the UN Security Council, and reported that
he had asked Andrew Young to talk about this with Ambassador Troy-
anovsky in New York. In response to a question from Dobrynin about
the results expected from a Security Council discussion, the Secretary
listed the following: ceasefire; recognition of international boundaries;
withdrawal of the Somalis from the Ogaden; withdrawal of all foreign
troops, including Soviet and Cuban, from Ethiopia and Somalia; and
the beginning of steps leading toward a negotiated solution. Dobrynin
expressed the view that there should be an immediate appeal for a So-
mali withdrawal, since this was, in the Soviet view, a precondition for
the other steps. Dobrynin asked who should take the initiatives in
calling for an SC meeting. The Secretary said it would be best if Nigeria
or Gabon did so, since an African initiative would not make it appear
that the UN was taking matters out of OAU hands, but that we would
do so if necessary. Dobrynin said it should not appear to be a Soviet-
American confrontation, and the Secretary agreed that an African initi-
ative would be better from this point of view as well.
The Secretary emphasized the importance of a firm commitment
that the Ethiopians and the Cubans would not cross into Somali terri-
tory, and the serious consequences that would follow if they did. Do-
brynin repeated the assurances of the Ethiopians on this point, and
added that Raul Castro4 had also made it clear during his visit to
Moscow that the Cuban forces had no intention of moving into Somali
territory. Dobrynin did not dispute the assertion that the Cubans were
participating in the fighting, but insisted that Soviet personnel were not
doing so.
Dobrynin said he would transmit the message to Moscow, and
could not anticipate what its reaction would be to the Security Council
move. He pointed out, however, that it had been negative up to this
point and the USSR had insisted upon prior Somali withdrawal as a
prerequisite to negotiations. He ventured his own opinion that a decla-
ration of Somali intention to withdraw might suffice to start the
process, if it were given without conditions, and if the withdrawal were
to be completed within a definite time period, such as two weeks.
3. Belgrade CSCE. The Secretary expressed concern that Vorontsov
had not been negotiating seriously on the neutral/non-aligned draft,
and said that while the draft was not altogether to our liking, it offered
an opportunity to move forward in a constructive way. Dobrynin re-
plied that Moscow was determined not to have any language that
changed the emphasis of the Helsinki accord, with its distribution of at-
4 Cuban First Vice President of the Councils of State and Ministers.
