March–August 1953
533
12. Items 7 through 11 must be agreed upon in advance by Zahedi
and the U.S.
13. [2 lines not declassified]
14. Should Zahedi himself fall from power the U.S. must act to re-
place him by the chosen member of his cabinet.
II. Evaluation of Principal Elements Concerned in Possible Replacement
Operation
A. General Fazlullah Zahedi
1. Current position
a. Biographical sketch (See Appendix A)
b. Evaluation of personality and capability
[3 lines not declassified] indicate that he is competent, energetic, ag-
gressive and patriotic. Derogatory comments also emphasize the ag-
gressive aspect of his character.
Associated with the Nazi efforts in Iran during World War II, he
has long been firmly anti-Soviet. A pro-Western orientation is reflected
in the education of a son in the U.S. and the activity of this son in the
Point IV office in Iran.
Local circles at Tehran believe him to be the only military man on
the scene who would stage a coup and follow it through with
forcefulness.
c. Motivation
Subject is personally ambitious, but at this particular time he prob-
ably feels he is the only man strong enough to bring order out of the
present chaos. He has displayed reason and restraint in answering
charges made against him by the National Front, and his self confi-
dence has certainly been reinforced by the fact that various elements
have asked him to assume leadership of the country. At least as early as
the summer of 1952 he was preparing to take over the government.
d. Elements supporting Zahedi
On 2 April 1953 Zahedi claimed that he was supported by the fol-
lowing elements:
Ayatollah Kashani
Minister of Court Ala and other Court officials
Military elements: Association of Retired Army Officers, several
Army officers in key posts, and General Batmangelish.
Amayoun Party (Group which consists largely of “old guard” anti-
National Front Senators. This group has Free Mason overtones.)
Large segment of the bazaar, including leading merchant Nikpur
Former supporters of Ahmad Qavam
Majority of the people (sic)
