506 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI The President: How about SDI? Senator Nunn: That needs to be a separate meeting. The President: Could we wait until next year on the missile issue? Senator Nunn: No. Congress wouldn’t spend $4.5 billion on Rail Garrison and then kill it for arms control. It has to be in START I. Senator Warner: I agree. 80. Memorandum From Senator Nunn to President Bush1 Washington, February 22, 1990 SUBJECT Ban on Mobile MIRVed ICBMs I have been urging the Administration to propose a ban in START on mobile MIRVed ICBMs because I think it makes sense in terms of greater strategic stability and because I think it may be your only hope for maintaining congressional support for the Rail Garrison MX and the Midgetman programs this year. I do not see a ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs as an end in itself and would not advocate it if it were. Rather, I see it as a halfway step toward an ultimate goal in START II of banning all MIRVed ICBMs, including those in silos. It is too late in the START I negotiations to try to ban all MIRVed ICBMs, but a window of opportunity is still open to ban mobile MIRVed ICBMs. Some have suggested that we wait until START II to seek a ban on mobile MIRVs, rather than negotiate it now. Setting this as a goal for START II is better than never proposing it in terms of our long-­ term objectives for greater strategic stability. However, I do not think that will save the “two-­missile” program on the Hill this year since Members will not be attracted to the idea of spending another $4.9 billion to complete the program before it could be traded away in arms control. The hard reality, Mr. President, is that absent a mobile MIRVed ban in START, the votes are not there this year for the two ICBMs. I believe 1 Source: Department of State, Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Lot 96D484, Robert B. Zoellick, Under Secretary for Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Gates Group NODIS. No classification marking. Eyes Only. Brackets are in the original. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
