800.51 W 89Belgium/43: Telegram
[Document 63]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BRUSSELS, June 5, 1925—10 p.m.
[Received June 5—9:10 p.m.]
70. Department’s No. 35, June 4 [3], 7 p.m. At two long conferences today, one in the
morning, the other in the afternoon, I presented your position strongly to the ad interim
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Finance. At last the Ministers decided to send you a
clear and explicit statement of unconditional acceptance of paragraph (a) and
expression of their willingness to negotiate on basis of the three paragraphs of May 31
memorandum.
In view of existing public opinion that in some way Belgium has been relieved of her
war debt, the acting Minister of Finance (Mr. Van de Vyvere) does not feel that he is in
a position to close door in forthcoming negotiations to presentations of circumstances
surrounding Belgium’s case. For this reason their Belgian memorandum is in nature of
an explanation of statements in earlier communication and I think may be accepted as
recession from former position. Memorandum seeks to make clear that although in
Belgium’s opinion the circumstances surrounding negotiations in 1919 are deserving of
consideration in forthcoming negotiations, Belgium does not assert that they constitute
a right or a legal claim.
As the Ministers preferred to have their reply of June 2 remain, I handed them the
memorandum contained in your No. 35, giving it date of June 4; I have received in
reply following memorandum dated June 5, which I hope will be satisfactory to you.5
Please telegraph me your decision.
The Belgian Government wishes to dissipate doubt as to its unconditional
acceptance of the proposal contained in paragraph (a) of the memorandum of
the 31st of May.
Its object in presenting the arguments as contained in paragraph 1 of the note
of June 2 is not with a view to maintain the substitution of Germany for
Belgium as debtor nor to contest that Belgium alone is accountable to the
United States for the payment of its debt. The statements were made for the
purpose of assuring to the negotiators the opportunity of bringing out all the
circumstances in their case. Belgium believes that these circumstances are
