564 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Aaron stated without objection that there was agreement on how to proceed on the other issues. This would involve continuing to defer discussion of permitted experiments in the negotiations, maintaining our positions on the OSI and NSS verification issues, and responding positively to the Soviet proposed NSS network in the US. There was also general agreement with Cy Vance’s observation that a long period of negotiations lay ahead and that it was clearly undesirable to go to the Hill on CTB before SALT is ratified. He noted that major differences remained on NSS issues such as the location of stations, equipment design and who would manufacture it, as well as data transmission. Similarly difficult OSI issues remained and in the best of all worlds, he could not see winding up trilateral agreement until sometime approaching early Fall. Aaron noted that the review conference issue should be considered in the context of the burden of proof or presumption regarding extension of the treaty, and the relationship of the review conference provision to other nuclear weapon states, particularly the Soviet effort to use the provision for leverage in France and China. He then asked for views on the three options developed by the Working Group. There was agreement that the formulation selected should end with the phrase “taking into account all relevant factors” to attempt to get the Soviets to drop their linkage of extension to whether France and China continue testing. Seignious favored an option which referred explicitly to “extension” of the treaty. However, Frank Press noted that in his view a more neutral formulation, “to consider the question of whether there should be future treaty arrangements” was more consistent with the President’s objective of providing a credible opportunity to resume testing. Bob Bowie stressed that in the long term [less than 1 line not declassified] was somewhat concerned about any reference to extension. Dave Jones, noting the Chief’s concerns about both verification and reliability, preferred to stick with our current position, but could support the “arrangements” approach if a shift was needed for policy reasons. Dave McGiffert and Jim Schlesinger also favored the “arrangements” approach. Cy Vance supported Seignious’ position but offered a compromise formulation using the term “renewal” instead of “extension.” Aaron suggested that “modification” also be included and a near-consensus was reached on “to consider the question of renewing its provisions and any modifications.” Schlesinger and McGiffert were willing to accept this as a backup to the “arrangements” approach, but Dave Jones was concerned that the compromise changed the tone of “whether there should be arrangements.” He reserved his position and asked for
