XLIII
Summary of Print Volume
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in 
the text of the print volume.
The print volume presents documentation on U.S. relations with 
the nations of Latin America and the Caribbean during the last 3 years 
of the Eisenhower administration. The volume first focuses upon gen-
eral U.S. policy toward Latin America during the period and U.S. policy 
regarding hemispheric defense and military assistance to the American 
republics. Also included are principal records regarding the visits by 
Vice President Richard M. Nixon to South America in April and May 
1958, Dr. Milton Eisenhower to Central America later that August, and 
President Eisenhower to South America in February and March 1960. 
The volume covers the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers 
of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics held in Santiago, Chile in 
August 1959 as well as U.S. policy in the Caribbean from 1958–1960. 
Finally the volume presents documents on the main line of the bilat-
eral relations of the United States and Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. 
Documentation on U.S. relations with Cuba and U.S. policy toward the 
Castro regime is presented in Volume VI, Cuba.
By the spring of 1958, the Eisenhower administration had become 
greatly concerned with the rising tide of social unrest in Latin America 
due to the political instability and intensified economic difficulties 
experienced by the region. It also noted with alarm the activities of 
indigenous communist groups in the area and the attention being given 
Latin America by the Soviet bloc.
On May 21, the National Security Council considered a “Report 
on Latin America” prepared by its Operations Coordinating Board 
(OCB) which outlined these challenges to U.S. policymakers (2). One 
week later, it adopted an “Operations Plan for Latin America” in which 
were enumerated a set of principles to which U.S. policymakers should 
adhere in conducting policies toward the region. These included the 
principles of non-­intervention, provision of individual and collective 
aid (both economic and security related), and the elimination of Soviet 
and communist influence in the area (3).
On February 16, 1959, the National Security Council adopted a new 
“Statement of U.S. Policy Toward Latin America” which incorporated 
the principles set down in May 1958. The new policy had as its goals the 
elimination of communism in the Western Hemisphere, improvement 
of the economic lot of the Latin American peoples, and the cooling of 
ultranationalist sentiment in the region which threatened U.S. interests 
(11). This policy remained valid for more than a year.
