762
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
later when it appeared no untoward actions against the tribes were
forthcoming from Tehran. Khosro Khan, who had personally led an
anti-Shah mob through the streets of Shiraz on August 16, was back in
Tehran by August 19 but beat a hasty retreat that day to Fars Ostand
when it became apparent the Mosadeq Government was falling. Mean-
while, Nasr Khan who had already sought to impose the role of inter-
mediary between the tribes and the American Government upon Mr.
Elmer C. Bryant, Regional Director at Shiraz of Technical Cooperation
for Iran, got in touch with Mr. Bryant through Dr. Bahman Bege. Ini-
tially his intentions were ostensibly to acquaint the American Govern-
ment with the alarm the tribes felt, but in reality he doubtless wished to
solicit American moral if not material support as well as to sound out
the intentions of the new administration in Tehran. The tribes began
immediately preparations for the southward migration, some 30 days
earlier than customary, in order to place as much distance between
them and Tehran as possible and to take up secure winter positions in
the shortest period of time. Mr. Bryant relates his several conversations
with Dr. Bahman Bege in a memorandum of August 24, 1953 (see enclo-
sure no. 1).
As a consequence of these conversations and of the local situation,
Mr. Bryant decided to come to Tehran, making the trip by car on Au-
gust 23. The Embassy’s telegram to the Department (no. 484 of August
26, repeated London as no. 140)3 relates the oral message he brought
from the Qashqai chieftains, the Ambassador’s conversation with the
Shah and the oral messages given to Mr. Bryant to be conveyed to the
chieftains from the Shah and the Ambassador. As yet no report has
been received from Mr. Bryant concerning any further conversations he
may have had with the Qashqais. Under date of August 30, however,
he forwarded a memorandum (enclosure no. 2) on “Current Activities
of the Qashqais and Associated Tribes,” in which he indicates he had
not yet been in direct touch with the Qashqais as the chieftains, who ap-
parently desired to meet jointly with him, were still separated over a
wide area and would not receive any communication through an
intermediary.
The Qashqai chieftains have, of course, maintained other, more
conventional channels with Tehran. Their mother has remained in the
capital since before the events of August 19 and is known to have coun-
seled them recently more than once not to take any precipitant action.
Habib Qashqai has made a number of trips to the South since the fall of
the Mosadeq Government. Moreover, Ali Hayat, who became Gov-
ernor General at Shiraz following August 19, but recently resigned that
post in order to accept appointment as President of the Supreme Court,
3 See footnote 4, Document 321.
