Chapter 2, January–June 1989 199 • Difficulties in parameter selection and definition of STOF could raise unresolvable compliance issues, thus offsetting the modest benefits derived by a ban. • With a SLBM STOF testing ban, an incentive may be created to covertly develop such a missile in order to gain a unilateral strategic advantage. • Since all US SLBMs and some Soviet SLBMs have demonstrated time-­of-­flight between 10 and 15 minutes, a SLBM STOF testing ban could not eliminate the existing STOF SLBM capabilities of either side, thus the potential threat would not be eliminated, regardless of restrictions placed on the development of future STOF SLBM systems. • Negotiating a ban could resurface the issue of SSBN standoff zones which was raised by the Soviets in SALT I and SALT II. SSBN standoff zones are merely CBMs and are not monitorable. • A ban would not reduce the potential STOF threat from high altitude burst-­on-­ascent SLBMs • While negotiating the STOF SLBM ban, sensitive US strategic system’s reaction times could be revealed to the Soviets. • Since STOF SLBM capabilities can be developed without end-­to-­ end testing, a ban would not be effective in eliminating the potential future threat. • The successful execution of a STOF SLBM attack as part of a coordinated “bolt out of the blue” or preemptive strike is highly unlikely. The resulting time of arrival differences of the various systems and difficulty in achieving the intended goal make an STOF SLBM attack a high risk option. Any concessions (cost) the USG would have to make to attain Soviet agreement to such a treaty provision would not be worth the modest benefits derived. • Monitoring uncertainties create both the opportunity for covert development and lower the possibilities to detect circumvention regardless of whether or not testing is banned. • The Ballistic Missile Launch Notification Agreement with the Soviets, in conjunction with current ballistic missile flight test monitoring, gives the US adequate indication of Soviet developments in STOF SLBMs without a ban on testing. Those who support Option 2, and thus do not support Option 1, hold that STOF attacks are potentially threatening and destabilizing, and that a ban on STOF SLBM testing: • Aggressively pursues closing out a potentially destabilizing Soviet option for a weapon system that the US has no intentions or need to develop. • Would be effective in eliminating a new development option for the Soviets because development of STOF SLBM capabilities requires end-­to-­end testing of any new system that is designed. • Could serve as a new stabilizing initiative in the START negotiations. • Maintains an initiative to increase strategic stability by reducing the potential for overt STOF SLBM development.
