Chapter 2, January–June 1989  199
• Difficulties in parameter selection and definition of STOF could 
raise unresolvable compliance issues, thus offsetting the modest bene-
fits derived by a ban.
• With a SLBM STOF testing ban, an incentive may be created to 
covertly develop such a missile in order to gain a unilateral strategic 
advantage.
• Since all US SLBMs and some Soviet SLBMs have demonstrated 
time-­of-­flight between 10 and 15 minutes, a SLBM STOF testing ban 
could not eliminate the existing STOF SLBM capabilities of either side, 
thus the potential threat would not be eliminated, regardless of restric-
tions placed on the development of future STOF SLBM systems.
• Negotiating a ban could resurface the issue of SSBN standoff 
zones which was raised by the Soviets in SALT I and SALT II. SSBN 
standoff zones are merely CBMs and are not monitorable.
• A ban would not reduce the potential STOF threat from high alti-
tude burst-­on-­ascent SLBMs
• While negotiating the STOF SLBM ban, sensitive US strategic 
system’s reaction times could be revealed to the Soviets.
• Since STOF SLBM capabilities can be developed without end-­to-­
end testing, a ban would not be effective in eliminating the potential 
future threat.
• The successful execution of a STOF SLBM attack as part of a coor-
dinated “bolt out of the blue” or preemptive strike is highly unlikely. 
The resulting time of arrival differences of the various systems and dif-
ficulty in achieving the intended goal make an STOF SLBM attack a 
high risk option. Any concessions (cost) the USG would have to make 
to attain Soviet agreement to such a treaty provision would not be 
worth the modest benefits derived.
• Monitoring uncertainties create both the opportunity for covert 
development and lower the possibilities to detect circumvention 
regardless of whether or not testing is banned.
• The Ballistic Missile Launch Notification Agreement with the 
Soviets, in conjunction with current ballistic missile flight test monitor-
ing, gives the US adequate indication of Soviet developments in STOF 
SLBMs without a ban on testing.
Those who support Option 2, and thus do not support Option 1, 
hold that STOF attacks are potentially threatening and destabilizing, 
and that a ban on STOF SLBM testing:
• Aggressively pursues closing out a potentially destabilizing 
Soviet option for a weapon system that the US has no intentions or 
need to develop.
• Would be effective in eliminating a new development option for 
the Soviets because development of STOF SLBM capabilities requires 
end-­to-­end testing of any new system that is designed.
• Could serve as a new stabilizing initiative in the START 
negotiations.
• Maintains an initiative to increase strategic stability by reducing 
the potential for overt STOF SLBM development.
