256  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
estimates that Soviet intercontinental offensive strength will grow in 
relation to that of the United States between now and the early 1980’s.
6. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe these trends are very serious 
and merit particular scrutiny in the context of other Soviet behavior. 
Soviet intransigence on a variety of international issues is consistent 
with a growing Soviet perception of a shift in the relative balance of 
power in their favor.
7. (TS) The Soviets appear to be actively seeking such a shift. NIE 
11–3/8–77 concludes, for instance, that one of their objectives is to 
“insure that their strategic forces and supporting elements . . . will sup-
port the perception that the strategic balance is continuing to shift in 
the USSR’s favor.” If this objective were to be attained, the framework 
of essential equivalence would be undermined. As you indicated in the 
Consolidated Guidance summary for the President, the consequences 
might well be attempted political coercion of the United States and/or 
US allies.
8. (U) In your annual report to the Congress on 23 January 1978,3 
you specified the following four conditions for essential equivalence:
a. Soviet strategic nuclear forces should not become usable instru-
ments of political leverage, diplomatic coercion, or military advantage;
b. Nuclear stability, especially in a crisis, should be maintained;
c. Any advantages in force characteristics enjoyed by the Soviets 
should be offset by US advantages in other characteristics; and
d. The US posture should not be in fact, and should not be seen 
as, inferior in performance to the strategic nuclear forces of the Soviet 
Union.
9. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff agree that satisfying these condi-
tions would preserve essential equivalence. They believe, however, that 
purely statistical measures of theoretical destructive potential should 
not be allowed to substitute for a more comprehensive assessment of 
the strategic balance, including offsetting capabilities, the role of per-
ceptions, and differences in production base. Of particular concern 
should be the “breakout” potential of the Soviets to expand their strate-
gic offensive and defensive capabilities rapidly in time of crisis.
10. (TS) Any SALT agreement must be viewed in the context of the 
above events and trends. In addition to adequate verification, which 
is fundamental to any SALT agreement, a most significant measure 
of the acceptability of a SALT agreement must be whether it provides 
a framework which allows both sides to exercise rights to maintain 
strategic stability. The emerging agreement generally provides this 
framework. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are concerned with: the 
additive potential strategic contribution of BACKFIRE, which may 
3 See Document 48.
