1955  341
violating Geneva spirit, seeking intensify cold war and continuing rely 
on “policy of strength.”
Regarding Geneva talks NCNA September 23 gave brief account 
of meetings stating that delegations had “exchanged views” regarding 
item two of agenda. NCNA announced September 24 that PRC had 
“approved” US invitation to UK.
Taiwan issue given slight attention during past week. Ta Kung Pao, 
September 25, stated CPR willing to negotiate “international question” 
of Taiwan, but US “reluctant” to negotiate. NCNA September 25 reiter­
ated familiar charge US policy re: Taiwan based on “aggressive princi­
ples” and represents interference Chinese internal affairs. Liberation of 
Taiwan stressed as task for Chinese youth at recent conference of Young 
Activists in Peiping.
Major attention past week focussed following topics:
1) UN membership. People’s Daily editorial September 24 accused US 
of “obstructing” admission Communist China to UN, in “open viola­
tion” of Geneva spirit and asserted admission PRC to UN essential for 
further easing international tension and solution major international 
problems.
2) Dulles speech to UN (September 22). NCNA commentary Sep­
tember 25 interpreted speech as indicating continued US reliance on 
“policy of strength”; accused US of “departing from spirit of Geneva” 
and seeking intensify cold war. Secretary’s comments on Taiwan cited 
as evidence US policy still based on “principles of aggression.” Secre­
tary’s account Geneva talks criticized as deliberate effort “distort sig­
nificance” of Chinese action in releasing 11 Americans.
3) Japan-US relations. People’s Daily editorials September 23 and 28 
on Shigemitsu visit to US revived familiar theme that US seeking to 
remilitarize Japan and use Japan as base for “aggression.” Shigemitsu 
policy seen based on “making China a hypothetical enemy of Japan,” 
and on complete subservience of Japan to US. NCNA saw possibility 
Japanese troops would be sent abroad, to Korea or Taiwan. Also noted 
possibility of Japanese alliance with Taiwan and ROK commenting 
such action would be evidence of “intended aggression” against PRC.
4) East-West trade. People’s Daily September 28 noted that easing of 
world tensions had created new prospects for promotion of East-West 
trade; saw good prospects for development of trade between China 
and the West. Expressed hope that forthcoming Ministers Conference 
would adopt specific measures for removal of “artificial barriers” to 
trade.
Dulles
