Chapter 2, January–June 1989  117
that a change in U.S. administration or Congressional pressure might 
cause the U.S. to pull back from its SDI program, and failing that to 
defer the issue until a START Treaty is closer at hand, when greater pres-
sure may be brought to bear on the U.S. (S)
SDI Testing Requirements. The President decided on the basis of 
NSR-12 that the goals of the SDI program will remain unchanged, and 
that the program presented to Congress will focus on evaluating the 
potential of the most rapidly advancing technologies such as Brilliant 
Pebbles. In light of this guidance, a proposed test program for evalua-
tion of the Brilliant Pebbles concept is being developed and reviewed 
for compliance with the ABM Treaty. This program consists of 12 flight 
tests to be completed by mid-FY92. While the compliance certification 
process has not yet been completed for these tests, we expect to conduct 
them consistent with the “restrictive” interpretation of the ABM Treaty. 
This test program would also be compatible with the U.S. unilateral 
assurance on testing in space and proposed Predictability Protocol noti-
fication measures. (S)
It is not clear at this time how long and to what extent additional, 
useful Brilliant Pebbles testing can be carried out after mid-FY92 con-
sistent with the restrictive interpretation, or for that matter the broad 
interpretation. However, development and testing of Brilliant Pebbles, 
if they are regarded as “based on other physical principles,” would 
probably proceed more usefully under the broad interpretation after 
mid-FY92. If the broad interpretation applies to Brilliant Pebbles, sys-
tem development and testing could proceed unrestricted to the point 
where an ABM system is “created,” resulting in a faster rate of growth 
in confidence in technical feasibility than a program conducted under 
the restrictive interpretation. (S)
If the concept for a Brilliant Pebbles system is not determined to 
be “based on other physical principles,” it could not be developed 
and tested under the broad interpretation. We would then have to test 
under the restrictive interpretation. While this would still permit us 
to increase confidence in the feasibility of the technology, the rate of 
increase, and perhaps its absolute value would be less than could be 
achieved under a broad interpretation program. (S)
N.B. No determination has yet been made as to whether an ABM 
system incorporating the Brilliant Pebbles concept would be an ABM 
system “based on other physical principles.” This issue includes con-
siderations beyond those associated with the issue of whether kinetic 
energy ABM weapons are based on OPP. (S)
Options. Options for assuring U.S. testing rights during a period of 
non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty are intended to insure U.S. legal 
rights and political support to conduct testing necessary to establish
