570  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
in PRC who desire to return to U.S. are entitled to do so, and declares 
that it has adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so that 
they can expeditiously exercise their right to return.” That statement 
which was freely made by your government contains no conditions, 
exceptions, or qualifications such as are now being used to justify your 
government’s continued detention of American citizens imprisoned 
in your country. At time we were discussing this subject in detail you 
asked such terms as “quickly”, “very quickly”, etc., and I pointed out to 
you that word “expeditiously”, which you suggested for English text, 
meant just that, and my government and people would so understand 
it. However, almost three months have now passed since the issuance 
of that announcement and 14 Americans still remain in prison.
C. It is not realistic to expect progress in reaching another agree­
ment unless there is clear evidence that there is good faith in proceed­
ing to carry out agreements already reached. I have been instructed 
to make absolutely clear that my government does not feel that there 
has been good faith with regard to expeditious return of Americans 
detained in your country, as well as in carrying out other aspects of 
agreed announcement.
D. Not only are Americans not being expeditiously released, but 
those detained are not able freely to communicate with U.K. Charge 
as is also clearly provided in agreed announcement. Of 14 Americans 
still detained UK Charge has received communications from only two. 
Yet your government has not, and I am sure that it will not, allege that 
reason these imprisoned Americans have not communicated with UK 
Charge is that they do not desire to return. You told me at our last meet­
ing that if these Americans desired to communicate with UK Charge, 
they were being assisted in doing so. I believe that you must not have 
had all facts at time you made that statement.
E. For example, on December 2, UK Charge finally received letter 
from Dr. Bradshaw which had been written on November 19 and post­
marked November 28. In this letter Dr. Bradshaw stated that prison 
authorities had refused to forward to UK Charge two previous letters 
he had written, one on October 26 and another on November 10. It is 
understood that transmission of these previous letters was refused on 
grounds that such letters must be limited to request for interview with 
UK Charge. There is certainly nothing in our agreed announcement of 
September 10 that contains any such limitation, and on December 5 
representative of UK Charge properly protested to your authorities 
suppression of Dr. Bradshaw’s earlier letters. Representative of UK 
Charge additionally pointed out that your authorities had never in any 
way indicated this. That communications to him originated by Ameri­
cans had to be limited to mere request for interview.
