Afghanistan
325
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the White House6
1. Amstutz Views on Recognition of the Babrak Karmal Regime: Charge
Amstutz believes U.S. interests would be best served in Afghanistan
by breaking or suspending diplomatic recognition. In considering
whether to extend recognition, his primary consideration is the illegiti-
mate use of Soviet military force in bringing the Babrak regime into
power. Unlike the indigenous Khalqi revolution that occurred in 1978,
the present coup resulted only through the blatant intervention of the
Soviet military. Additionally, a general U.S. practice in deciding on
recognition has been whether the government exercises effective con-
trol of the country, a dubious proposition with Amin’s regime and of
even greater doubt with the present regime. Finally, though only mini-
mal information is available, Babrak’s press conference gives Amstutz
little reason to believe any change has occurred with respect to U.S.
interests or programs. While no “hasty action” should be taken in order
to prevent any precipitous action against mission personnel by the
Babrak regime, Amstutz believes that “we may have more to lose in
U.S. prestige globally and internally too were we to maintain a mis-
sion.” (Kabul 8668, PSN 10651)7 (C)
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
3. Chinese Reaction to Soviet-Afghan Situation: In discussions with
DCM Roy today, the deputy director of the Asian Affairs department
expressed China’s vigorous opposition to what the Soviet Union had
perpetrated in Afghanistan and urged the U.S. to offer its assistance
to the Pakistanis and the other threatened countries of the area. The
Chinese official stressed that the reaction of the U.S. and Western
Europe would impact significantly on whether the countries of the
region stood up to the Soviet threat or adopted a more accommodating
attitude toward the Soviet Union. (Beijing 9475 NODIS, PSN 11236) (S)8
6 Secret. The author of the paper is not identified. In the top right corner of the
page, Carter wrote: “Zbig. C.”
7 See Document 110. In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Do
not recognize—Have Warren pursue this? In London.” See footnote 2, Document 107.
8 Telegram 9475 from Beijing is dated December 29. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P840150–2539)
