Human Rights 29 permitting or perpetrating a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights, suggesting what US actions could help or hurt the situation, and how such actions might affect other US national interests. d. Proposal for Presidential attention. At some later point, you may want to encourage the President to complement his already considerable support for human rights with such initiatives as a major foreign policy address (dealing entirely or in part with human rights) or a well publicized meeting with outside spokesmen/experts on this subject. e. High-level speech on human rights. In the not-too-distant future, you could make a speech or present a statement before the Humphrey hearings in early March.7 f. Consideration of change in current legislation. Working together with the Congress on promotion of human rights may lead to opportunities to amend some current legislation which either does not serve the intended purpose of furthering human rights or runs counter to other foreign policy objectives—or both. In addition, we may find more ways to shift from legislation with a punitive cast to more positive measures that reward nations improving their observance of human rights. Recommendations for Action 1. Authorize the Deputy Secretary to establish an ad hoc Human Rights Coordinating Group, as described above.8 2. Instruct the Deputy Secretary, with or without the Coordinating Group, to consider the action items noted above. 3. Mandate S/P, together with D/HA and other interested bureaus, to draft (as per above and Tabs A and B): a. overall strategy paper; b. guidelines for implementation of human rights provisions in current legislation. 4. Sign the memorandum on human rights at Tab C.9 Attached for your information at Tab D are the instructions on regional strategy papers on human rights to be issued by the Executive Secretary.10 7 In a February 9 action memorandum to Christopher, Jenkins proposed that Christopher testify before the Humphrey subcommittee, owing to Christopher’s eventual “direct supervision over the [Department’s] Office of Human Rights.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770043–2533) For Christopher’s March 7 subcommittee testimony, see Department of State Bulletin, March 28, 1977, pp. 289–291 or Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, 95th Congress, First Session on Human Rights Issues and Their Relationship to Foreign Assistance Programs, March 4 and 7, 1977, pp. 62–69. 8 Vance’s special assistant Jacklyn Cahill initialed Vance’s approval of all four recommendations on February 11. 9 Attached and printed as Document 14. 10 Attached and printed as Document 15.
