88 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —Seeking greater collaboration with Third World nations by stressing the relation between promotion of all human rights—political, civil, economic, social, and cultural. —Continuing to involve Congress in the preparation for and participation in UN meetings. —Concentrating US efforts on the worldwide problems of crimes against the person. —Trying to assure even-handed study and statements on country and area human rights situations so that not just a few targets (such as Chile, Israel, and South Africa) are singled out without significant reference to other gross violators. Specific recommendations for US action on human rights at the United Nations should include: —Pressing for US ratification of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the covenant on political and civil rights and the covenant on economic, social, and cultural rights (as noted in the President’s UN speech, March 17). —Preparing immediately a human rights strategy for the Spring Session of ECOSOC (New York, April 12–May 13), the September 1977 UNGA and, if and when announced, the Special Session for the North-South dialogue. —Seeking ways to eliminate the racism-Zionism issue in order to allow full US participation in the international struggle against racism and racial discrimination. —Considering the selection of one of the USUN ambassadors as US Representative to the HRC. That would facilitate continuity in the US statements and actions at the HRC, ECOSOC, and the General Assembly, and provide one known full-time US spokesperson at the UN. That individual could be charged with factoring human rights considerations into US participation in UN meetings on economic and social development (important for greater cooperation with the LDC’s) and maintaining closer contact with non-governmental organizations which form an important part of the human rights constituency and which lobby actively at the United Nations. —Finding ways to strengthen the Human Rights Commission, such as following up on the President’s proposal for more frequent meetings of the HRC, returning the Commission to New York, and increasing its mandate with the appointment of a UN Human Rights Commissioner. We should also use the HRC to preserve and defend the Commission’s procedures for dealing with private complaints on human rights.
