Chile  271
4) liberalize foreign trade (eliminated lists of prohibited imports, main-
tained a steady exchange rate, increased general confidence in the eco-
nomic future of the country, and announced plans for the reform of the 
customs structure); 5) obtain foreign loans and aid (mostly from the 
United States and the Federal Republic of Germany). The Government 
has also initiated much needed steps to improve the efficiency of Chile’s 
agriculture, to stimulate the construction of low-­cost housing, and has 
announced plans for development of the country’s transportation, elec-
tric power and steel industries. Plans are also under way to reorganize 
many government organizations, including the expensive and often 
mismanaged social security system.
WST Comment:
The air of confidence which Alessandri has managed to inspire 
cannot last indefinitely if his administration fails to deal more effec-
tively with the continuing increase in the cost of living (up 36.9% in ten 
months of 1959 vs. 32.5% in all of 1958). The Government has already 
publicly abandoned its position that there should not be a new round 
of compulsory wage and salary increases in 1960, and in all probability 
this will unbalance the 1960 budget (despite a balance on paper), with 
further inflationary implications. The magnitude of the Government’s 
problem in attempting to curb inflationary pressures during 1960 will 
depend on a number of factors which cannot yet be measured, e.g., 
copper prices, foreign exchange reserves, level of wage increases, etc.
CH–26.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in 
Chile (Howe)1

Santiago, November 25, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
President Alessandri
Senator Morse2
Mr. Pat Holt3
Ambassador Howe
After formal introductions the Ambassador explained briefly 
to the President the purpose of Senator Morse’s trip to Chile and 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 31, “Congressional Visits 
to Chile.” Official Use Only.
2 Wayne Morse (D-Oregon)
3 Consultant to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.
