470 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI when he addressed the Supreme Soviet. As for Krasnoyarsk, the Soviet position had been the subject of public criticism to the effect that they had made unjustified concessions. Though they were able to defend themselves on this question, it was important that the START Treaty take into account the other side’s interests and arguments. The Secretary said Shevardnadze had underscored the fact that we still had significant differences on the Defense and Space issue. It had been our belief and hope in Wyoming that the Soviets had delinked START from the question of interpretation of the ABM Treaty or from a D&S agreement. It was our concern that the Soviets were now attempting to relink the two. It was difficult to understand why Soviet interests would not be sufficiently protected by a provision allowing withdrawal at any time a side saw a threat to its supreme interest, which could include a situation in which the Soviets believed the U.S. was in violation of the ABM Treaty. To insist on a common understanding presented the U.S. with difficult political problems, problems no simpler than the ones Shevardnadze had cited. Some would see such a common understanding as constraining our ability to move toward greater stability and predictability. Shevardnadze said he hoped that the Secretary had clearly understood the Soviet position and concerns. In his view it was necessary to stick with the agreement reached in Washington. If so, the views he had just expressed would not be unacceptable to the U.S. side provided the U.S. considered the Washington summit accord to remain in effect. It was the Soviets’ firm view that there had to be a clear standard on how either side interpreted the ABM Treaty. What counted most was defining what was permitted and what was prohibited under the ABM Treaty. We had not had a discussion in depth of this issue and he suggested it continue in parallel to the negotiation of a START treaty. In this way, we could see clearly what types of activities were permitted and which were banned. There was an understanding on both sides that the ABM Treaty would be complied with, Shevardnadze continued. The Soviets hoped a common understanding could be reached on this question. This was not a departure from the position he had presented in Wyoming. The Soviets were prepared to sign a START treaty if the ABM Treaty were to be observed. On this basis the sides could proceed with the practical elimination of 50% of their strategic offensive arms. The Secretary said he understood the Soviets were prepared to sign a START treaty on the basis of an understanding that the ABM Treaty would be observed. He asked Shevardnadze what would happen if we resolved all START issues and we were still observing the ABM Treaty in one another’s opinion. Could it then be signed? Shevardnadze said yes. That was what he had said previously.
