246 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII the preceding months. However, Amin is widely regarded to have been the strong man in the Taraki regime and the one responsible for its ruthless policies. State of the Insurgency and Military Efforts to Contain It While the insurgency remains uncoordinated and locally led, the number of active rebels has multiplied throughout the year. The rebels’ military capabilities have steadily increased owing to captured equipment and the participation of officers and recruits defecting from the DRA forces. Insurgents now control most of the countryside throughout Afghanistan. They have made travel on the major roads extremely hazardous even in heavily armed convoys and have successfully isolated military outposts. In October, the government was able by assembling massive armored force and air support under Soviet control and direction to mount a successful campaign against the rebels in Paktia province, on the border with Pakistan. However, the actual and psychological effects of this victory appear to have been negated by the subsequent reappearance of the insurgents as the DRA was forced to withdraw its armor for redeployment. The DRA had apparently been counting on a winter lull to reorganize its forces and train new recruits. However, the lull has failed to materialize as the insurgents continue to press and government forces have suffered a number of recent set backs, particularly in areas surrounding Kabul and in northeastern Badakhshan province. There are reports that the rebels intend to step up terrorist activities in urban centers during the winter. The situation in Qandahar indicates this is already in progress in Afghanistan’s second largest city. Reportedly, the government is preparing for an expected rebel attack on the city. There were reports in October that Soviet military personnel had taken over the control of both military and civilian government of Qandahar. The most serious problem affecting the government’s military capability to contain the insurgency appears to be the manpower shortage and the disaffection among both recruits and officers. Throughout the year, there have been constant reports of defections, occasionally involving complete military units. Troop disloyalty is reportedly rampant in the Badakhshan area. The extent of the influence of exile insurgent organizations based in Pakistan is unclear. They undoubtedly have played a supportive role in the provinces bordering on Pakistan, while western and centrally located insurgents may be receiving assistance from groups in Iran. The Pakistan-based groups have been plagued by rivalries and have been unable to unite in a common effort. One important role these
