International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
9
—Global economic recovery and stability (CEA)
—International financial arrangements (Treasury)
—Trade (State)
—North-South (State and Treasury)
—Energy (Schlesinger and State)
—East-West (State and Treasury)
—Investment (Treasury and State)
Each study should, in addition to presenting alternative U.S. posi-
tions, and making policy recommendations, analyze the likely posi-
tions of other Summit participants, identify points which they might
raise, and provide suggestions for response. These studies should be
completed by March 28 for submission to the President through the
National Security Council.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
4.
Paper Prepared in the Office of the Special Representative
for Trade Negotiations1
Washington, January 21, 1977
Major Trade Issues
During the coming months, a number of difficult international
trade issues are likely to command considerable attention both in the
United States and abroad. Concern will likely focus on (1) the general
trade climate and increased pressures for protectionism, (2) specific
trade actions which will be presented for decision (in particular, a
series of trade complaints under the Trade Act of 1974),2 (3) progress in
the Multilateral Trade Negotiations (which has been painfully slow to
date) and (4) the trade aspects of the North-South Dialogue.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 88, Trade Policy Committee. Confidential. Sent to the Trade
Policy Committee (Vance, Blumenthal, Brown, Attorney General Griffin Bell, Secretary of
the Interior Cecil Andrus, Bergland, Kreps, Marshall, and Schultze) under cover of a Jan-
uary 21 memorandum from Acting Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
Clayton Yeutter. (Ibid.)
2 President Ford signed the Trade Act of 1974 into law on January 3, 1975. For infor-
mation on the provisions of the act, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign
Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Document 223.
