Chapter 4, February–April 1990 557 effective verification and the Soviet side believes their new proposal strikes a good balance between the two. Ifft asked what the difference was now between routine movements and exercise dispersals under the Soviet concept. Davison amplified Ifft’s question noting that, if there is no limit on the number of launchers outside of an RA and if there is no requirement to notify the departure of a launcher from an RA, and, additionally, if neither type of movement can depart from the DA, it now appears that the Soviet proposal has rendered the concept of an exercise dispersal, and the strict limit on their frequency, meaningless. After some initial confusion, Koltunov agreed that under the new Soviet concept the requirement for exercise dispersals could be reviewed. Masterkov questioned whether under the U.S. concept for exercise dispersals there would be no limit on the number of launchers outside an RA, but that such movements would be confined to the DA. Brooks confirmed that this was correct. Ifft added that the U.S. had dropped the percentage limit on routine movements only under the understanding that such movements would be pre-­notified. Fischer, referring back to Khromov’s earlier statement that under the Soviet proposal a launcher would have to travel a maximum of about 120 kilometers to return to its RA during an inspection, noted that if DAs are 160,000 square kilometers in size this would mean that a launcher would not be traveling from the opposite side of the DA. Khromov said his understanding was that RAs would be scattered through a DA like pepperoni on a pizza and that during routine movements and dispersals launchers assigned to one RA would not travel near other RAs, since survivability would dictate mobile launchers being spread out. Fischer said his question was whether the maximum distance suggested by Khromov was a statement about unilateral planning or whether it was intended to be a Treaty restriction. Khromov replied that it was only a hypothetical figure intended to give a sense of the magnitude of such movements. Koltunov added that the underlying proposition was that the sides would commit to having launchers return to their RA during inspections. It was up to the inspected side to ensure that this happened. Brooks said the U.S. side understood reasonably well the second proposal the Soviets had made on facilities subject to PPCM. He noted again that Ambassador Nazarkin had suggested other topics for the experts to discuss. He asked when such discussions should take place. Masterkov joked that he could not use his usual response that this could be arranged through Executive Secretaries since they were not in Geneva. He said he understood Brooks’ question and assumed something could be agreed. Brooks concluded by noting that he hoped the Soviet side would have a lot to say on these topics because the U.S. side would have little to offer beyond what the Soviet side had already heard.
