3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
816
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
to mention the territory of Soviet allies such as Bulgaria, GDR, Hun-
gary, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Romania. He would point out that
Soviet SS–20 missiles cannot reach the territory of the U.S. and that this
weapons system had not been designed for that purpose. Conse-
quently, if there is equality in Europe at present, the balance works in
the favor of the U.S.
Gromyko was sure that the Secretary knew all of this very well.
Therefore, it seemed to him that when the Secretary was referring to So-
viet actions, in particular deployment of SS–20s and alleged that these
constituted a threat to NATO forces in Europe, he was convinced that
the Secretary himself did not believe that Soviet arms or Soviet policy
could be a threat to the U.S. and NATO. But, if that was so, he would
ask the Secretary to put himself in his shoes and think objectively. As
for the Soviets, since there was no basis for NATO’s decision, it had to
ask very serious questions as to the purpose of some of the statements
made in this connection. It was evident to Gromyko that such state-
ments were made for the purpose of concealing NATO’s own actions.
That was how the Soviet side assessed the situation, and he would ask
the Secretary to look at it objectively.
Gromyko said that further, as far as strategic weapons were con-
cerned, the U.S. was now planning to deploy the MX missile. He had to
tell the Secretary that the Soviet Union had not yet reacted to those
plans, that it had not yet had its say. The time will come when the So-
viet side will have to say something about this system of strategic arms.
Further to the subject of strategic arms, Gromyko noted that some
statements had been made, including one by the Secretary after en-
tering upon his new duties, to the effect that SALT II had been sus-
pended, but that the U.S. would like to have an understanding with the
Soviet Union for both sides to observe the obligations under the SALT
II Treaty as if it had entered into force. That was strange logic indeed.
How could there be a situation when a treaty was not in force, but the
parties to the treaty had to observe its provisions? No, it seemed to him
that this could not be done. Those who made statements to the effect
that a treaty not in effect obligated anyone to do something or other
were probably the only ones in possession of the secret of how that
could be accomplished.
Gromyko had a second point. Since he and the Secretary were
speaking frankly he had to tell the Secretary something that might not
be to his liking. It was a fact today that the Soviet Union did not fully
trust the U.S., that if the two sides were to agree that they would ob-
serve the provisions of the Treaty, the Soviet side would not have full
confidence that the U.S. side would do so, in view of what had been
done by the U.S. side with respect to agreements and understandings
