332 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI the U.S. position on SDI and D&S issues remains unchanged. Cooper encouraged the Soviet side to review the tape of Vice President Quayle’s interview with the LA Times; this would reveal that the printed report had been taken out of context, because the substance of the Vice President’s comments in it showed a clear commitment to the SDI Program; he emphasized on several occasions President Bush’s commitment to seek to develop a strategic defense system and deploy it when ready. 45. Cooper said that Round XI of the Defense & Space talks had not made meaningful progress, although the sides had had an interesting discussion on the offense-­defense relationship. The Washington Summit joint statement was an important milestone in the sides’ negotiations on Defense and Space, Cooper said; it laid a solid foundation for a Defense and Space Treaty. But the Treaty must build on, and clarify, the Washington Summit understandings, Cooper continued; it must not merely codify language that had been interpreted in sharply different ways by the two sides. The U.S. recognized that these differing interpretations reflected differing positions on substance; clearly, they must be resolved if there was to be fundamental progress. But Cooper said procedural obstacles ought not to be allowed to exacerbate matters. Even though both sides had tabled texts with common language over a year ago, no joint draft text of the Defense & Space Treaty exists, despite public pledges by the Soviet Foreign Minister. The U.S. could not understand why the Soviet side had imposed such an artificial obstacle, unless its purpose was to delay the talks. 46. Regarding substance, Cooper continued, the U.S. side would be happy to hear any new ideas from the Soviet side on moving forward in the Defense & Space negotiations. Cooper stressed several points: — The U.S. will not accept an ambiguous agreement that simply codifies the language of the Washington Summit joint statement. Ambiguity is a formula for failure in Defense & Space as in any other arms control forum. — The U.S. was encouraged in Round XI by Soviet calls for working out a “common approach” on the right to deploy and a “mutual understanding” on the scope of the non withdrawal commitment. The U.S. side would like to hear more about this. — The U.S. was pleased that the Soviet side had accepted some important U.S. concepts for predictability measures over the last year, but regretted that further progress had not been made in Round XI. U.S. proposals for visits to laboratories and briefings, and for the inclusion of research in the field of strategic ballistic missile defense are sound and deserve Soviet support. The U.S. side would like the Soviet side to consider not excluding activities that take place earlier in the acquisition cycle than can be observed by NTM. This Soviet approach lessens
