Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 733 269. Editorial Note On April 25, 1980, the White House issued a short statement on the failed hostage rescue attempt. President Jimmy Carter followed this with a longer address to the nation at 7 a.m. that morning. In his address, Carter briefly outlined the rescue mission and then explained that the rescue attempt, which had been months in the planning, was executed only when it became clear that Iranian authorities “could not or would not resolve this crisis on their own initiative.” He also stated regarding the decision to attempt the rescue and the decision to cancel the mission: “The responsibility is fully my own.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pages 771–773) The Carter administration then continued the process of dealing with the consequences of the failed rescue operation, including engaging in correspondence with U.S. allies and congressional leadership, debating among advisers a new rescue attempt, meeting with the wounded, holding a press conference, accepting the resignation of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, and attending the burial of the returned bodies of those who died at Desert One. Carter personally apologized to Sultan Qaboos bin Said of Oman, Prince Fahd ibn Abd al Aziz Al Saud, the First Deputy Prime Minister of Saudi Arabia, and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt for using facilities on their territories as part of the rescue mission without giving them prior information. Carter assured Sultan Qaboos that he would provide “prompt assistance” if the security of Oman was jeopardized as a result of U.S. activities. And he assured Prince Fahd “of full U.S. support for the maintenance of the integrity of Saudi Arabia.” (Letters from Carter to Sultan Qaboos and to Prince Fahd, April 25; Carter Library, Plains File, Box 3 and Box 4, respectively; and telegram 109160 to Cairo, April 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047– 2438) Qaboos was at first “angry,” then asked that the United States “do everything possible to avoid publicly linking Oman or Masirah Island to Iranian operation.” (Telegram 1151 from Muscat, April 25; Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS Cables Apr 1980) Sadat responded that while it was “wellknown that Egypt had said it would provide facilities for such humanitarian purposes,” to avoid criticism, Egypt did not intend to say anything publicly, and if it did, any statement would be in the form of a denial. (Telegram 9284 from Cairo, April 25; ibid.) Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of Defense W. Graham Claytor, and Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General John S. Pustay briefed the representatives of the U.S. allies in Washington on April 25, providing a detailed
