832  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Basic rule: If a PCC principal doesn’t know enough to discuss the sub-
ject without an interagency study, defer to the Negotiator.
— On RFGs, mandate that Negotiating Group recommenda-
tions are automatically approved on the due date in the request, pro-
vided that at least eight working days have elapsed unless Washington 
directs otherwise.
— Forbid backstopping from delaying sending cables forward 
to the NSC beyond a Negotiating Group requested due date. If agencies 
are unable to provide positions, forward a cable with the notation that 
“agency x provided no views.”
— Direct evening and Saturday meetings of backstopping, 
PCC subcommittee, or PCC when needed to meet a Negotiating Group 
requested due date.
5. Convince the bureaucracy that we’re serious. We should:
— Convene a meeting in Room 450 of the Old EOB of all START 
players down through the backstopping level.
— As I suggested in the Oval Office some months ago, have the 
President make a 5 minute drop-­by at which he makes the following 
points:
— Want a treaty this year, but want a good treaty.
— Job of people in this room is to support the Negotiator so that 
he can get that treaty.
— Your job is to find solutions.
— Not looking to abandon our principles but expect you to find 
solutions we and the Soviets can both accept.
NOTE: There are precedents. President Reagan met with the Senior 
Arms Control Group (sub-­cabinet level) in 1983. As Vice President, 
President Bush made an appearance in OEOB Room 450 before a gov-
ernment wide audience down through action officers to stress the 
importance of a special access program. The National Security Advisor 
discussed START before a similar audience after one summit. My idea 
attempts to combine the features of these past sessions.
— After the President’s departure, announce the new procedures 
set forth above. Stress that they have been agreed to at the cabinet level.
6. Convince the Soviet bureaucracy that we’re serious. We should 
schedule a summit for late this year. Probably nothing less will do the 
trick. The sooner a summit is scheduled, the better—­it will enable us to 
begin disciplining the bureaucracy now and leave us less vulnerable to 
charges of a last minute rush to completion.
There is no question that the measures above are draconian. They 
are also the only way to finish this year—­and even then the outcome is 
not certain. But the issue is not whether we finish this year; the issue is 
whether we finish at all. We can probably complete a treaty by the spring 
of 1991 if we adopt some of these measures. We certainly cannot com-
plete a treaty by December without adopting almost all of them. If we 
do none of them, we will probably see START slip through our fingers.
