Romania
587
is more a result of the cleverness of its diplomats than of the might of
its armies.
27. To a large extent, the relative loyalties of the armed forces tend
to reflect those of the population but, as it receives more ideological
indoctrination, probably at a somewhat higher level of intensity. Since
loyalty to the country is highest, the regime has skillfully promoted
Ceausescu and the Party as synonymous with Romania. Loyalty to the
Warsaw Pact is the weakest link in the loyalty chain.
28. In terms of ability, the technical services (that is, Navy, Air
Force, and Air Defense) are far better trained than the Army, essentially
a vast labor pool which receives little training above the small-unit
level. It is the assessment of the Bucharest Embassy Defense Attache
that any Warsaw Pact operation would be far better off without a
Romanian Army unit during a combined operation.
29. Mistrust of the minorities is reflected by their status in the
armed forces. There are very few minorities represented in the officer
corps, for example. Enlisted men from ethnic groups are almost auto-
matically placed in engineer units where they are little more than
unskilled labor troops.
30. [less than 1 line not declassified] the Ambassador has read this
report [less than 1 line not declassified] he considers it “a comprehensive
statement which highlights the main problems and current areas of
potential conflict in the Ceausescu regime’s management of Romania.”
In the Ambassador’s view, however, “the report’s skepticism concern-
ing Romanian achievements and possibilities is somewhat overdrawn,
and it leans toward the lowest available estimates of quality of life/
standard of living in Romania (i.e., vis-a-vis Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and
the USSR, where other estimates show Romania equal or ahead). This
penchant extends also to judgments on politics . . . ” where, the Ambas-
sador believes, “there is an underestimation of Ceausescu’s potential,
and that of his regime, for development in both the political and eco-
nomic/social spheres.”)
31. [less than 1 line not declassfied]
32. [less than 1 line not declassified]
