3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
5
Tab C
Letter From Professor Andrei Sakharov to President Carter6
January 21, 1977
Dear Mr. Carter,
It’s very important to defend those who suffer because of their un-
violent struggle, for openness, for justice for destroyed rights of the
other people. Our and your duty are to fight for them. I think that a lot
depends from this struggle—trust between the people, trust to the high
promises and in the final result—international security.
Here we have hard almost unbearable situation—not only in the
USSR but also in all the countries of the Eastern Europe. Now, before
the Belgrade meeting7 and in the conditions of the raising of the
struggle for the human rights in the Western Europe and in the USSR,
authorities not wishing to make any concessions towards the most nec-
essary human rights (freedom of belief and information, freedom of
conscience, freedom of the choice of the country of living etc), being not
capable for the honest competition of the ideas, increase the repressions
and make the attempts to comprometise (sic) the dissidents; the perse-
cution of the members of the Group of the Assistance to the fulfillment
of the Helsinki Agreement in Moscow and Ukraine, and especially the
provocation in Moscow subway, which should be resisted energetically
(we compare it with the Reihstag (sic) fire in 1933 and killing of Kirov in
1936).8
It’s very important that USA President should continue the efforts
for the release of those people who are already known to American
public and that these efforts shouldn’t be useless. It is very important to
continue fight for the heavily ill and women—political prisoners. (The
detailed information about all of them is in Chronica-Press (Ed Klain).
I have serious problems with the communications. Telephone
communications with the West is blockaded fully and no tel. calls reach
me. It’s useless to go to the tel. station as I’m always told that my corre-
spondent doesn’t answer. (I’m always closely watched.) This question
is principly (sic) important for my public activity and for all the human
6 No classification marking. Printed from a typed copy of an original English-
language letter signed by Sakharov.
7 Reference is to the first of three CSCE follow-up meetings held in Belgrade, Oc-
tober 1977–March 1978.
8 References are to the Reichstag Fire in 1933, which resulted in greater political au-
thority for Hitler after Communists were blamed for the incident, and Sergey Kirov’s as-
sassination in 1934, believed to be ordered by Stalin.
