1182 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Government. It has the most complete religious freedom and the most absolute separation of church and State. It has had professional armed services, divorced from participation in politics, for longer than any other Latin American country. It probably has a smaller percentage of illiterates and a larger percentage of newspaper readers than any other Latin American country—­with a deeper devotion to all forms of civil liberties. Uruguayan Attitudes toward Communism and the Soviet Bloc Those Uruguayans who have been interested in the professed advances of communist States in guaranteeing at least minimum “social security” to their populations are now becoming aware of the ruthless dictatorial and police methods that have been required to do this and of the total immorality of communism whenever this serves communist purposes in relations with countries outside of the Bloc. These Uruguayans are confident that their country is basically impregnable to the dictatorial or police-­state ideas of communism. But, since such ideas have begun to take hold in Cuba, their confidence is beginning to be shaken. Many Uruguayans, moreover, have seemed to have an attitude bordering on irresponsibility about the threat of communist infiltration and subversion in democratic and uncommitted countries in other parts of the world. For example, some Uruguayans have not seemed to realize that visits of curiosity to the Soviet Bloc have the effect of subtly enhancing Soviet prestige and lulling gullible peoples in other countries into less concern about the dangers of communist propaganda, infiltration and agitation. It is to be hoped—­particularly in view of the developments in Cuba—­that such Uruguayans are beginning to understand that any act of theirs which shows intellectual benevolence toward communist countries has the effect of raising communist prestige and endangering other more vulnerable democratic peoples not only on the periphery of the Bloc but even closer to Uruguay. After completely free political activity since 1920, the Uruguayan Communist Party won 27,000 votes out of one million votes cast in the November 1958 national elections. The most the Communists have ever won was 34,000 in 1946. Uruguayans have not seemed to realize that other poorer and less-­educated peoples in other countries would be far more susceptible to communist blandishments if this same degree of freedom of activity were to be permitted. The steady cumulative effect of news stories and other sources of information has undoubtedly tended to make Uruguayans more realistic, but Communist is persistent and communist influence continues to be strong in Uruguay in a minority of the labor movement and among a minority of the teachers.
