746 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement people obtain American citizenship and stay in US for so long? If US thought its population not big enough, even in that case it could not resort to this means of increasing its population. 92. Wang said this contrasts strongly with treatment of Americans in China by Chinese authorities. Even in case American who refused to return to US for moment and even if it happened that in future he changes mind and desires return to US, Chinese Govt would not attempt detain him. This attitude of Chinese Govt beyond comparison with action of US Govt in forcibly detaining Chinese in US. 93. Wang said I had said that number of Chinese who desire return as given me by him were what I termed empty, fanciful, unsupported by facts. Might he ask about 103 Chinese students who US admitted had been prevented from returning, was it not fact that 32 of them still not been able return? Was it not fact that 27 persons including those named on todays list not yet returned? 94. Wang said it quite true there are still 13 Americans in Chinese prisons. But how many Chinese are locked up behind bars in US prisons and whose names US has failed submit to Wangs side? 95. Wang said if US refuses take measures improve treatment Chinese who desire return in accordance with agreed announcement between two sides, and if US refuses make accounting of Chinese of whom he had asked accounting, then US has no right ask about these 13 Americans. 96. Wang said agreement must be carried out by both sides. It impermissible, while one side carrying out agreement, for other side to be violating it. 97. I said I had only few simple things say. First is, he stated people writing to his country alleging they being obstructed in returning. I not seen any case yet in which there any definite facts they being obstructed. 98. I said however over and beyond that I not see how he could allege that people feel free to and are writing his country and if gen­ uinely desire return his country and feel obstructed, why they do not communicate with Indian Embassy. On very fact of it, this incredible. 99. I said next let me say his allegations here on one hand seem to relate to Chinese who desire return and on other hand to those who desire remain US or do not desire return his country. I wanted point out agreed announcement concerned only those who wanted return his country. Those who desire stay US or go other destinations are not proper subject our discussions here. 100. I said however with regard persons who do desire stay US, I wanted point out few simple facts. I mentioned these before, but apparently he not understood.
