question of rates of duty would be reopened, especially upon raw products,
such as leaf tobacco, and that a lower rate might be required. The American
Delegation was doubtful also of the advisability of accepting the suggestion
that Provincial approval should be required in connection with any plan for
the abolition of likin. Doubt was likewise expressed concerning the
composition of the Likin Compensation Committee and it was the opinion
of the American Delegation that there should be foreign representation on
the Committee, that a Committee composed entirely of Chinese might not
make a judicious expenditure of the funds. The American Delegation also
felt that some provision should be made for a system of rebates, or other
assurance, for the protection of the foreign trader in the event that transit
passes and exemption certificates were not honored and additional taxes
collected.
The Japanese opposed the British plan in several particulars, notably the
rate of the Likin Compensation Tax, the omission of a refund system for
illegally collected taxes, and the abolition of the coast-trade duty and the
inland export duty. The Chinese likewise voiced objection to various phases
of the British plan, particularly the treatment to be accorded native goods
and the allocation to the Provinces of the likin compensation tax.
Generally speaking, the Chinese, endeavoring to impress upon the
Delegates that this was a matter largely of domestic concern, contended for
as much freedom as possible in concluding arrangements for the complete
abolition of likin. No Delegation other than the American, British, Japanese
and Chinese seemed to have any considerable interest in the matter of
working out the details of likin abolition.
While the British plan was not definitely accepted, it may form the basis of
further discussion when the active work of the Conference is resumed.
Various memoranda and documents relating to these several subjects are
enclosed herewith and are enumerated in the list of enclosures under the
heading of Likin and Tariff Autonomy.7
Rates of Surtaxes.
Unlike the questions of Likin and Tariff Autonomy, the question of Rates of
Surtaxes occupied to a considerable extent the attention of the Delegates
