268
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
only bad policy ensues when we allow either our global fears or our
global hopes to skew our vision of the facts.
This is not to say we should be indifferent to the influence of the
Soviet Union in the Third World or elsewhere. We and the Soviets have
different views of history and of the future; our relationship continues
to have competitive, as well as cooperative, elements.
But in terms of our own self-interest, we must begin to deal with
the developing nations on a basis which takes full account of their
growing importance to us. And we should understand that the deter-
mination of Third World nations to decide their own policies, their
wish to determine their own fates, is a basic protection for the world of
diversity we want to see preserved.
So it is no longer possible to say that East-West relations or ties
among the industrial democracies are more important to us than
North-South policies. For different reasons, they are all vital to U.S. in-
terests and to the kind of world we want for our children. Advance-
ment of our objectives in one area cannot be divorced from progress in
another. Worldwide energy security, for example, affects the economic
welfare of the industrial democracies, the developing world, and the
eastern Communist states. Economic cooperation among the United
States, Europe, and Japan affects growth in the Third World; by the
same token, their economic health is important to our own.
Another way of looking at the importance of the U.S.-Third World
relationship is to enumerate some of those problems which cannot be
solved without their cooperation.
• Controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons requires the
assistance of India, Iran, Brazil, and Argentina, among others.
• Restraining the dangerous growth of conventional arms races
must be addressed on every continent.
• Human rights, including the economic dimension of those
rights, are a concern to us wherever they are in jeopardy.
• Managing an economically interdependent world to assure
global growth and promote economic equity requires close cooperation
between the governments of the industrial democracies and those of
the developing nations.
Managing the Relationship
For many of these first months in office, the Administration has
been reviewing—and arguing about—how this complex, intercon-
nected relationship with the developing nations can be managed. Let
me summarize some general conclusions we have come up with in six
points.
First, we must adopt a positive and constructive attitude in ad-
dressing international problems encompassing the developing coun-
