Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1169
more than one warhead is attributed and the Parties have agreed within 
the framework of the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission 
to permit deployment of such ICBMs on mobile launchers of ICBMs. 
A new type of ICBM for mobile launchers of ICBMs may cease to be 
considered to be a type of ICBM for mobile launchers of ICBMs if no 
ICBM of that type has been contained on, or flight-tested from, a mobile 
launcher of ICBMs.
5. Each Party undertakes not to deploy ICBM launchers of a new 
type of ICBM and not to deploy SLBM launchers of a new type of SLBM 
if such launchers are capable of launching ICBMs or SLBMs, respec-
tively, of other types. ICBM launchers of existing types of ICBMs and 
SLBM launchers of existing types of SLBMs shall be incapable, without 
conversion, of launching ICBMs or SLBMs, respectively, of other types.
6. Each Party undertakes not to convert SLBMs into ICBMs for 
mobile launchers of ICBMs, or to load SLBMs on, or launch SLBMs 
front, mobile launchers of ICBMs.
7. Each Party undertakes not to produce, test, or deploy transporter-­
loaders other than transporter-loaders for ICBMs for road-mobile 
launchers of ICBMs attributed with one warhead.
8. Each Party undertakes not to locate deployed silo launchers of 
ICBMs outside ICBM bases for silo launchers of ICBMs.
9. Each Party undertakes not to locate soft-site launchers except 
at test ranges and space launch facilities. All existing soft-site launch-
ers not at test ranges or space launch facilities shall be eliminated in 
accordance with the procedures provided for in the Conversion or 
Elimination Protocol no later than 60 days after entry into force of this 
Treaty.
10. Each Party undertakes not to:
(a) flight-test ICBMs or SLBMs of a retired or former type from 
other than test launchers specified for such use or launchers at space 
launch facilities. Except for soft-site launchers, test launchers specified 
for such use shall not be used to flight-test ICBMs or SLBMs of a type, 
any one of which is deployed;
(b) produce ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs of a retired type.
11. Each Party undertakes not to convert silos used as launch con-
trol centers into silo launchers of ICBMs.
12. Each Party undertakes not to:
(a) produce, flight-test, or deploy an ICBM or SLBM with more 
than ten reentry vehicles;
(b) flight-test an ICBM or SLBM with a number of reentry vehicles 
greater than the number of warheads attributed to it, or, for an ICBM 
or SLBM of a retired type, with a number of reentry vehicles greater 
than the largest number of warheads that was attributed to any ICBM 
or SLBM of that type;
