1016  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
and I’ve seen several of them, pertain only to what would happen 
against targets in Continental United States. Most of them assume a 
specific targeting which would be SAC first, then soft missile sites 
and then hard missile sites. It doesn’t take very many missiles under 
ideal conditions to knock out all of SAC. What these presentations 
prove is SAC is a useless thing in the missile age, because you can 
knock out the bases. At the same time, they also prove that until we 
get POLARIS and hardened sites, within ’60 and ’61 if Russia did have 
a significant number of missiles—70, 100, 120, some place along there, 
if for some reason they did have these missiles on launcher, and if 
they had a high degree of reliability and other systems, they could 
knock out most of our retaliatory system in the United States. The 
cure for that, as I said before, is POLARIS and hardened sites. We 
don’t get any hardened sites until ’61. This is all without warning, 
so the obvious thing to do is push up—accelerate POLARIS, accelerate 
BMEWS, and SECDEF is considering whether or not to put on an air 
alert. I think he read that letter on carriers that we wrote on Saturday, 
and maybe he is considering increasing the number of carriers we 
have as well as dispersing SAC.
Now, he wants a study made by the Joint Chiefs of Staff on all of 
this intelligence—a military appraisal of our situation. This means a 
very important piece of paper because we’re going to have to move 
fast on this thing. Op–06 and Op–92 must get in on this for sure. This 
problem is going to be turned over to the JSSC. The JSSC will call upon 
the Service planners.
Here’s what I think, and this is from the top of my head. I don’t 
care what you do so long as you follow this. I think you’ll agree it’s 
sound. Let’s shoot for these things which increase this nation’s capi­
tal gains, these things which will give us a greater capability and will 
last for a long time. For example, if you expedite BMEWS, you get 
BMEWS sooner but you’ve got a BMEWS for ever and ever. So, let’s 
expedite BMEWS, let’s expedite POLARIS. Let us do these things 
which will increase our military capability over a long period of time. 
Let us take those things which do not increase our military capability 
but are only temporary expedients, such things as an air alert where 
no matter how many air alerts you run today, you’re not any better 
off tomorrow—you’ve get to run them tomorrow too. Let’s exam­
ine the cost of these very carefully. Now, carriers come in there. If 
you keep carriers in existence, it’s the operating costs of the carriers, 
but the airplanes you buy for that carrier are capital gains because 
you’re going to buy those airplanes someday anyway. So that’s an 
actual gain. That increases your military capability, but the operation 
of your carrier doesn’t increase your military capability—you’ve got 
to operate it tomorrow. I think that’s a pretty sound way to approach
