Chapter 5, May–June 1990  703
compromise formulation: “joint statement on strategic stability and 
agreement on nuclear and space arms.” Nazarkin commented that, in 
both the title and text, Burt was focussing mostly on strategic stability. 
This could give rise to the erroneous impression that the current START 
treaty had nothing to do with strategic stability. Burt observed that in 
the two original titles, the word “stability” appeared only in the Soviet 
draft. Nazarkin then proposed inverting the word order to read: “Joint 
statement on future negotiations on nuclear and space arms and strate-
gic stability.” Burt said this formulation looked acceptable to him.
— Working off of the U.S. draft which Burt had provided on 
May 17 (dated May 16), Nazarkin said he had no comment on the first 
sentence, but advocated a fuller statement on the objectives of the nego-
tiations. There were two omissions in the existing language: No explicit 
mention of reducing the risk of nuclear war; and, no mention of further 
reductions in strategic arms as a goal. He added that the components 
of a future agreement should also be discussed in the joint statement.
— Nazarkin said the second paragraph had the same problem as 
the title; it focussed on stability as if it would lead to reductions. The 
Soviet side believed that stability would result from further reductions. 
Reductions were not the only way to achieve stability, but they were a 
major way.
— Nazarkin said that the emphasis on ICBMs created another 
difficulty for the Soviets. The initial Soviet START document included 
a broader component, banning other kinds of offensive arms. Since 
the Soviets would soon be taking the difficult step of reducing heavy 
missiles, it would be desirable to identify the other issues which con-
stituted a subject for future negotiations—­without prejudicing the out-
come. The joint statement could refer to the possibility of discussing the 
limiting/banning of all missiles with MIRV’s.
— Nazarkin expressed dissatisfaction with the last sentence in 
paragraph two which promised the beginning of future negotiations 
“as soon as practicable.” He would suggest a more definite and pratical 
formulation, according to which, discussions would begin immediately 
after signing the treaty and negotiations immediately after the treaty 
entered into force.
— Burt commented that the draft’s reference to reducing the con-
centration of warheads on ballistic missiles and banning mobile MIRVed 
ICBMs was obviously related to President Bush’s suggestion that these 
objectives be achieved in the current negotiations. The Soviet response 
had been that this objective should be left to the next stage of strategic 
negotiations. It was thus very likely that the American President would 
like to see language along the lines of the U.S. draft in the joint state-
ment. Nazarkin said he understood that this was an important element 
of the U.S. approach, but that the U.S. side also knew the Soviet reaction 
to President Bush’s proposal. The Soviets had expressed a readiness to
