434 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Subsequently, V and B were informed of other decisions by the Council. —The militants will no longer be allowed to express their views to the press. This decision was taken on the evening of January 24. Thus far we are not able to confirm whether or not it has been effectively implemented. —The Council guaranteed absolutely the security of the hostages. The Council would take further steps to assure that the hostages would not be harmed. (This decision was taken because V had raised the possibility that some disgruntled militant might try to deepen the crisis by harming one of the hostages.) —The U.S. should attempt to prevent Iranian students in this country from making statements which damage prospects of a settlement. For example, some students had said that whatever happened to the Shah the U.S. itself was the real enemy. (We commented that the Iranian Embassy in Washington was more troublesome than students and perhaps the Foreign Minister could direct the Chargé to cease harmful propaganda activities. B agreed to do so.) —Finally, because Ghotbzadeh believed that the U.S. wanted some American correspondents to be allowed to return to Iran, the Iranian government would soon permit on a selective basis the return of correspondents who would not be “biased.”3 These correspondents would be asked to pledge that they would not interview the militants. V and B gave us their analysis of the Iranian political situation, which they said was shared by Ghotbzadeh and members of the Revolutionary Council: The seizure of the Embassy had been a move by the religious extreme right—somehow backed by the Soviet Union— to provoke a crisis. They had, in fact, succeeded in bringing down the Bazargan Government and in later forcing out Bani Sadr. But within forty hours of the seizure Khomeini had moved to thwart their plans. He had dispatched the Ayatollah Khoeni a loyal supporter plus contingents of Palestinians, Kurds, Libyans, left-wing Iranian youth and also other religious students to dilute the authority of the group that had organized the seizure. Subsequently, these groups left the compound. (We doubt the involvement of these groups. The significance is that the Revolutionary Council believes that the militants are hostile to the Khomeini regime and that Khomeini recognized this and moved to take charge of the operation on the compound by inserting his own people.) 3 Iran expelled all U.S. journalists on January 18, on the grounds that their reporting was “biased.” (“Tehran Says Reporting is Biased,” Los Angeles Times, January 14, 1980, p. A1, and James Yuenger, “Tehran will expel U.S. journalists,” Chicago Tribune, January 15, 1980, p. 1)
