824  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
fully their views regarding declaration. He failed see any portion my 
long argument I had just made which could contribute progress our 
discussions.
30. Wang said I had stated that he had first made proposal that 
declaration we were discussing should simply express desire for peace­
ful settlement, and then that he had referred to declaration as renun­
ciation of force declaration. He did not think that there were any two 
declarations that he had been referring to, and there were no points 
of contradiction in his statement. When he said declaration should 
express desire for peaceful settlement, he did not mean desire that two 
sides should go to war to effect settlement. Instead it was declaration 
of desire for peaceful settlement and they regarded declaration we dis­
cussing as something which would help peaceful settlement disputes 
between us and they regarded declaration as first step toward such a 
settlement. He recalled that I had also said in previous meetings that 
declaration in itself settled nothing.
31. Wang said I had also repeatedly referred to his opinion that 
issuance of declaration must be separated from actual settlement of 
practical issues between us. These were two separate things. However, 
views advanced by me at previous meeting and again this morning 
tend to confuse these two things.
32. Wang said text their December 1 draft was quite clear and 
no distortion any portion it was possible. He would read portion of 
December 1 draft. It stated: “PRC and USA determined they should 
settle disputes between their two countries through peaceful negotia­
tions without resorting to threat or use of force.” Let him also read last 
paragraph their October 27 draft: “In order realize their common desire 
PRC and USA decide to hold a conference of Foreign Ministers to settle 
through negotiations question relaxing and eliminating tension Taiwan 
area.”
33. Wang said thus texts these two drafts have clearly expressed 
desire for settlement disputes between two sides. Also give expres­
sion to our determination to seek practical and feasible means settle­
ment our disputes. How can it be said that such views as expressed in 
these drafts had any disadvantageous effect against U.S.? Could there 
be found anything in these drafts which tended to require that U.S. 
abandon its view.
34. Wang said however U.S. did not accept even these drafts and 
instead U.S. alleged groundlessly that his side insisted on using force 
to settle disputes. Was not that utter nonsense? First I had referred to 
position of U.S. as one of absolute unwillingness to accept views stated 
above. However I had followed up that statement by saying I willing 
strive for agreement. Was not that self-­contradictory statement?
