National Security Policy  1003
demise is most likely to be followed by another period of “collective 
leadership” and a phase of contention for the top position. We continue 
to believe that the Soviet system has an inherent tendency to revert to 
one-­man dictatorship. The inevitable struggles for power which this 
produces are not likely to menace the stability of the regime, much less 
alter the nature of its most basic policies. However, the fact of personal 
government is likely always to affect profoundly the manner and tone 
of Soviet policy. Thus, Khrushchev’s successor might bring to the con­
duct of Soviet policy features quite different from those characteristic 
of the present dictator.
18. The years of Khrushchev’s rise to power have been marked by 
a series of reforming changes intended to cope with problems raised by 
past policies and with new conditions resulting from rapid industrial­
ization and modernization. The relaxation of police terror and a greater 
concern for living standards, some greater degree of ideological flexi­
bility, wider foreign contacts, a more pragmatic and innovating spirit 
applied to institutional arrangements—all these are changes of a more 
than transitory character which, even if there should be some reversion, 
will have a lasting influence on the future evolution of the Soviet system. 
Their main effect for the present has been to give the Soviet people a 
hopeful sense of forward movement, and therefore probably more sat­
isfaction with the regime and its goals than has existed at any time in 
the Soviet period. But it does not follow that the changes which have 
taken place so far forecast a more basic evolution away from totalitarian 
dictatorship. A modern industrial society is not necessarily incompatible 
with a totalitarian political system, especially in a nation like Russia with 
a long authoritarian tradition. In any case, for the period of this estimate 
we see no prospect of change on the Soviet domestic scene so funda­
mental as to diminish the motivation, will, or capacity of the regime to 
project its rapidly growing power externally.
Soviet Relations with Other Communist States
19. The challenge which the USSR presents to the non-­Communist 
world will be much affected by the extent to which Soviet authority 
over a unified bloc of the Communist states is maintained. In Eastern 
Europe Soviet authority appears more firmly established than at any 
time since the events of 1956. Poland’s potential instability continues 
to be an unsettling factor in Eastern Europe, although the disruptive 
influence of its deviations in internal policy seems to be declining as the 
Gomulka regime moves toward a tighter discipline. However, there are 
signs that Communist China is becoming less disposed to accept Soviet 
guidance in domestic and foreign policy, even though it has outwardly 
complied on a number of disputed issues in recent months. We believe 
that the problem of intrabloc harmony is far from being resolved. 
Disharmony is likely to arise repeatedly with the appearance of new
