Chapter 5, May–June 1990  717
something that we ought to be able to report. Certainly, that’s what we 
agreed to in Moscow on the main elements.
Baker: Well, we’re willing to try.
Shevardnadze: Also, we probably need some working mechanism 
between now and the Summit. Maybe we could have experts working 
in Moscow and Washington.
Baker: Well, you said before you want to start five days before the 
Summit, so we still do have some issues that we would like to resolve.
Shevardnadze: Well, I’m going to send a team—I’m willing to send 
a team tomorrow.
Baker: Well, we’re happy to receive them. Why don’t you send 
them when you can—­but we won’t be back until Tuesday.3
Shevardnadze: Well, there’s no objection. And I think that you and 
I should be involved as needed. And we can have the working groups 
report to us, and I think that will help prepare us for the Summit.
Baker: That’s good. In the press conference, let me say, I think we 
were able to resolve two of the remaining major issues and that these 
have created problems for years and we now have them behind us. 
Now we are in a position to be able to have the two Presidents resolve 
all the major substantive issues of starting a Summit just as they said 
they would at Malta. And also we are going to mention chemical weap-
ons as well.
Shevardnadze: That’s my intention also. Overall I’m going to offer 
a very positive assessment and say that this ministerial has been very 
productive. Maybe we don’t have to use phrases like a breakthrough, 
but this has been a very productive ministerial.
Baker: Well, I think CW is a breakthrough. It is an issue, after all, 
that has gotten nowhere, hasn’t moved at all; it’s been an issue for a 
long time and certainly it’s one we want to get resolved and yet we’ve 
now made an agreement and we have a chance to really move ahead.
Shevardnadze: Should we join our colleagues and maybe have a few 
words on what bilateral agreements we’re in for.
Baker: Yes.
End of conversation.
3 May 22.
