50
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—calls for a program lasting 3 years with the possibility of one
3-year extension.
There are numerous arguments against import relief. We would
expect Blumenthal and Schultze to emphasize the domestic aspects of
the problem, e.g. that relief would be inflationary, hit low income con-
sumers hardest, give the most efficient domestic producers windfall
profits, and do little to help the domestic industry improve its competi-
tive position against imports.
From a foreign policy standpoint, trade restrictions would:
—invite emulation on the part of our trading partners (many of
whom face severe domestic economic difficulties and have gov-
ernments too weak to resist an assault by protectionist forces.)
—have especially adverse political repercussions in Italy, Spain
and Brazil (although Option II is not harsh in restricting exports from
these countries, their peoples will miss the technical nuances and see
this as a threat to a key export sector); endanger economic recovery in a
number of countries.
—have a highly negative effect on the Summit and North/South
relations.
Those who favor protection will likely emphasize the domestic po-
litical and Congressional considerations, and downplay the foreign re-
action. They will stress that the law exists to deal with such trade injury
situations, that the shoe industry has a prima facie case for relief, that
Congress expects prompt and effective action to restrict shoe imports,
and that failure to provide import relief could lead to a Congressional
override with possible adverse implications for the President’s pro-
grams in other areas. They may also argue that Option II allows for an
increase in Italian shoe exports and only a slight decrease in exports
from Brazil, Spain, etc.
On balance, the costs of restricting imports in terms of our broader
foreign policy objectives coupled with the cost in terms of the Presi-
dent’s domestic economic goals far outweigh any benefits that might ac-
crue to the domestic shoe industry from reduced import competition.
Moreover, there are important domestic political benefits—viz. all con-
sumers. Thus, I strongly recommend that you support Blumenthal, Schultze,
and State in opposing import restrictions.
Talking Points
—This is the single most important decision in the area of foreign eco-
nomic policy that the President will have to make in the first year of his Ad-
ministration. The stakes are extremely high.
—It impacts on our relations with key allies, on the Summit, on our
relations with the developing nations, and on the international finan-
cial and trading system. If the US turns towards protectionism at this
critical stage of Western economic recovery, we can expect others (with
