70  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
3. Upon the acceptance of the trusteeship described above by the 
Republic of India and the United Kingdom in response to the requests 
of the People’s Republic of China and the United States of America 
respectively, both sides shall give wide publicity to the details of this 
agreement by means of all available news media. The Republic of India 
and the United Kingdom may also give similar publicity which they 
consider appropriate in the United States of America and the People’s 
Republic of China respectively.
UNQUOTE.
Gowen
63.	
Telegram 403 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 11, 1955, 1 p.m.
403. From Johnson.
At meeting this morning issue was clearly joined. In interest expe­
diting agreement and although not completely satisfactory to Chinese 
Wang submitted “draft agreement” incorporating but somewhat broad­
ening along line anticipated Mytel 364, our representation proposal 
(text by separate tel) and stated that if concluded “I will advise you 
very soon concerning results review” cases detained American nation­
als. During course informal discussion he mentioned release fliers as 
Chinese gesture and expectation gesture from US.
I stressed degree we have gone meeting their point of view, that 
is removal all restrictions against Chinese in US, consideration rep­
resentation proposal, lack substantial results his last year’s promise 
review cases Americans, length time Americans in prison, lack of value 
representation proposal to Americans in China whose situation could 
be resolved only by action his government, inequality situation two 
groups nationals, and repeated with increasing directness agreement 
representation not possible until action their part Americans.
During course considerable give and take Wang increasingly clear 
in implication no action on Americans until representation agreement 
but that such action would promptly follow agreement.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1155. Confidential; Priority.
