108
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Mubarak. Mubarak was present at both meetings and Sadat instructed
him to handle the matter with all discretion. Mubarak told me, inciden-
tally, that aviation fuel is available at both places. I stressed to Sadat
that you have not as yet made any decision on this matter, but that I
knew you would be very grateful for his understanding and prof-
fered help.
Sadat also suggested that a second strike through Turkey might
be useful, but acknowledged that the Turks may be reluctant. He had
heard news reports of the move of the MIDWAY toward the Persian
Gulf, applauded this show of force and suggested that a second carrier
be sent to show the American determination.
Talk With Prince Fahd (November 17/18)
I conveyed to Prince Fahd your appreciation for what he has
already done in connection with the hostage problem and asked if he
had any further thoughts on what Saudi Arabia might be able to do
with Khomeini in order to get the hostages released. I said nothing to
Fahd about possible contingency or punitive action.
Fahd spoke scathingly of Khomeini and affirmed that Saudi Arabia
has been trying, in an Islamic context, to point out how Khomeini’s
action is hurting Islam’s international reputation. He said that he had
earlier in the day sent Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal to see
Yasir Arafat in Riyadh in order to press Arafat to continue the PLO
effort with the Iranians. He freely acknowledged that the Saudis are
making the point to Arafat that the PLO image in the United States
and in the world at large will be immeasurably enhanced if it can
somewhat succeed in getting the hostages released.
Fahd’s only other thought was the possibility of trying to organize a
multi-national group of distinguished ‘ulama (Islamic religious doctors)
who would go to Tehran to remonstrate with Khomeini about the
damage that the Iranian action is doing to Islam’s good name. Such a
group, Fahd noted, would be able to point to Khomeini that the Iranian
treatment of the American diplomats is totally contrary to the Prophet’s
handling of diplomatic envoys. Fahd acknowledged the potential diffi-
culty caused by the Sunni/Shi’a cleavages and said he was not sure
whether his idea is viable. He planned to discuss it before he left for
Tunis the following day with Qudhi Harakat, one of the most learned
Saudi religious doctors and a former Minister of Justice, in order to
ascertain the latter’s estimate of the feasibility of such an idea. If Harakat
believes it makes sense, Fahd said, he would try to enlist support for
the idea at the Tunis Summit meeting. (I rather doubt that this idea is
viable with a man like Khomeini and since, I understand, Fahd’s visit
