March 27–December 31, 1979
1021
with Fahd and wondered if Sadat had any additional thoughts that he
might wish me to convey.
Sadat asked if I had read his letter to Fahd, and I said that you had
shown it to me. Sadat then asked what I thought of the letter. I said that
it was certainly a constructive initiative on his part and that I knew that
the views expressed were a true reflection of his pertinent thinking. At
the same time, my estimate was that Fahd would react negatively, es-
pecially to the long recital of Egyptian complaints of Saudi actions. (In
saying this, I made it clear that I was speaking for myself and not sug-
gesting any criticism on your part of the letter.)
Sadat was slightly taken aback, and asked what I thought should
be said to Fahd. I told him that I would carry whatever he wished, but
that in my view the recital of past complaints should be dropped. Sadat
responded that he wanted to “shock” Fahd. I said that I realized this,
but I could only tell him, as a friend and as someone who knows Fahd
well, that the effect would be counterproductive. Sadat then said that
the circumstances had changed since sending you his original letter. He
had thought that you would first send the letter to Fahd and that this
would be followed by the visit of a special representative. Since these
two actions were now taking place simultaneously, it seemed reason-
able to change the letter. What would I suggest?
I told him that I would suggest something to the effect that he,
Sadat, understands the Saudi position and respects it, that he hopes the
Saudis also understand the Egyptian position, that the moratorium on
public attacks ought to be reestablished and that some kind of direct di-
alogue be reestablished between Egypt and Saudi Arabia. I said it was
important to show that Sadat did not wish to embarass Fahd or the
Saudis and that any communication between Sadat and Fahd would
not be published.
In this connection, the last several pages of his original letter were
just the kind of constructive language that is needed.
Sadat thereupon gave Mubarak general instructions on rewriting
the letter along the lines that I had suggested, but said he also wanted
included a series of questions about the area situation which should be
of concern to both countries. Wagging his finger under my nose, he did
turn down my suggestion that he say he respects the Saudi views. He
did not respect the Saudi view, but I did not have to tell them that. I told
him I had no intention of doing so.
Sadat asked me to pass on two additional oral points to Fahd.
(a) Despite the differences between the two countries, he is pre-
pared in the event of a security threat to Saudi Arabia to help in any
way possible, and
(b) With respect to the Saudi interest in amending UN Resolution
242, Camp David had already enabled this situation to be “jumped
