National Security Policy 751 Paragraph 6 (p. 7) summarizes the objectives toward the achieve­ ment of which detailed guidance comes later in the paper. The para­ graph is virtually unchanged from existing policy save for the addition of subparagraph b. However, I should point out that a number of the consultants felt that the U.S. should not take the initiative in promoting sound economic growth and acceptable political development in the Free World. Paragraph 7 (p. 8) is a revision of earlier language which called for presenting the true image of the United States, a concept which had puzzled the consultants. Paragraph 10 (p. 10) is the general paragraph on deterrence and, as the majority would have it, is unchanged. State and AEC, however, wish to define the term “general war” by adding the words ”a war in which the survival of the United States is at stake.” Adoption of such a definition would mark a change in present policy which “is based upon the assumption that any war with the USSR would be general war.” (NSC 5904/1, p. 2, footnote) (Call on: SECRETARY HERTER Mr. McCONE) Paragraph 12–­a (p. 11), which deals with the use of nuclear weap­ ons, presents one of the most important splits in the paper. However, in view of its relation to paragraphs 15 and 16, which are the subject of separate treatment, I propose that we do not this morning seek to deal with 12–­a. Paragraph 13 (p. 12) sets forth our policy on chemical and biological weapons. The majority would leave the language of the existing paper unchanged, but Budget and Treasury propose that the President decide on the stockpiling of such weapons, as well as their use. (Call on: MR. STANS SECRETARY SCRIBNER) Paragraphs 15 and 16 (pp. 12–14), as I explained at the beginning, were not considered by the Planning Board and are not up for Council consideration today. Paragraph 17 (p. 14) deals with the “cold war” contribution which the capabilities of U.S. military forces can make. Existing policy is con­ tinued, but there is a split in that USIA proposes deleting the clause which uses the term “cold war.” It may be noted that Paragraph 9, as agreed to by the Planning Board, would sanction the use of the term “cold war.” (Call on: MR. GEORGE ALLEN) Paragraph 18 (p. 14) deals with U.S. bases overseas. It omits the reference to the possibility of “a small net expansion” of the base
