1956 731 485. Telegram 1479 from Geneva1 Geneva, February 9, 1956, 11 p.m. 1479. From Johnson. 1. I opened 36th meeting with following prepared statement on renunciation force: A. In announcements made by our governments last year on July 25, purpose of our talks was set forth very clearly. That purpose was two-­fold: to aid in settling matter of repatriation civilians who desired return, and to facilitate further discussions and settlement certain other practical matters at issue between both sides. B. What were these practical matters? We each recognized most important and urgent matter under this category was situation Taiwan area. However, our respective approaches to problem were very dif­ ferent. Against background of continued threats by your government to initiate hostilities in area, you proposed we immediately abandon these talks and there be meeting of FonMins our two countries to dis­ cuss question. In other words you were suggesting US undertake nego­ tiations with you at that level under continued overhanging threat you would resort to hostilities if agreement entirely satisfactory to you was not promptly reached. Stated another way, you were asking such nego­ tiations be conducted under what was in effect [garble] ultimatum. C. US for its part suggested approach to problem should be first to remove this aspect by making clear neither side intended resort to war enforce its point view, and in that atmosphere undertake discussion our differences only by peaceful means and only to seek their fair and equitable solution. D. This was proposal I made October 8 last year. So grave was over­ hanging threat by one side resort to force, particularly in Taiwan area, as to make peaceful and constructive discussion impossible, unless this overhanging threat were removed. In circumstances, to have rejected this proposition would have been admission of lack of real desire or intent settle our disputes peacefully. E. I proposed whatever was said this regard be fully reciprocal; that it apply with equal force both parties, not asking of one party any more than of other, and only requiring of both parties they declare their 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/2–956. Confidential; Limit Distribution.
