World Hunger and Food Policy
661
cultural, fishing, or industrial activity. Food-deficient countries might
attempt to link their cooperation to assurances of adequate food sup-
plies. Developing countries, moreover, will maintain (with some justifi-
cation) that the earth is threatened less by the impact of their popula-
tion
growth
and
modernization
than
by
the
consequences
of
overconsumption and pollution in the highly industrialized countries.
G. Policy Constraints and Alternatives
The ability of the US to use food as an instrument of its foreign
policy depends in part on the degree to which it controls the disposi-
tion of its agricultural production. Power to apportion this production
for domestic consumption, sale abroad, and foreign aid is currently
shared by the government, private institutions, and market forces. The
same is true for allocation among various paying customers. Moral in-
clinations, economic considerations, and international political chal-
lenges posed by food and population trends, however, may lead to ex-
panded and regularized government involvement.
The prominence of food as a domestic and international issue in-
creasingly calls into question complete reliance on the international
marketplace as a mechanism to allocate food among nations; when de-
mand exceeds supply the market takes no cognizance of moral or polit-
ical considerations. There also appears to be growing interest in the
idea that US farmers and consumers should be insulated from adverse
effects of international price fluctations. As principal custodian of an
object of occasionally intense international competition, moreover, the
US might find it necessary to guard against market manipulation and
possible attempts by wealthy nations—or coalitions such as OPEC—to
employ purchases, stockpiles, investments, or other devices to gain a
measure of control over world food supplies.
Agreement on increased government involvement in food distri-
bution would probably not, however, be accompanied by consensus as
to what the criteria for allocation should be. Whether the US should use
its unique position to maximize economic returns through sales to the
highest bidders, seek primarily political gains with food as leverage, or
emphasize humanitarian values with food aid could be the focus of in-
tense domestic and international controversy.
Deciding to which nations, in what order and proportion, and on
what terms agricultural exports should be allocated during an era of
food uncertainty will, moreover, be complicated by the need to recon-
cile domestic farm and foreign food policies. As needs for imports from
the US fluctuate from year to year, so too will the ease with which do-
mestic and foreign policy considerations can be harmonized. The US
may be faced in one year with having to decide which nations to feed,
and in the next with determining how to dispose of massive surpluses.
