March–August 1953
697
282.
Memorandum for the Record by the Deputy Director for
Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)1
Washington, August 19, 1953.
SUBJECT
Conversation with Governor Stassen August 19, 1953, concerning FOA support
for Zahedi regime
1. Colonel White and the undersigned called upon Governor
Stassen at his office this afternoon in order to follow up on earlier con-
versations between Governor Stassen and the Director in which Gov-
ernor Stassen had indicated that his agency would be in a position to
move promptly to the support of the new regime with new or stepped-
up programs of economic assistance. (I had learned from General Smith
just prior to the meeting with Governor Stassen that the two of them
had discussed this matter at some length and were in agreement that
FOA should move in with substantial economic assistance at the right
moment.)
2. I explained the current situation to Governor Stassen, who ap-
peared to be fully aware and appreciative of the significance of the
entire matter. He approved of our sending to the Embassy by our com-
munications a statement confirming the readiness of FOA to give im-
mediate and favorable consideration to new programs of financial and
economic assistance and requesting advice as to the types and kinds of
programs most urgently needed and best calculated to have the desired
effect.2 He enlarged upon this with a recommendation to the effect that
the most appropriate way of launching this aspect of the matter would
be for the Embassy to suggest to Prime Minister Zahedi and/or the
Shah that he (they) should address a communication to the President
requesting economic aid. Governor Stassen said that it would look very
strange and would not be at all appropriate for the US Government to
rush forward with a volunteering of aid and that it would be such more
logical and reasonable for the President to reply to an appropriate re-
quest. The Embassy should make sure that the request is couched in the
proper language which should be somewhat as follows:
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information.
2 No specific telegram has been found. However, in telegram 633 to Tehran, August
27, the Department expressed its concern over obtaining the best psychological effect in
Iran from any announced aid figure. Therefore, it suggested to the Embassy that it seek a
specific request from the Zahedi government, in order that the U.S. Government might
then be able to offer a specific amount that would correspond to Iranian expectations.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.00–TA/8–2753)
