1176  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
spirits in the difficult period of the floods,3 and concluded the meeting 
with the presentation to President Eisenhower, on behalf of the NCG, 
of a medal as a memento of the occasion.
3 Reference is to severe floods that Uruguay experienced in mid-April 1959. The 
Government of Uruguay declared a state of emergency on April 16, 1959, and the United 
States provided some medicines, emergency rations, and water purification tablets, and 
diverted the U.S., Edisto, an icebreaker carrying two helicopters, then returning from the 
Antarctic, to assist the Uruguayans in rescue operations. At the end of May, the United 
States sent a Bailey bridge to replace the vital railroad bridge over the Queguay River, 
which had been washed out by the flood. The temporary installation reopened the only 
rail line to the hardest hit northwestern area of Uruguay. Documentation concerning the 
subject is contained in decimal file 833.49.
UR–15.	
Memorandum of Conversation1
 
Montevideo, March 2, 1960.
US/MC/21
Participants
United States	
Uruguay
Christian A. Herter,	
Lieut. Hanero Martinéz Montero,
  Secretary of State	
  Minister of Foreign Affairs
Roy R. Rubottom,	
Juan F. Yriart,
  Assistant Secretary of State 	
  Director General of
  for Inter-American Affairs	
  the Foreign Office
Henry A. Hoyt,	
Carlos Clulow,
  Counselor of U.S. Embassy,	
  Uruguayans Ambassador
  Montevideo	
  to Washington2
	
	
Diego de Arteaga, 
	
	
  Uruguay Rascher–civilian 
	
	
  aide to Secretary Herter
SUBJECT
Official Call on Minister of Foreign Affairs; Cuban Problems - (Separate Memoran-
dum of Conversation have been prepared on “Law of the Sea Hatiters”; “General 
World Situation”; and “Exchange of Gifts,”)
1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files, Lot 64 D 559, OF 1607. Confidential. 
Drafted by Henry A. Hoyt on March 3, and approved in the office of the Secretary of State 
on March 17, 1960. Information on the source text indicates that the conversation took 
place in the Uruguayan Foreign offices at 7:00 p.m.
2 Carlos A. Chelw presented his credentials as Ambassador to President Eisenhower 
of February 16, 1960.
