976
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The President replied yes. He said he hated to see his visit come to
an end. It would be nice to stay another week, but he had to get back
to work in Washington. (U)
The President then invited President Mijatovic to make a few
remarks. (U)
President Mijatovic, in turn, suggested that Mr. Djuranovic discuss
the economic situation. (U)
Mr. Djuranovic began by noting that Yugoslavia had had a very
dynamic economic development, with an average growth of over six
percent. This had been followed by serious economic problems, how-
ever. The domestic economy had become overheated and Yugoslavia’s
trade deficit had increased, as had its foreign debt. The increase in oil
prices had reinforced these difficulties. Yugoslavia would have to pay
$2.0 billion more this year than last year. All this had caused real
economic problems. The Yugoslavs had introduced a program of eco-
nomic stabilization. This was intended to bring down the growth rate,
which would be two percent lower this year. (C)
They had also introduced measures to reduce economic investment
and consumption. The Yugoslavs intended to undertake further meas-
ures toward stabilization such as the devaluation of the dinar. The
main task was to reduce the deficit to $2 billion; however, it was
necessary to have help from abroad to carry out this stabilization pro-
gram. That is why the Yugoslav government had been talking to Secre-
tary Miller and Mr. Rockefeller. The Yugoslavs had long experience
with Rockefeller, going back some 35 years and they wanted to continue
this favorable cooperation. (C)
Turning to the question of Mr. Rockefeller’s recent visit, Mr. Djura-
novic said that there had been two problems. Mr. Rockefeller had
wanted a consortium of world banks. However, this would make a
Yugoslav program of stabilization more difficult. The Yugoslavs
wanted credits exclusively from US banks. They recognized the rela-
tionship of the United States government to the private banks, but felt
that the government could still exert a certain favorable influence on
the banks. They had also discussed a second credit of $500 million next
year. This would help to continue the program of stabilization. In July
they looked forward to a meeting with Secretary Miller in Washing-
ton. (C)
The President then invited Under Secretary Cooper to make com-
ments on the economic situation. (U)
Mr. Cooper said that he appreciated the problems associated with
the Yugoslavian economy. However, he pointed out that the Yugoslavs
had made considerable economic progress as well. He had discussed
with Minister Kostic his upcoming visit to Washington. Thus much of
this had already been discussed. (C)
