1390 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement Johnson-Wang Talks. Johnson left Geneva by air for Prague this morning. Reference tele­ gram repeated Prague. Gowen 816. Letter 71 from Clough to Johnson1 Letter No. 71 Washington, July 18, 1957 Dear Alex: I have just received your letter of July 11 and will not try to com­ ment on it in detail at this time. Needless to say we will proceed to act on your various suggestions, none of which seems particularly difficult to accomplish. The purpose of this letter is to inform you that the Secretary, Mr. Berding and Mr. Robertson are meeting today with representatives of American press media to see whether a formula can be worked out which would permit limited travel by correspondents to Communist China without too seriously compromising our China Policy. Whether it will be possible to devise any effective safeguard against a gradual erosion of all travel restrictions, I rather doubt. However, it looks very much as if we will make the attempt. If we should undertake a limited relaxation of our travel ban to per­ mit correspondents to go to Communist China, do you see any advan­ tage in announcing this to Wang at Geneva simultaneously with or prior to public announcement? Since we took a firm position last year that we would not authorize such travel so long as the Chinese Communists refuse to release the imprisoned Americans, it is hard to see how we could get any mileage out of announcing to Communist China that we are backing down on this point. On the contrary our action might simply confirm the Communists in their apparent belief that time is on their side and that we will eventually make the concessions they desire without their releasing the Americans or taking any other step which they might regard as concession to us. This of course would be the case whether we announced our action in the Geneva forum or not. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Martin.
