March 1952–February 1953
429
CIA believes that the project is probably feasible and that it could prob-
ably be handled in such a way that British and American connection
with it could never be proven. However, there can never be absolute as-
surance in regard to a matter of this kind especially in a country like
Iran. Many things could go wrong. Furthermore, it must be assumed
that the Iranians would charge the British with complicity in any
sudden political development of this sort, with or without proof, and
that this charge would be echoed by the Soviet bloc and probably many
elements of the Near East and Asia. The general trend in Iran has been
so steadily against the West that any sudden change brought about by
unusual methods would look fishy to world public opinion.
Even if the coup were successful, temporarily, it would not do us
much good if at the same time we further alienated the mass of Iranian
people and the other peoples of the Near East and South Asia.
There is also the danger of possible violent Soviet reaction, espe-
cially if the coup was not completely successful from the beginning. If
some national front leader, such as Kashani, were able to join forces
with the Tudeh and they established themselves somewhere in the
northern provinces, claiming to be the true representatives of the Ira-
nian people, we could have a situation even more serious than we have
today. Such a group would undoubtedly have strong Russian support,
and the difficulties it could create for the central Government in Tehran
are obvious. Even the resumption of the flow of oil and other Western
assistance would probably not be sufficient to redress the balance.
Conclusions:
1. Although we cannot be assured of success in our efforts to save
Iran under Mosadeq, agreement at this time to join with the British in
preparing a coup d’e´tat against Dr. Mosadeq would weaken any
chance of success of our present efforts to formulate a new oil settle-
ment proposal which might be acceptable to the Iranians and the
British.
2. It would necessitate renunciation of any policy of unilateral
American assistance to the present Iranian Government and would
produce a serious deterioration in our relations with Iran over the next
several months. Satisfactory relations might or might not be reestab-
lished after a new Government had been brought to power.
3. There can be no guarantee that the project would succeed or that
its leader could govern Iran more effectively than the present regime.
4. Even if it were successful, the proposed coup might in the long
run work to our disadvantage not only in Iran but in other parts of the
world, especially the Near East.
Recommendations:
1. That you receive Sir Christopher Steel early next week and hear
his statement of the British Government’s views.
