710 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III it will result in significant sales or employment benefits. Toyota has requested that the tariff be reduced to 6.8 percent and that implementation be delayed for a reasonable period of time. Estimating the impact on the U.S. truck market of an immediate 21 percentage point increase in the duty is difficult. The impact depends largely on assumptions of how much of the duty increase would be passed through to retail. Toyota has announced a price increase of $800 per truck. Toyota believes the 25 percent tariff will result in a 30 percent decrease in all imports of mini-pickups. Toyota claims it could be subject to dumping charges if it absorbed a substantial portion of the 25 percent duty. The recent erosion of the yen/dollar exchange rate has considerably narrowed profit margins and could further support such dumping charges. U.S. Government estimates indicate that the price increase could range from $800 (or 16 percent) to $400 (or 8 percent) per truck. In the former case imports would fall by approximately 26 percent and in the latter by 13 percent. In view of the recent appreciation of the yen vis-a`-vis the dollar, it is likely that the price increase would be closer to the high side of these estimates. Some consumers will shift to domestic pickups and station wagons, others to imported small cars and station wagons, and others will defer purchases. To the extent that the higher duty on minipickups would lead to increased sales of domestic trucks, there could be a small increase in oil imports. The mini-pickups are more fuel efficient than the nearest, comparable U.S.-made pickup (half-ton) by an average of about 5 mpg when not loaded. However, the fuel economy advantage of the imports decreases as the pay load increases. The new Corporate Average Fuel Economy requirements will force fuel economy improvements on U.S.-made trucks thereby reducing fuel economy as a distinguishing feature in the next few years. Projections indicate that the total U.S. production of mini-pickups will remain at the 30,000 units made by Volkswagen until model year 1982 even if the 25 percent reclassification occurs. GM will at that time have a plant in operation with a capacity of 250,000 to 300,000 minipickups. In 1983 Nissan’s U.S. production will enter the market with 120,000 units. It is anticipated that Ford will announce plans to build mini-pickups. Customs and Nissan officials indicate that exporters and importers will have difficulty finding a new loophole to circumvent reclassification. Toyota is reviewing the possibility but doubts that it will be economically feasible. Ford, Chrysler and GM indicate they are not exploring a new loophole. In order to be dutiable at the cab chassis rate manufacturers could increase substantially the U.S. value added, labor or parts, or they could remove the cab entirely. Customs will rule on
