806 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 3; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770198-0487) The text of the final communique´ of the Conference on International Economic Cooperation is printed in the Department of State Bulletin, June 20, 1977, pages 650–652. In the June 4 Evening Report to Carter, Acting Secretary of State Warren Christopher suggested that the United States could “be reasonably satisfied with the results of the CIEC,” which he summarized thus: “a common text was agreed upon; the developing countries did not issue a unilateral declaration; both sides expressed disappointment that only limited agreement had proved possible; but both sides also pronounced themselves satisfied that the dialogue had been comprehensive and that a positive tone had prevailed.” Christopher asserted that the “CIEC represents a form of diplomacy that is growing in importance. In the UN and elsewhere, the developing countries continue to demand action to reduce the asymmetry they perceive in the international economic system. The developed countries have responded with concessions calibrated to continue the dialogue and keep it nonacrimonious. The state of bilateral relations between the US and particular developing countries has had only a rough bearing on their conduct in this kind of multilateral discussion. Bloc politics has produced a cohesion that survives in the face of widely divergent national economic interests. To take four countries with whom we have relatively good relations, Iran and Saudi Arabia were both helpful to us at CIEC, but Mexico and Venezuela were not. We need to reflect on the implications of this kind of diplomacy and consider how we can deal with it more effectively.” Carter directed that Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs Terence Todman and First Lady Rosalynn Carter be apprised of the stances of Mexico and Venezuela. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 18, Evening Reports (State): 6/77)
