806
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770198-0487)
The text of the final communique´ of the Conference on International
Economic Cooperation is printed in the Department of State Bulletin,
June 20, 1977, pages 650–652.
In the June 4 Evening Report to Carter, Acting Secretary of State
Warren Christopher suggested that the United States could “be reason-
ably satisfied with the results of the CIEC,” which he summarized thus:
“a common text was agreed upon; the developing countries did not
issue a unilateral declaration; both sides expressed disappointment
that only limited agreement had proved possible; but both sides also
pronounced themselves satisfied that the dialogue had been compre-
hensive and that a positive tone had prevailed.” Christopher asserted
that the “CIEC represents a form of diplomacy that is growing in im-
portance. In the UN and elsewhere, the developing countries continue
to demand action to reduce the asymmetry they perceive in the interna-
tional economic system. The developed countries have responded with
concessions calibrated to continue the dialogue and keep it nonacrimo-
nious. The state of bilateral relations between the US and particular de-
veloping countries has had only a rough bearing on their conduct in
this kind of multilateral discussion. Bloc politics has produced a cohe-
sion that survives in the face of widely divergent national economic in-
terests. To take four countries with whom we have relatively good rela-
tions, Iran and Saudi Arabia were both helpful to us at CIEC, but
Mexico and Venezuela were not. We need to reflect on the implications
of this kind of diplomacy and consider how we can deal with it more
effectively.” Carter directed that Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs Terence Todman and First Lady Rosalynn Carter be
apprised of the stances of Mexico and Venezuela. (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 18, Eve-
ning Reports (State): 6/77)
