3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 346 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 105. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, May 3, 1978, 2:15 p.m. SUBJECT Moscow Trip, Soviet Jewish Emigration, Shcharanskiy Case, Humphrey-Findley Bill PARTICIPANTS Eugene Gold, Chairman, National Conference on Soviet Jewry (NCSJ) Rabbi Alexander Schindler, Chairman, Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations Jerry Goodman, Executive Director, NCSJ Marina Wallach, Washington Representative, NCSJ Yehuda Hellman, Executive Director, Conference of Presidents The Secretary Patricia Derian, Assistant Secretary, HA William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR Melvyn Levitsky, EUR/SOV (notetaker) The Secretary began by briefing the group on the results of his trip to Moscow. He said the general atmosphere was somewhat better this time. He informed Gold that during the visit we had given the Soviets the list of hardship emigration cases which was prepared by the NCSJ. We had received no immediate response, but the Secretary noted that the Soviets in such cases never go beyond saying they will study the matter. In this context, the Secretary referred to the fact that the emigration figures were substantially up from 1977. Gold said the NCSJ was aware of this approximate 40 percent increase. The Secretary stated that the Soviets are well aware of our concerns in the Shcharanskiy case. His impression was that the Soviets are still struggling over the question of what to do and how to proceed on the case. He was convinced that it is being handled at the highest level in Moscow. There were no new developments to report, however. He said we would keep after the Soviets and continue to press them on the Shcharanskiy case. Gold asked how the Secretary saw the situation playing out. The Secretary responded that we had done a good deal of advance planning so that we could handle any contingency promptly. He felt 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 9, Vance NODIS MemCons, 1978. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Levitsky on May 4; cleared by Luers, Derian, and Shulman; approved by Anderson on May 9. Levitsky initialed for Luers, Derian, and Shulman. The meeting took place in Vance’s office.
