390  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Possible Question:
In view of (1) and (2) above, Mr. Echandi may ask what assis-
tance his country might be given from the United States in the event 
of a depletion of foreign exchange reserves stemming primarily from a 
decrease in world market prices of coffee.
Suggested Reply:
If this subject is raised, Mr. Echandi could be informed that sym-
pathetic and careful consideration would be given to Costa Rica and 
that every effort to give assistance commensurate with the then exist-
ing financial problem would be made, provided that the Costa Rican 
Government had taken or given evidence of a resolve to take all mea-
sures within its power to cope with and reduce the scope of this prob-
lem. In this connection, it could be pointed out that Costa Rican imports 
have been at a relatively high level; that these have been stimulated by 
domestic credit policy and government deficits, both of which may be 
further curbed; that the need for action in the field of credit and fiscal 
policy is accentuated by unfavorable prospects for earnings from cof-
fee exports; and that in the event such measures proved unsuccessful 
in stemming loss of reserves Costa Rica enter into consultation with 
the International Monetary Fund. In regard to our position on coffee 
it is suggested that Mr. Echandi be informed the United States is pre-
pared to participate in discussions and studies with coffee producing 
and consuming countries on problems of coffee trade. We have been 
pleased to note the initiative taken by the Latin American countries in 
organizing at Rio a Conference3 at which the United States was repre-
sented by an observer to discuss and formulate an active program in an 
effort to resolve coffee trade problems.
(3) Establishment of Branches of Private Banks:
The nationalization of banks took place in 1948 and a Central 
Bank was established, endowed with typical central bank functions. 
The nationalization decree as it now stands permits the setting up of 
private banks with permission of the Government but prohibits them 
from accepting deposits, as it stipulates only the state may “mobilize 
deposits of the public”.
Mr. Echandi has expressed an interest in inviting American bank-
ing and insurance companies to open branches in Costa Rica. He has 
said it is not his intention to propose measures which might destroy the 
national banking system, but that he thinks the existence of a private 
bank operating with its own funds will help solve the growing lack 
3 Reference is to the International Coffee Conference, January 20–27, 1958. For a 
report, see U.S. Department of Commerce, Foreign Commerce Weekly, February 24, 1958, p. 3.
