736  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
that cooperation cannot go beyond Trident II. In Geneva, we worked 
on an agreed statement. Again the Soviets never said we could not go 
beyond Trident II. In Moscow we listened to minister Shevardnadze, 
and talked to you and Nazarkin and others, there was no mention of 
limiting cooperation to Trident II. Aside from the substance, which 
jeopardizes the treaty, there is a procedural problem. We are being 
told on the eve of the summit that US/UK cooperation, which goes 
back to World War II, now must come to a end as a price for this treaty. 
I urge the Soviet side to take a look at this position. It pushes the 
United States to make a choice between its traditional ties to a close 
ally, or entering into START on those terms. I don’t think you want us 
to make this choice.
Karpov: Let me merely say this question was brought up by 
Minister Shevardnadze when at the last plenary he said he took a criti-
cal attitude toward the US unilateral statement, and it required further 
study.
Nazarkin: I merely want to say I am surprized at the statement by 
Amb. Burt, who says this is the first time we have raised US coopera-
tion with the UK. We expressed our concern over US/UK cooperation 
in strategic offensive arms as far back as last year. The December US 
statement was a result of that Soviet concern. Later on when in 1990 
we returned to non-­circumvention, I did explain that we still have con-
cerns regarding cooperation with third countries other than the UK, 
and cooperation with the UK on systems other that Trident II. I remem-
ber clearly you told me that you have commitments with respect to the 
UK, not only Trident II but also maintaining the UK deterent. I noted 
this but did not agree to it. During the last ministerial in Moscow, you 
made a statement which removes our concern regarding countries 
other than Britain. In Moscow Minister Shevardnadze and Mr. Karpov 
and I mentioned we still have concern regarding the pattern of US/UK 
cooperation other than Trident II.
Bartholomew: I need to be very clear. The government of the United 
States will not enter into a strategic arms treaty that (as the terms you 
just stated) require it to sacrifice its cooperation with the UK. We will not 
bound or limit our cooperation with the United Kingdom. Point two, 
we have been open and clear about this since the negotiations began, 
even before the current START negotiations. Point three, this issue has 
been followed closely and carefully at high levels. I must tell you I can-
not understand the position you are presenting to us at the 11th hour. 
My fourth point is that the proposal that we have made and you have 
agreed to, and the US statement, is the path to resolving this issue con-
sistent with what we are trying to achieve in START. The path you have 
today opened for the first time leads to no treaty. Finally, I would ask 
you to give full weight to what I have said, to look again at this question
