16 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 ment. They have no history of violence that we are aware of. It does appear that Khomeini gave permission for the occupation of the Embassy. The chances of negotiating with them do not appear to be good. He also noted the Kharg Island oil terminal had been shut down this morning and that presently no oil exports were coming out of Iran. The President inquired about the results of the students’ press conference in Tehran. Dr. Brzezinski said it was largely more of the same. Stan Turner added that they had said that any action aimed at freeing the prisoners would lead to killing the hostages. Secretary Brown said that led to the discussion of a possible rescue operation. They had examined this option and considered that the chances of carrying it off successfully were very small. General Jones noted that his Israeli counterpart Eitan was currently visiting in Washington and the subject of a rescue operation had come up naturally during lunch. Eitan considers the situation in Tehran far more difficult than Entebbe6 because of the urban environment, the distance from the airport, and other complications. At this point General Jones displayed a number of pictures of the Embassy compound in Tehran and its surroundings showing how difficult it would be to come through the city on the ground. Such an approach could be impossible and Khomeini could put millions of people in the streets. In general they thought that helicopters was the only way to come in. We are not sure exactly where the hostages are located, though there are reports that they are being held in the basement of the Embassy. It might be possible to bring three helicopters down on the Embassy grounds at night in the open area. It would [be] necessary to bring in at least 120 people, 30 of which would go immediately to the residence area. There are high buildings around the Embassy where people could shoot down into the compound. Therefore, they recommend three additional helicopters coming in after the initial three to help secure the compound. They had examined the area around Tehran looking for isolated airfields which were unlikely to be armed or manned. They had discovered one very slightly used airfield about sixty miles south of town which had originally been used as a C–130 base. They felt that aircraft could land there and the helicopters could cycle in and out of town from that airfield. The likelihood that this could be done without the Iranians knowing it in 6 On July 4, 1976, Israeli commandos rescued approximately 100 hostages held by pro-Palestinian hijackers at the Entebbe airport in Uganda. The rescue focused on rapid air assault, extraction, withdrawal operations, and information from released non-Jewish hostages. All 7 hijackers, 3 hostages, 20 Ugandan soldiers, and Lieutenant Colonel Yonatan Netanyahu, leader of the assault force, were killed.
