170
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the new initiatives, it has supported a program for technical assistance
to representative assemblies in developing countries, but this support
is scheduled to end in 1977. We have also distributed a collection of re-
ports dealing with Human Rights and Economic Development.
—A.I.D. supports a major American Society for International Law
study of the role of public interest law as an instrument for economic
and social development. We have helped a legal aid program in Chile
and expect to do the same in other countries.
—We have supported conferences on social and political struc-
tures and rural equity in Afghanistan and Yemen.
—We are providing money for some leaders in the World Peace
Through Law organization to visit African countries for the purpose of
surveying the need for “paralegal” services. A proposal to support a
conference on human rights to be sponsored by the Rwanda Govern-
ment is pending.
Some of the private voluntary organizations assisted by A.I.D. have
been doing work that is relevant to the new initiatives. A.I.D.’s latest re-
port to Congress mentions legal aid and probation reform projects sup-
ported by the Asia Foundation.
A.I.D.’s human rights policy for the future will be the subject of a
discussion of A.I.D.’s Senior Staff scheduled for June 10. There are a
number of options which are to be considered; we will inform the
Deputy Secretary of any specific results of that meeting.
Tab B
Memorandum From the Coordinator of the Women in
Development Office, Agency for International Development
(Fraser) to the Deputy Assistant Administrator for
Intergovernmental and International Affairs, Agency for
International Development (Butler)5
Washington, June 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights: AID Response to PRM 28
Women’s rights are necessarily a part of human rights both be-
cause women are half of humanity and also because women have fre-
quently been considered second class citizens legally, socially and
economically.
The Women’s Rights Movement has its roots in the U.S. Civil
Rights Movement beginning with the abolition of slavery, running
5 No classification marking.
