182  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
American citizenship but who were legal permanent residents. He said 
that reports from the Chinese Associations in all the American cities 
where there was a large Chinese population confirmed the existence of 
these apprehensions. He felt that only official U.S. action could coun­
teract the mental anxiety.
Mr. Sebald said that the U.S. position was made clear at the time the 
Geneva talks were announced that nothing would happen at Geneva to 
betray the interests of free Chinese. The Ambassador surely must be 
well aware that the U.S. would not do anything which would “sell Chi­
nese residents down the river”. As for an official U.S. statement, he did 
not see any peg to hang such a statement on at the present moment. If a 
statement were issued with no apparent reason, and without reference 
to any current development, it would seem strange and might raise 
questions as to why it was issued. It might tend to cause confusion and 
might heighten rather than alleviate the unfounded fears of which the 
Ambassador had spoken. Mr. Sebald thought that it might be preferable 
for the Chinese Embassy to take action to reassure the Chinese commu­
nities in the U.S., based on the full knowledge possessed by the Chinese 
Embassy of the U.S. position and the course of the Geneva talks.
Ambassador Koo said that the Chinese Embassy would be glad 
to do what it could. However, he felt that some form of reassurance 
from the U.S. Government was also needed. He inquired if the Secre­
tary could not take advantage of one of his press conferences to say 
something to restore the confidence of the Chinese. If a question along 
this line were asked of the Secretary, he would be afforded a logical and 
natural opportunity to say something which would dispel the doubts. 
In addition, Ambassador Koo requested that the Department reply 
to the numerous petitions and letters on this subject which he under­
stood the White House and the Department had received from Chinese 
groups and individuals. He said he understood that ordinarily such 
petitions were not answered, but he hoped in this case answers could 
be provided.
Mr. Sebald and Mr. McConaughy stated that they did not recall 
any petitions or letters from Chinese on this subject. Correspondence 
along this line ordinarily went to the Bureau of Public Affairs and was 
handled there. Such correspondence did not ordinarily come to the 
attention of the geographic bureaus.
Mr. Sebald, in response to a direct question from the Ambassador, 
said that while Item I of the agenda did not specify that only Chinese 
students were referred to on the Chinese side, the whole context of the 
arrangements for the talks showed that the question of the return of 
Chinese revolved primarily around Chinese students. The actual cases 
which have become issues were all cases of students, and it was our 
understanding that it was principally students in whom the Chinese
