in its attitude towards the representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Since my arrival here, however, no concrete case has arisen to give an opportunity for me to make representations to the Foreign Office in this matter until the one which is the subject of this report to the Department. In handing to Baron Marcks von Wurtemberg my note of December 17th, 1923,45 regarding the case of Mr. Wright, I went into the subject as fully as the information on file at the Legation would permit. I mentioned, in the course of our conversation, that the restrictions in Norway, somewhat similar to those in Sweden, had recently been removed. Last evening I dined with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and after dinner he referred to this matter of the Mormon missionaries. He said that it presented considerable difficulty to his Government, as the information which it has regarding the Mormon Church was not favorable. He spoke of a report to the Swedish Government which had been made some years ago, promising to send me a copy, which I shall forward to the Department as soon as possible. I learned that the Minister has instructed the Swedish Legation at Washington and the Swedish Consulate at San Francisco to make new investigation of the activities and standing of the Mormon Church. In view of this instruction, the Minister said it would be some time before he could make an answer to the note which I sent to him on December 17th last. Should the Department see no objection, I beg that the information contained in this despatch be brought to the attention of Senator Smoot, in order that he may be acquainted with the present situation regarding the entrance of Mormon missionaries into Sweden and, also, that he may inform the competent authorities of the Mormon Church of the investigation which is to be made by the Swedish diplomatic and consular officers in order that they may facilitate such investigation if the proper opportunity presents itself. In this respect, it is my opinion that it would not be advisable for the Mormon Church to repeat the invitation that an investigation be made nor
