Afghanistan
483
possibly—and in a possible de facto and ad hoc alliance with a severely
chastened Iraq—to simply occupy Khuzestan), it might well try to deter
such an intervention by a preemptive intervention of its own. Moreover,
if they felt that their only other real choice was acquiescence in what
they would almost certainly envision as a more or less permanent US
military presence on or close to their southern border, the Soviets might
not be averse to confronting the United States in an area in which
the local population was strongly anti-American and the USSR could
benefit from many logistical advantages.5
5 In a January 18 memorandum to Brzezinski, Odom laid out three strategies for
dealing with a Soviet invasion of Iran, none of them “very attractive.” The memorandum
is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 258.
169.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, January 16, 1980, 1400Z
271. Subject: Afghanistan Sitrep No. 23.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary. Kabul remains quiet but tense as the Soviet profile,
while lowered, remains visible. The ruling Parcham faction is trying
to broaden its bases of support through a Fatherland Front. There are
indications that even the Parchamists are splitting among pro- and
anti-Soviet presence elements. The government-controlled media con-
tinue to attack the U.S. and President Babrak Karmal has made a strong
pitch for Afghan-Iranian solidarity against American “imperialism.”
He pledged that the DRA would not permit Afghanistan to be used
as a base of operations against Iran (ignoring the presence of over
25,000 Soviet troops near the Afghan side of the two nations’ border)
and expected Iran to assume a “reciprocal” stance. The Afghan econ-
omy appears to have come to a standstill, at least in regard to develop-
ment activity and commerce. Although foreign exchange reserves are
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800027–0678.
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Ankara, Beijing, Bonn, Islamabad, Lon-
don, Karachi, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, USNATO, USUN, USICA (for NEA), CINCPAC
(also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD).
