1955 451 They tend to overlook or minimize the fact that O’Neill’s contact with the Americans should be governed by the provisions of the Agreed Announcement, not a penal or POW code. Hubert Graves remarked that the rules seemed to him to represent a considerable advance over the rules applied by the Japanese to enemy aliens during World War II. This is the sort of irrelevancy which we regret to hear from the British. I am also enclosing a copy of O’Neill’s report on the announced release of Harriet Mills and Father Proulx. We are mystified by the delay in the arrival of these two Americans in Hong Kong. We still assume that they will come out shortly. I discussed with Joy the embarrassment (your 987) that resulted from the failure to get word to you before your Oct. 27 meeting of O’Neill’s conversation with Chang Han-­fu, when he received the rules and regulations regarding visits and the word of the impending release of Mills and Proulx. This interview took place on the evening of Octo­ ber 26 (about noon on Oct. 26, Geneva time). This was almost a full day before your meeting and with prompt service you would have had the word in time. O’Neill did get his message out Wednesday night. It was received by the British Foreign Office fairly promptly. It reached the British Embassy here, marked Priority, on the evening of the 26th, Washington time. If Joy had been notified by the Embassy duty officer, he would have telephoned me and you would have had the informa­ tion before your meeting. Unfortunately the duty officer did not see the urgency, and took it upon himself to disregard the priority marking. Joy did not see or hear of the message until the opening of business on Thursday, the 27th, which was too late to do us any good. It seems that the Chinese tried to time their release of this information so as to make it difficult for you to receive the news before the meeting. Their hopes were realized, through a failure in the British Embassy here. I have pointed out to Joy the awkward position in which you were placed as a result. I mentioned particularly the fact that it gave Wang a talking point in support of his contention that these implementation matters should not be discussed in Geneva. The British are taking special meas­ ures to insure that a similar slip will not happen again. A special alert will be in effect on Wednesdays, day and night. Enclosed is what sketchy material we have been able to obtain from Defense on the cases of certain of the missing servicemen, as requested by you. The information we are able to get from Defense on this subject is still inadequate and the handling unsatisfactory. They tell us that they will have to go to central files in another city for some of the needed material and that this material will probably not add anything to what is already known. Monroe has been out of town for some days. He is due to return on the 31st and we may be able to get a little help from him then.
