1346 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Linowitz said that he had left Begin in a troubled mood, which was just right. Begin has a good sense that we will be quite demanding with regard to what Begin may do with respect to the Jerusalem move and the Golan annexation. Linowitz had also gone over with Begin in enormous detail the draft (on the autonomy talks?). It was a process he did not recommend, as the President would appreciate. The President commented that he understood Linowitz had spent five hours with Begin. Ambassador Linowitz said Sadat did not want to take the draft, but he would give it to Ali tomorrow. After their meeting, Sadat had agreed with his proposal and took Linowitz out directly to talk to the press and announce agreement. The President said he was glad both leaders were constructive. The Vice President congratulated Ambassador Linowitz on his efforts. 403. Summary of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1 Washington, September 4, 1980, 8:35–8:40 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of Telephone Conversation with Prime Minister Begin in Israel PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin The President: Good Morning Mr. Prime Minister. Prime Minister Begin: Good Morning Mr. President. I want to congratulate you on the tripartite agreement to resume the talks.2 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 79, Sensitive X: 9/80. Secret; Sensitive. Carter was in the Oval Office. Carter wrote, “OK. J.” in the upper right-hand corner of the summary. The summary was attached to a September 4 covering memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski. A handwritten note from Denend to Brzezinski on the covering memorandum reads: “Gary reports that within an hour of this conversation Begin made a public statement to the effect that he had been invited to meet with President Carter after the US election.” A separate handwritten note on the covering memorandum, in an unknown hand, states that Brzezinski hand carried the summary to Carter on September 5. 2 See Document 402.
