Afghanistan 531 festering of longstanding divisions, aggravated by the pervasive Soviet role in the country. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The government’s policies are designed to win wider popular support while pursuing basic goals of the Marxist regime. A major aspect of this effort has been to blame the late President Amin for the past hostility between the Marxist rulers and the people. The government has made much of Amin’s perversion of the “revolution” in his alleged efforts to turn Afghanistan over to the US and to destroy Islam. ([classification marking not declassified]) To correct Amin’s misdeeds, the government claims it has released 15,000 political prisoners and abolished the secret police. Many Afghans are aware that few prisoners, other than members of Babrak’s previously suppressed faction, have been freed. ([classification marking not declassified]) The President’s credibility has been further undermined by his appointing as a deputy prime minister the man who headed the secret police until last September.2 In fact, executions continue at about the same rate as under Amin, and the secret police have changed little except their name. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) Babrak also has tried with scant success to prove that his government is not anti-Islamic. His claim that his is the first government in 50 years to allow religious freedom is unlikely to impress a population that equates Marxism and the USSR with atheism and views many of the reforms the government advocates as antireligious. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) The cabinet still represents little more than the various groups that joined the first Marxist government established after the coup in April 1978. The three ministers who do not belong to the party hold minor positions. Moreover, because of their association with Babrak, they are popularly regarded as having been long-time secret Communists or Soviet agents. ([classification marking not declassified]) A recent deemphasis on the role of the party—it is now said to have only the “leading” role in the “revolution”—probably has been too slight to change the popular view of the government. The suppression of opposition by previous governments has left few organizations to join the “Fatherland Front” Babrak reportedly plans to form. ([classification marking not declassified]) There is little chance that nonparty figures of any prominence at any level can be persuaded to support the government unless there is 2 A reference to Assadullah Sarwari.
