792 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV without disrupting near-­term Soviet programs. For example, we would expect the Soviets to deploy 14 RVs on SS–18s after a brief flight test program, and to deploy another version with still more RVs in about 1985. A MIRVed medium solid ICBM could be deployed without having to replace existing SS–17s and SS–19s, which themselves could be upgraded to carry more MIRVs. The smaller solid-­propellant ICBM could also be flight-­tested and deployed. Mobile ICBM launchers as well as additional SLBM launchers could be deployed without compensatory dismantling. We believe that, through such means, the Soviets would seek to counter the US MX/MPS and other programs as they emerged. Soviet Intercontinental Striking Forces 22. Our projections of Soviet intercontinental striking forces reflect our judgment that the USSR will continue its historical heavy reliance on ICBMs, secondary reliance on SLBMs, and maintenance of a relatively small force of aerodynamic systems for intercontinental attack. The four projections we display illustrate alternative future Soviet force levels under various assumptions about SALT. The projections are based on observed recent trends and our best estimates of Soviet technological progress, and are made in the light of Soviet objectives for strategic forces as well as US strategic program options. They are not confident estimates of what the Soviets will actually do over a period as long as 10 years ahead, especially in this period of transition in Soviet and US programs. 23. We project two moderate SALT-­limited (Mod SAL) Soviet forces, in which we assume that the SALT II Treaty enters into force this year and remains unchanged through mid-1989. In the first force we assume that the Soviets elect as their permitted one new type of ICBM a medium solid-­propellant missile with a large single RV, and deploy it in upgraded SS–11 silos and on mobile launchers. The second Mod SAL force illustrates the effects of a Soviet decision to maximize the number of ICBM RVs within SALT II limits, by replacing all SS–17s and SS–19s with a medium solid-­propellant system having 10 RVs, deployed in silos and on mobile launchers. 24. We project a third force (termed SAL/No-SAL) which illustrates the Soviet potential to develop and deploy additional forces and to respond to the MX/MPS system if SALT II limitations are in force through 1985, but expire at the end of that year. This projection assumes that the USSR prepares in advance for rapid, subsequent improvements in the counterforce capability and survivability of its offensive forces. 25. A fourth force (Mod No-SAL) illustrates Soviet development and deployment options under circumstances in which the SALT II Treaty is abandoned this year, the SALT process breaks down, and
