Human Rights
301
governments. Everyone I have talked to and everything I have read in
the past months confirms this. Each of the President’s speeches and
statements in this area has captured much attention and generated ad-
ditional support, which eventually percolates back to governments.
Thus I think that Reinhardt’s suggestion for a Human Rights Week
speech addressed to people all over the world is an excellent one.2
You may remember that after the last UNGA speech, we got many
reports of reactions expressing disappointment that the President had
not once mentioned human rights.3 Some interpreted this as a backing
off from the policy (this isn’t serious—it’s a press obsession that will be
with us until the policy is no longer new). We even got some indica-
tions of disappointment from governments who were expecting some
general words of praise for the positive steps that have been taken in
many places. Thus there is substance that can usefully be said in such a
speech, and I think we can be confident that the market has not been
saturated with talk of human rights: I am a little leery of Reinhardt’s
suggestion that the speech address “the place of the individual in so-
ciety” which could easily get too philosophical and ethnocentric, but I
believe that it would be well worthwhile to take a look at his draft.
Rick informed me yesterday that a proposal for a 3–4 minute
Human Rights Week statement is already in the system. Obviously we
would not want to do both. I would suggest that it be expanded into a
10–12 minute speech.
I have no particular comments on Reinhardt’s proposals Two and
Three other than that we should take a look at his material. I have
drafted a note for a reply to Reinhardt’s memorandum along these
lines—it is at Tab A.4
2 Brzezinski placed two parallel lines in the left-hand margin next to the portion of
the paragraph that begins with “eventually” and ends with “one.”
3 Reference is to the President’s October 4 address before the UN General As-
sembly, which is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1715–1723, and is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of For-
eign Policy.
4 Attached but not printed is a signed copy of Brzezinski’s memorandum to
Reinhardt, dated November 25. In it, Brzezinski commented: “I found both your analysis
and proposals interesting. Regarding a ‘State of the World’ message, and your thoughts
on the FY ’79 budget for ICA, I hope you will forward the materials you mention to me.
We are giving serious consideration to your proposal for a Human Rights Week speech—
there are the inevitable schedule problems as you know. While I can make no commit-
ment at this time that the speech will be given, I would like to see a draft of what you have
in mind.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Of-
fice File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1977)
