204 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement the Government of India and there is no reason for specifying this in our agreed announcement. With respect to the introductory paragraph, I feel it appropriate that we retain the words contained in the statement issued by our two governments on July 25th announcing these talks. You will note that I have accepted the revised wording which you suggested for paragraph (3) of our respective statements. With reference to our discussion at our last meeting of the word “promptly” as used in the first paragraph of our respective statements, I have retained this word as I have not been able to think of any other that would be more appropriate. From the interpretation which you gave me at our last meeting of the Chinese term which you had sug­ gested, it seems to me that “promptly” is the best and most adequate translation into the English. It does not in the English carry with it any connotation such as you suggested of command but rather carries the connotation of quickly or very quickly which I understood from you was the sense of the Chinese term. However, in the English usage it is a more appropriate word in a context such as this than simply the word “quickly” or “very quickly”. However, as I said at our last meeting, the essential point with respect to whichever term is used is that we both clearly understand what it means. I would hope that you would today be able to define for me much more clearly than you have in the past and in terms of a definite period of time the further appropriate measures mentioned in the draft of the agreed announcement which will enable all Amer­ icans now detained in your country to exercise their right to return. 157. Telegram 677 to Geneva1 Washington, September 2, 1955, 6:56 p.m. 677. For Johnson. Your 658. Agree text proposed announcement quoted reftel as good as can be expected. While we would like agreement as to time release Americans it should not be pressed so as to jeopardize agreement on proposed 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–3155. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Phleger and Sebald; cleared by McConaughy and cleared in substance by Dulles and Robertson on September 1.
