822 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI then they’d leave and you’d stay behind for a discussion with the President. Baker: I think it would be important if during the visit of the businessmen if the regular JCC meet. Could you check and see if the regular JCC meeting is going to be at that time? I think there has been some reluctance on the part of your Commerce Ministry to have the meeting at that time. Shevardnadze: Yes, their plan was for the JCC to meet in October. But we could check. I do agree that the appropriate time might well be at this point and I’m not sure that all the questions have been considered appropriately by our side. So I’ll look into that. Baker: It would also give a boost to the JCC. Shevardnadze: Your presence in Moscow would certainly enhance the important of the JCC. Baker: And also President Gorbachev’s meeting would also give it a boost. Shevardnadze: Well, I’ll talk about it and I’ll talk to the President as well and we’ll make sure that JCC takes place in September. Baker: Good. Shevardnadze: Will the next meeting be in Washington or New York? In the past, our meetings in September were a part of full-­scale ministerials. I don’t know how it will be at this time since we’re meeting in Moscow in September. And I know that we use to have a full-­ scale ministerial just before the UNGA. But I have some doubts about that because it would come right after our September 11 and 13 meetings here. Baker: My thinking was that we would have our next full scale ministerial after the CSCE meeting on October 1 and 2. It’s our turn to host. So, I think we should think about that and the timing of it. Shevardnadze: Well, do you think some time in mid-October? Baker: Yes, I would say either the third or fourth week of October. It would mean you’d have to come back to America. And if you’re willing to do that it might be better than trying to squeeze a meeting around the UN and the CSCE. But we may also have the Two-Plus-Four, if it’s necessary. But I hope that it will not be necessary. Shevardnadze: Well, I hope that we will complete the main problems in Moscow. If anything remains, we could do it in New York. In October will be a difficult time, given everything that is going on; but I don’t see how we can wait much longer. In October you know we really should try to complete the work of START. After we complete the work of the fundamentals of START, we’ll still need one or two months to complete the technical drafting. I know that I recall that on the INF Treaty it took
