814 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX rary state poised strategically and politically between East and West, and playing a world role far beyond what size or power would dictate. Site of the spark that ignited the First World War, Yugoslavia arose out of that war as a state welded—or patched—together from pieces of the Kingdom of Serbia, of the crumbled Turkish Empire and of defeated Austria-Hungary. Little more than twenty years later it fell victim to German and Italian invasion, and was torn by Civil War between the communist-led Partisans under Tito, the Mihailovic forces built from remnants of the pre-war regime and the Ustashi forces in the Nazi puppet “Independent State of Croatia”. In vicious and tragic fighting against the occupiers and each other almost 2 million Yugoslav lives were lost—about half at the hands of other Yugoslavs. Marshal Tito came out of the war an authentic national hero, able to form in Yugoslavia the only post-war communist regime in Europe not imposed by Soviet arms or subversion. But, good communist that he was, Tito worked closely with Moscow until forced to demonstrate that he was an even better nationalist. The historic break with the Soviets in 1948–49 has profoundly affected Yugoslavia’s course for the 30 years that have followed. An outcast in the communist world after 1949, and threatened by Soviet power, Yugoslavia found the United States prepared to support its independence with military and economic assistance programs totalling $2.9 billion from 1949 to 1965. With the security this offered, Tito embarked on policies which have largely formed today’s Yugoslavia and which explain its importance as a country. Internally, he set in train political and economic trends which have made Yugoslavia a maverick in communist theory and practice. While still a one-party state, Yugoslavia no longer comes close to the totalitarian communist stereotype of a highly centralized system characterized by virtually total suppression of individual rights. Externally, Tito joined with India’s Nehru and Egypt’s Nasser to create the nonaligned movement, thereby giving focus to the growing number of newly-independent and underdeveloped states seeking a voice in the post-war world. Sole survivor of the three and, by now, the only remaining national leader of the Second World War generation, Tito stands as an elder statesman and leader of the nonaligned and the third world. The economy—and the underlying economic philosophy—start from premises which are unorthodox in communist practice. Unlike the rest of communist Europe, industrial property is not state-owned or managed via a government bureaucracy. Rather, industrial and economic activity is carried on through a “workers’ self management” system which at least in theory places ownership of enterprises in the hands of those who work in them (except in agriculture, a percentage of which is in private hands, and in retail marketing and small manufac-
