682
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
assistance programs, including agricultural assistance programs. The
study is to be completed by September 1.8
• A development assistance study by Brookings to be completed
by mid-October, commissioned by Secretary Vance.9
• An AID commissioned development study by Ed Hamilton to be
completed by mid-July.
• A report to the President (delivered June 20th) by the National
Academy of Sciences culminating a two-year study of how research
can contribute to an improved world food and nutrition situation.10
These activities—and there are probably others I don’t know
about—need to be integrated into any Administration initiative in this
field. In fact, the USDA and DCC efforts should contribute importantly
to laying the foundation for such an initiative.
Leadership
The absence of a clear assignment of leadership on this issue is
causing problems, and will cause more if it isn’t soon resolved. As you
can see from the above listing of activities, USDA, AID, State, the DCC,
and NSC/EPG are all proceeding down similar paths . . . and some-
what independently. The Bourne memo further suggests the possibility
of direct White House involvement.
USDA wants the lead responsibility. Two arguments are offered
for not giving Agriculture the lead: (1) that Agriculture’s interest is too
narrowly focused on surplus disposal objectives, and (2) that U.S. for-
eign assistance has been designed on a country-by-country basis rather
than along functional lines. The first argument is much less valid than it
once was. The second argument raises a fundamental policy question
that needs to be addressed. The major argument in behalf of Agricul-
ture’s assuming the lead is simply that they are better equipped to
carry-out the assignment than any other agency—an argument I find
compelling.
Largely for the opposite reason, I would recommend against a
major White House role. The White House staff, as you know, is not
8 Documentation on the DCC development assistance review is in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic Policy. A summary of the DCC Study is at-
tached to an undated issues paper prepared in advance of the October 11 PRC meeting.
(Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 65, PRC 039, 10/11/77,
Foreign Assistance [1])
9 Documentation on the Brookings Institution study—An Assessment of Development
Assistance Strategies—is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic
Policy. A summary of the study is attached to an undated issues paper prepared in ad-
vance of the October 11 PRC meeting. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institu-
tional Files, Box 65, PRC 039, 10/11/77, Foreign Assistance [1])
10 See Document 212.
