1977 105 that people could survive. Secretary Brown said that was because Kahn stores his own sustenance. Secretary Brown asked that in the time remaining that the group should talk about certain questions with respect to weapons systems, such as the question of the Triad versus a Dyad versus an augmented Triad, as well as the question of how sure we are of how our systems will actually perform. Dr. Brzezinski asked how sure the Soviets are about the performance of their systems. Secretary Brown said that both sides had similar problems in terms of the destruction of systems before launch, defensive actions, both passive and active, etc. He noted there was also the question of to what extent the creation of a new weapons system changed perceptions in a way that was favorable to us. Dr. Brzezinski raised the question whether this depends on what accuracy new systems might have. Secretary Brown noted that such questions affect both deterrence and hard-­target capability. Dr. Brzezinski emphasized that he thought that deterrence should focus on population and countervalue targets rather than on counterforce capability. He indicated that he thought that continuing to have a Triad made more sense since it permitted the US to mix the threat as well as to provide some selection in terms of lower level responses where the other side would not know where an attack might be coming from. David Aaron asked whether the real Triad question was not simply what we should do about ICBM survivability as distinct from the hard-­ target question. He thought it made no sense to make a great investment in a force which was increasing in vulnerability. Secretary Brown said that in this context, a mobile ICBM made sense. In addition, as long as we get warning, the other side has to account for the possibility that we might launch under attack—­systems that might not be as good because of their vulnerability were not necessarily useless. However, vulnerability does affect stability especially in situations of high tension. If both sides have good assurance that their systems will survive, then the situation is more stable. [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified] David Aaron wondered whether we would be satisfied with the answer of launch-­on-­warning in terms of stability and deterrence. There was also important command control questions. In any event, there was some question about whether it made any sense to put M–X in silos. Secretary Brown indicated that we use to feel stronger than we feel now. In terms of Soviet actions, there was some question if the Soviets would count on us to not fire before they would take out our ICBMs. David Aaron noted that this is basically a question of the credibility of our posture.
