World Hunger and Food Policy
765
tended by the US OPIC program; i.e., insurance against various contin-
gencies, might be put in place. Some capital inputs or credit availability
might also help in consummating agreements.
These are just a few observations, hastily dictated. I also presume
to include an article which appeared in the United Nations publication,
Development Forum, on the possibilities for reaching and training small
cultivators.5 Many variations of this are possible.
So far as direct food aid is concerned, there are many more expert
than myself. It is necessary, but very difficult to manage so that real
people-needs are met without depressing prices for farm products in
the marketplace. The importance of price and resulting return as an in-
ducement to using proper technology should be given top priority.
Over the years, the mistake of following a cheap food policy for hu-
manitarian reasons, with resulting low market price and no progress
on the production front has been made again and again. I can say quite
factually that “I have met farmers all over the world who can’t read or
write, but never one who can’t count.”
I hope this brief response to your inquiries is helpful. Good luck in
your very important project.
Sincerely yours,
Orville L. Freeman
5 Not found.
238.
Letter From Senator Hubert Humphrey to President Carter1
Washington, December 5, 1977
Dear Mr. President:
This fall both Houses of Congress passed resolutions asking you to
appoint a commission to explore initiatives through which the United
States can combat hunger and malnutrition in the world.2 I was among
the original co-sponsors of the Senate resolution because I believe such
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780008–1406. No
classification marking. Another copy of Humphrey’s letter is in the Carter Library, RG
220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 42,
Members of the Commission [3].
2 See footnote 3, Document 227.
