692
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
tional reports attacks on American citizens not only in Tehran but also
other localities.
3. He said these attacks almost inevitable. Iranian people thought
Americans were disagreeing with them and, therefore, were attacking
Americans. I said disagreements no reason for attacks. He replied Iran
in throes revolution and in revolutionary stress and strain it would re-
quire three times as many police as exist to afford full protection to
American citizens. I should remember that in American Revolutionary
times when Americans wanted British out, many Britishers in US were
attacked. I said if Iranians wanted Americans out individual attacks not
necessary. We would go en masse. He said Iranian Government did not
want Americans leave but some individual Iranians did and, therefore,
were attacking them. I replied Chiefs of American military mission,
American gendarme´rie mission, and TCI had informed me today that
Iranian officials with whom they dealt had assured them they were
anxious that these missions continue to function in Iran. These missions
could be assured of maximum cooperation from Iranian authorities.
These chiefs had also told me that at no time had they been receiving
more full and effective cooperation from Iranian authorities than at
present. I had refrained from informing Washington of this situation
until I could talk with him. I wanted to know what his present attitude
was re these American aid missions and also re giving adequate protec-
tion to members these missions. It did not make sense for certain Ira-
nian authorities to insist that these missions remain in Iran while
members of these missions were subject to insults and attacks from
gangs of hoodlums.
4. Prime Minister said he sure law enforcement agencies doing all
possible give protection. I disagreed and read to him excerpts various
memoranda which I had received from members American aid mis-
sions during course of day, some of which indicated that police were
passive while they were being attacked. He said he wished assure me
that he desired aid missions to stay. He thought they were performing
valuable services and would look further into matter protection of their
members.
5. After another lull I told him I would be grateful if he would tell
me confidentially for use my government, just what had happened
during recent days. US Government interested with respect both
events and legal situation. He chose interpret my remarks as reference
to President’s letter to him last July.2 He reminded me that we had had
agreement to effect existence these letters would be confidential and ex-
change would not be published unless US reply would be favorable.
2 See Document 230.
