National Security Policy  747
to expect them deliberately to initiate general war or to take actions 
which they believe would carry appreciable risk of general war, and 
thereby invite destruction. Therefore, in carrying out the central aim 
of deterring general war, the United States must develop maintain, 
and secure, as part of its military forces, sufficient nuclear retaliatory 
capability to reduce the Soviet power complex to impotency. Security 
of our nuclear retaliatory forces is essential to permit reasonable size 
and to lessen the need for their immediate or automatic release in order 
to avoid their destruction. The United States must also develop and 
maintain adequate military and non-­military programs for continental 
defense. The national effort devoted to continental defense should pro­
vide for early warning and defense of retaliatory forces. It should also 
provide a level of defense in vital areas sufficient to require a significant 
enemy effort to counter it, leaving no single threat totally unopposed.”
REASON: The above proposal provides specific terms of reference 
against which the adequacy of the retaliatory and defensive elements of 
the deterrent can be measured and will facilitate the difficult decisions 
concerning the allocation of resources among the various types of forces 
which make up the total U.S. military posture. Until some rational limit 
can be placed on the size of the retaliatory force the continued and unlim­
ited expansion of such forces will absorb resources sorely needed to 
develop other forces designed to provide essential flexibility of response.
e. Page 13, Paragraph 16—Support the State proposal which is repro­
duced on pages 61 and 62 of the Annex to NSC 5906.
REASON: The State proposal properly emphasizes the increas­
ing importance of further developing and maintaining the capability, 
including a nuclear capability, to oppose limited aggression. Further, 
it allows much needed political flexibility in that it does not require in 
advance that the United States, once committed to action in a limited 
war, must apply unlimited force to achieve military victory regardless 
of consequences, but leaves the United States free to fight for a limited 
objective if such is the best course under the conditions then existing.
Appendix B
Paper Prepared by the Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Washington, undated
VIEW OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S. AIR FORCE
on
BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY (NSC 5906)
1. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force has reviewed the draft state­
ment of policy (NSC 5906) which was prepared by the National Security
