1979 599 years. The Soviets have demonstrated their capacity to supply troubled allies or friends but not to carry out these actions if opposed nor to wage distant wars themselves. This remains an area of large overall US advantage. In sum, the document appears to downplay an emphasis on NATO vis-­a-­vis strategic and power projection forces. We do not find the arguments persuasive and strongly favor continuation of DOD’s current European emphases as stated in PD–18. Political/Diplomatic Balance —Great power triangular relations are treated primarily in terms of the costs and benefits of using our relations with Beijing either to induce Soviet cooperation or to constrain Soviet expansion. We agree that these two elements are important factors to be considered in our relations with the Soviet Union and China but the discussion oversimplifies the range and significance of our relationships with both countries. There are prospective interests and activities we may wish to consider vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union which may have a minimal impact on China, and a comparable set of relationships with China that may neither work to constrain the Soviets nor induce their cooperation. Our overall objective should be to strengthen and improve our relations with both China and the Soviet Union in ways which enhance global US security and influence. —We believe more weight should be accorded to Europe and Japan in the political/diplomatic balance. The strength of the industrial democracies is a fundamental factor in our international position. This is in contrast to the significant problems faced by the USSR in a potentially unstable Eastern Europe. —The paper’s speculation concerning a Soviet “German card” is highly misleading and could lead to policy judgments and conclusions which would be potentially destructive of US/FRG relations. —US/Soviet competition in the Third World significantly complicates our bilateral and overall East-West relations. As the CNA ­acknowledges, however, it is far from clear that the turbulence in the Third World translates into durable Soviet gains. Perhaps because of the time at which the CNA was written, it does not take account of (a) the Egyptian-Israeli treaty;4 (b) the Baghdad Summit and shift of 4 Reference is to the Treaty of Peace between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the State of Israel, which was signed by President Carter, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin on the North Lawn of the White House on the afternoon of March 26, 1979. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980, Second, Revised Edition, Document 239.
