1106  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
by the terminal date of the study, 1 July 1962. Therefore, the scenarios 
could be developed only up to a point to permit examination of partic­
ular systems, available and appropriate to the situation.
4. By agreement of the participating agencies, U.S. and allied capa­
bilities for covert military operations and psychological warfare were 
excluded from the study. The study group recognizes, however, that such 
capabilities would be relevant to a number of the situations studied.
5. In contrast to the 1958 study in which capabilities for limited 
military operations were discussed on a general basis and supported by 
shorter studies of twelve geographical areas, the present study exam­
ined five situations (Korea, Taiwan, Iran, Berlin and Laos) which are 
considered adequately representative of the types of areas and situa­
tions in which the United States might conduct limited military oper­
ations. Each of the five has been prepared in sufficient detail to stand 
independently. Together they cover a sufficient range of problems to 
permit over-­all conclusions to be drawn on U.S. and allied capabilities 
for limited military operations.
II—OVER-­ALL CONCLUSIONS
1. U.S. capabilities in conjunction with those of our allies are gen­
erally adequate to conduct any one of the limited military operations 
studied but these capabilities are dependent on prompt action, as 
required in each case, to:
a. Initiate partial mobilization.
b. Augment existing military lift capabilities.
c. Expand the war production base.
d. Waive financial limitations.
2. The U.S. overall capability for general war would be degraded 
initially by any one of the five limited military operations studied, 
except Berlin, although not to an unacceptable degree. The capability 
of the U.S. nuclear retaliatory forces for general war would in no case 
studied, be seriously affected.
3. Although U.S. capabilities might, in some circumstances, be 
adequate to conduct two of these limited military operations simulta­
neously, the U.S. over-­all capability for general war would, in such cir­
cumstances, be degraded to an unacceptable degree.
4. On the basis of the assumptions utilized, the five studies did not 
indicate a need for change in existing deployments of U.S. forces.
5. Substantial conventional forces—ground, sea and air—were 
required in all cases studied whether or not nuclear weapons were 
employed.
6. From the U.S. military point of view, the desirability of initiating 
the use of nuclear weapons varied in the five cases studied. In Berlin,
