96 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 3. Further to paragraphs 3–5 of Reference A, in the spring of 1978 we provided the first subsidy [less than 1 line not declassified] to a prominent Russian-language publishing house [less than 1 line not declassified]. With these funds it was possible for them both to keep in business and to plan the publication of approximately 12 titles of philosophical works much in demand in the Soviet Union. [less than 1 line not declassified] 4. Increased funding has allowed an increase in publication of Russian-language books to provide a wider choice of materials available for infiltration into the Soviet Union. Two major works have now appeared, and four additional titles are in the process of being published. Three or four more titles will appear by the end of the year, including the initial volume of what is to be a major historical series. At the same time, in order to exploit more fully increased political activism in Poland, eight additional titles are in various stages of publication in the Polish language. Five volumes have already appeared and have been distributed. The demand for written materials in Poland is high, [2 lines not declassified] which facilitates distribution. Russian and Polish editions of works of current importance in Western thought are now being given active consideration. [less than 1 line not declassified] 5. Although tighter controls exist in Czechoslovakia than in Poland (especially during the tenth anniversary of the invasion) many manuscripts have been smuggled out of Czechoslovakia. The additional funds were used to publish more of these materials in a Czech-language journal and to publish an additional issue of this journal. Part of the funds were also used in an effort to increase internal distribution. [less than 1 line not declassified] 6. [6 lines not declassified] that our literature is distributed widely in both East Europe and the USSR. 7. The preparation of this report was delayed because of the need to collate information received through a number of outside contacts— [1 line not declassified]. All portions of this document are SECRET. Stansfield Turner
