3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
39
My letter is warranted by the sincere concern about today and to-
morrow of our relations and it is this main thought that I want to bring
to you in all directness and confidentiality.
I hope that with the understanding of that high responsibility
which is placed on the leadership of our two countries, we shall be able
to insure progressive development of Soviet-American relations along
the road of peace in the interests of our and all other peoples.
Sincerely,
L. Brezhnev5
5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
13.
Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary
Brezhnev1
Washington, March 4, 1977
To General Secretary Brezhnev
Your letter of February 25th2 caused me some concern because of
its somewhat harsh tone, because it failed to assume good faith on my
part, and because there was no positive response to specific sugges-
tions contained in my previous letter. The differences between our
countries are deep enough, and I hope that you and I never compound
them by doubts about our respective personal motives.
The fact is that no final agreement was ever reached at Vladivostok
nor in the subsequent negotiations regarding cruise missiles or the
Backfire bomber. I am confident that such agreements can be attained
in the future, and I am eager to seek them. I appreciate your concerns
regarding the deferral of these issues to later negotiations but I do be-
lieve that something is to be gained from generating momentum
through a more rapid agreement and I want to emphasize that a de-
ferral of these two contentious issues would be designed only to facili-
tate a more rapid agreement, with all its positive political conse-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 69, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR): Brezhnev–Carter
Correspondence: 1–2/77. No classification marking. In the upper right-hand corner,
Carter wrote, “Zbig—O.K. to transmit as amended. J.C.”
2 See Document 12.
