1955  353
substance item two”. Renewed suggestions be discussed by assistants or 
through UK Charge Peking.
2. Then referring to my suggestion on subjects we discuss under 
item two stated “each side may raise subjects it considers should be 
discussed and not necessary to limit subjects or to fix their order”. 
There is no necessity carry on any prolonged argument on subjects to 
be discussed, “will not agree removal any subjects”, then went on with 
long justification for discussion higher level meeting largely repeating 
previous line. He then referred my two subjects stating he had already 
given me list all Americans in China including military personnel, if 
by raising subject I intended imply more Americans in China “this was 
sheer fabrication”, we have not given them list of Chinese in US, if there 
is to be any accounting of personnel up to us to do accounting.
3. Then turned to renunciation of force, should distinguish between 
civil conflicts which outside scope of these talks and international dis­
putes. “Even in civil conflicts China had striven for peaceful solutions 
when circumstances permit.” “Chiang clique under wings of foreign 
forces has refused peaceful settlement and carries on harassing activi­
ties;” China has consistently upheld peaceful settlement international 
disputes, consistently supported principles UN Charter on peaceful 
settlement international disputes, references to Bandung, Five Princi­
ples, etc. “Chinese do not want to fight with US” and Dulles said no 
fighting in Taiwan area between Americans and Chinese. Therefore 
no question cease-fire between China and US. US is one using force 
achieve national objectives, Taiwan is Chinese territory, was restored 
to China World War II and yet US encroaches on and occupies and has 
said it will use force prevent liberation. PRC wishes discuss withdrawal 
all US forces from Taiwan and coastal islands. If I fully empowered dis­
cuss and settle this question he ready to do likewise. In closing referred 
my statement previous meeting I had faith and hope and said he shared 
but “we would have to strive harder and prove our desires by deeds”.
4. I said I first wanted to deal with implementation. I did not want 
to spend time on details, did not see why it was necessary. All that was 
required were simple answers to my simple questions, could be disposed 
of in few minutes. In reply his suggestion on UK taking up questions 
Peiping, pointed out agreed announcement had two aspects: one, actions 
to be taken by our governments which were intergovernmental matters 
between us, and two, functions third powers. Words of agreed announce­
ment resolved nothing, only implementation resolved questions. Some 
of questions I had raised also taken up by UK in Peiping but no satis­
factory replies. Repeated in full three questions on whether Americans 
in jail informed of text announcement, their access to UK Charge, and 
authority UK Charge interview them. Said simple affirmative answers 
would immediately dispose of these questions here. Difficult understand 
why he couldn’t give me simple answers, pointing out his failure to do
