324 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV OMB Bowman Cutter, Executive Associate Director for Budget Randy Jayne, Associate Director for National Security and International Affairs Federal Preparedness Agency Joseph Mitchell, Director Dalimil Kybal, Assistant Director for Research, Development and Program Coordination White House Zbigniew Brzezinski NSC Samuel Huntington Reginald Bartholomew Colonel William E. Odom MINUTES OF MEETING Harold Brown opened the discussion by observing what we do in civil defense to some extent is driven by what the Soviets do. He then asked Admiral Turner to comment on Soviet programs. Admiral Turner said the Soviets are investing in a large civil defense effort sheltering all of the leadership and a small portion of the population. The remainder of the population is to be protected by evacuation. A full seven-­day evacuation effort would protect about 75 percent and would reduce expected casualties by about 50 percent. If the evacuees dig elementary shelters, casualties could be reduced by another half. In the first six to thirty-­six hours of an evacuation, however, a U.S. strike on the Soviet Union could increase the casualties slightly. From the second day on, the number would drop rapidly. Admiral Turner also mentioned two large uncertainties. First, we are not sure how long the Soviets could remain in an evacuated posture. Second, we cannot say what the impact of weather conditions would be on civil defense effectiveness. Harold Brown asked when and how we would know about Soviet evacuation if it took place. Stating that the evacuation rate would be two million people per hour for the first two days, Turner ventured that satellite and other intelligence systems would detect such movement. Some skepticism was expressed about detection of such a slow rate of evacuation. Keeney insisted that the Soviets would make a public broadcast if they evacuate. Challenged on his report of the two million per hour evacuation rate, Admiral Turner called on [name not declassified] who verified this figure. Brown, Christopher, and others thought it a very small number for a very large country. Harold Brown moved the discussion to potential effectiveness of civil defense and related uncertainties. Would civil defense make a difference in the outcome of a nuclear exchange? What effect would it
