March 27–December 31, 1979 859 people that the armed forces have a greater mission in time of peace than their task at war-time. On the other hand, the Soviet Union has been virtually excluded as a supplier of weapons for several years. Thus, we are confronted with the challenge of modernizing the weapons system at the same time we are faced with the problem of replacing our dwindling stock of arms. It was for these two reasons that we agreed on a new role for the United States as a major supplier of arms and military equipment. You would certainly recall that I told you that it was an absolute must to take twenty steps forward in this direction. Promptly, you dispatched your competent officials to coordinate with their Egyptian counterparts plans for this supply. In all candor, I must tell you that the results of these contacts have not been satisfactory enough. While your representatives were quite appreciative of our problems and needs, what we have been offered to meet these needs was short of meeting our needs, both in quality and quantity. At a time when the financing of the purchase of the F5 planes by Saudi Arabia is being blocked for reasons you well know, we have been offered only 35 F4 planes and twelve air defense batteries. We might understand the reasons why it is difficult to provide us with the more sophisticated F–15 and F–16. However, the supply of only 35 F4 planes, 16 of which to be delivered before October 6, is not the answer to our needs. Our Air-Force command says that it is crucial to increase the number of aircrafts and equip them with “Maverick” type of rocket in order to ensure effectiveness. Perhaps the position of the naval forces is more precarious. U.S. officials have offered to provide them with two gearing class destroyers whose equipment and electronic gear are of a less sophisticated quality than the Soviet destroyers which have been in use in our Navy for some time. They also offered to sell Egypt a diesel-operated submarine which is of the same quality more or less. You are aware of the priority I am attaching to our naval forces in the light of the current situation in the area. Serving our purpose would require providing us with more advanced types of destroyers, submarines and fast patrol boats equipped with guided missiles. On the other hand, the withdrawal of our three Arab partners from the Arab Organization for Industrialization6 confronts us with some 6 Established in May 1975 by Egypt, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates in order to facilitate greater Arab self-reliance in military production, the Arab Organization for Industrialization was scheduled to be disbanded on July 1. Announcing the disbandment in Riyadh on May 14, Prince Sultan stated “the signing by Egypt of the peace treaty contradicted the reason and purpose for which the organization was established.” (Christopher S. Wren, “Saudis Scuttle a Billion-Dollar Arms Consortium With Factories in Egypt,” The New York Times, May 15, 1979, p. A3)
