March 27–December 31, 1979 1031 vided like talking points in response to Sadat’s October 6 (Soviet/ Cuban security threats) letter.6 3. Assistance to Egypt: —The various aspects of U.S. assistance for Egypt have, of course, been the subject of a continuing dialogue between our two governments. A number of the points raised in President Sadat’s letter were discussed with Vice President Mobarak during his September visit,7 not only by the President but also by other senior officials. And we in the Embassy have similarly had frequent contacts with you and others here on these matters. —On the subject of our longer-term military supply relationship, Vice President Mobarak’s visit was very useful, coming as it did in the immediate wake of Dave McGiffert’s Mission to Egypt8 and during the initial course of the decision-making process in Washington. This latter process has taken longer than we had hoped, but future programs for Egypt cannot be considered in isolation—the relationship to other budgetary requirements and the need for congressional support, to cite but two examples, must be considered. —President Carter and his top advisers are taking a careful look at your requests for military assistance. We hope in the near future to hold discussions again in Cairo with Minister Ali and General Bedawi which will allow you to prepare definite plans. —As Vice President Mobarak noted, your needs are great. On the one hand, we will not be able to do all that you might desire, particularly in the short term, because of budgetary ceilings. On the other hand, there have already been pluses, such as our achievements in getting some of the F–4s and APCs to Cairo in time for the ceremonies on 6 Conveyed in telegram 20675 from Cairo, October 7, Sadat’s October 6 letter responded to an October 1 message from Carter, informing the former of the measures the administration would take in response to the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba. In the letter, Sadat proposed four measures to counter “the exploitation by the Soviet Union of unjust situations still prevailing in various areas of the Middle East, in Africa, in the Far East, and in Latin America:” 1) a “long range” program of economic and military assistance to the countries “most directly affected by the Soviet efforts at penetration and destabilization;” 2) “increase the capabilities of countries willing to take a firm stand against the Soviet plans;” 3) “increase efforts to solve the international problems which are exploited by the Soviet Union;” and 4) support “genuine liberation movements who should not be left in a position where they feel that their only support comes from the Soviet Union and other Soviet-leaning countries.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840172–2248) 7 See Document 293. 8 See footnote 4, Document 274.
