situation wherein Chile demands decision on plebiscite and at same time maintains intransigent position in the negotiations, there will be no reason for you to delay your action further. (4) As I understand Commission’s practice and procedure, any resolution that Edwards may offer on Saturday must go over until next meeting if objection is made to its immediate consideration by any member of the Commission, and in your telegram of June 1, 5 p.m., you state that you intend to let the motion lie on table as unfinished business to be considered at next meeting. This procedure will afford me the opportunity to deal with the few contingencies that remain and to telegraph you finally that way is clear to introduce resolution quoted above under (1). I assume that a second brief adjournment could be taken if required by circumstances, but I doubt that it will be necessary to take one. Whatever happens, I must rely upon you to await this final word from me before you introduce this resolution, making no communication meanwhile on the subject to either party. (5) If on Saturday Edwards should attempt to spread on record a statement of his position on plebiscite, either by speech or otherwise, it may be advisable for you to make brief rejoinder. I do not think it would be wise for you to enter upon elaborately detailed discussion for this purpose. It should be sufficient were you to challenge his statements wherever you feel you could do it appropriately, declaring that position he is taking is not supported by record before Commission. If he should deny Commission’s power to do anything but fix date for election and proceed with plebiscite, you should dissent. (6) I assume you are taking and will take all proper precautions in every eventuality for complete protection of personnel, including those in outlying districts, calling them in, if necessary. No measures should be overlooked to eliminate risk of unfortunate and embarrassing incidents. KELLOGG 14 Quoted passage not paraphrased.
