Arms Control and Disarmament  1387
340.	 Letter From John Foster Dulles to Killian1
Washington, July 3, 1958
Dear Dr. Killian:
One of the most important aspects of disarmament negotiations is 
the question of measures to detect and discourage surprise attack. This 
aspect of disarmament is one on which the Soviet Union may be willing 
to enter into serious negotiations.
Several preliminary studies have been done for the Government in 
the past three years concerning inspection methods to be applied within 
any surprise attack zones. None of these, however, has adequately 
treated the problem of specific inspection and control systems designed 
to minimize the possibility of surprise attack, nor has any taken into 
account missiles capabilities. It would therefore be most helpful if the 
Science Advisory Committee could explore in a preliminary way some 
of the general facets of the surprise attack problem, with particular ref­
erence to its scientific and technical aspects.
What I have in mind is an examination of the ways of obtaining, 
through an international agreement, significant enhancement of early 
warning abilities and capability to detect preparations for a major sur­
prise attack, as well as reduce the chances of accidental war, both in the 
current period and in subsequent years when strategic missiles would 
have been developed in large numbers. I should think that such study 
would endeavor to explore the question of just what are the critical 
areas of the Soviets’ military and industrial activities, from the point of 
view of providing advance warning of a surprise attack, and thus what 
would be the most important objects and means of inspection and con­
trol in any such inspection system.
In making this preliminary analysis you may wish to consider 
United States capabilities to detect a surprise attack that could be 
utilized to strengthen reliance on an agreed international inspection 
system. You may also wish to comment on the extent to which an 
international inspection system could meet the problems of surprise 
attack detection which the Science Advisory Committee’s Technologi­
cal Capabilities Panel raised in its February 14, 1955 report to the Presi­
dent, entitled “Meeting the Threat of Surprise Attack”.
On the basis of the above, I would hope that you could give a 
tentative evaluation of the degree of contributions to surprise attack 
1 Source: Request for exploration of surprise attack issues. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology Files, 
Disarmament, Surprise Attack.
