1980  903
with civilians during the Vietnam buildup and about 40,000 when we 
ended the draft. Yet DoD has cut down civilian employment by about 
120,000 since 1974, largely through increased efficiencies. We have now 
reached the point where continuing to cut, instead of building up as a 
substitute for needed increases in scarce military manpower at a time 
when defense needs are expanding, will compromise readiness—­even 
if defense spending is increased. In fact, increased readiness and real 
growth in defense programs require more, not fewer, civilian employ-
ees in industrially funded activities such as Navy yards, air rework 
facilities and laboratories. Arbitrary civilian manpower restraints here 
are equally counterproductive. DoD’s special circumstances demand 
relief from such limitations (even though they appear politically attrac-
tive to both outgoing and incoming administrations).35
Issue #8—Lastly, how can non-Defense agencies best complement DoD 
efforts? The acute security problems we confront in the 80s dictate a far 
broader effort than is in DoD’s purview. In the largest sense, our for-
eign and economic policies must take more fully into account national 
security needs.36 National policies which reduce inflation and promote 
investment clearly help defense. So too do energy policies which pro-
mote conservation, accelerate use of alternate fuels, and hold down 
energy costs. Such policies will also assist the defense efforts of cru-
cially needed Allies.
In DoD’s view our coalition defense and overseas force projec-
tion strategy also dictate providing much greater security assistance 
to friends and Allies in maintaining adequate defense efforts. Such aid 
is often more cost-­effective than building up our own forces to com-
pensate for their weakness. In particular, key countries like Turkey, 
Pakistan, and Egypt need to be strengthened militarily as a key aspect 
of our PG/IO deterrent strategy. To this end a substantial rise in Secu-
rity Assistance is indispensable. Since many important client states are 
unable to meet the financial terms required by current FMS policy, or in 
some cases, can’t pay at all, more flexible terms plus some element of 
grant aid are equally important.37 State/DoD have prepared proposals 
for SCC review.38
III. THE DOD POSITION. DoD recognizes that its proposals on the 
above issues add up to a highly ambitious security program for the 80s. 
But it goes without saying that deterrence is far more desireable and 
far less costly than conflict, even granting that a credible war-­fighting 
35 Brzezinski drew vertical lines in the left and right margins next to this sentence.
36 Brzezinski underlined “must take more fully into” in this sentence.
37 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous 
sentence.
38 Not found.
