necessity and revenue producer with a moderate rate. Great Britain’s prime interest was in high grade piece goods, woollens and sugar. Practically all of the work of fixing the rates of surtaxes may be said to have been done in informal conferences among the Delegates and Technical Advisers. To have attempted to thresh out these questions in formal sittings of the Delegates or Advisers would have been a prolonged, and perhaps futile, task and the expeditious and satisfactory manner in which it was handled does great credit to the Technical Advisers who bore the brunt of this work. Much of it was of a technical character and involved a knowledge of values and commodities which some of the Delegates could not be expected to possess. It was for this reason that it was deemed advisable to leave this work largely to the Japanese, British and American Advisers. The position of the American Delegation regarding rates of interim surtaxes was that as a tentative basis of negotiation, it was prepared to go as high as 25 to 30 per cent on manufactures of tobacco, 20 to 25 per cent on tobacco not manufactured, 25 to 35 per cent on wines, beers and liquors, which it was made plain were not American products. The American Delegation objected to the placing of shoes and boots, leather and soles, cream and milk, evaporated, sterilized or condensed, electrical materials, indigo and India rubber manufactures and a few other articles in the list of “B” Grade luxuries. On the broad principle of a schedule of rates the American and British Delegations favored higher rates, on an average, than those proposed by the Japanese. Except for individual items in the schedules, the other foreign Delegations did not evince any considerable interest in the question of rates, with the exception of the French and Italian Delegations, who followed the negotiations rather closely and submitted carefully prepared proposals and estimates. The British and Italian Delegations proposed a 10 per cent flat rate on all imports, with surtaxes of a flat 5 per cent on “B” Grade luxuries and a flat 15 per cent on “A” Grade luxuries. The Japanese proposed a minimum rate of flat 7½ per cent on their low-priced imports into China and 10 per cent on some items admitted to be luxury goods. The American Delegation felt that a flat 15 per cent duty on all “B” Grade luxuries would bear very
