48 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ETA–14. Circular Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to all Diplomatic Posts in the Other American Republics1  Washington, December 21, 1958, 6:52 p.m. 793. Section 1 of 2 sections. Section 2 of this telegram sets forth an outline of preliminary U.S. views, subject further consultations with members of Congress, regarding the structure, capitalization and functions of the proposed inter-American development institution. You requested transmit this outline to government to which you accredited together with statement incorporating points stated below. In course transmittal you should make sure that communication is brought to attention of high-­ level financial and economic officials of foreign government who will presumably be responsible for determining financial policy issues involved. Points to be included in U.S. statement follow: 1. Since inauguration Operation Pan America and announcement by Under Secretary Dillon at IA-ECOSOC on August 12, 1958 of U.S. willingness to support inter-American financial institution U.S. Government has been giving intensive study to best means establishing such institution on basis (a) to assure effective support L.A. economic development, (b) to serve as instrument economic cooperation genuinely inter-American in character, and (c) to inspire confidence in long-­ run technical and economic soundness of institution which essential its future growth. 2. During its study U.S. Government has taken account discussions at Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Washington on September 23–24, 1958 and at meeting of Special Committee of 21 during November-December 1958. 3. As result its consideration, U.S. has come to conclusion that in order assure success inter-American development institution should reflect certain basic principles: A. Primary funds to be administered by institution should be utilized for loans repayable in currency lent (i.e. “hard loans”). Funds to be administered by the institution on basis repayment in currency of borrower or other flexible basis (i.e. “soft loans”) should play secondary 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 810.10/12–2158. Confidential; Priority. Sent in two sections; drafted by John M. Leddy, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, and signed by Dillon. The telegram was cleared with the Treasury Department, OFD and ARA in the State Department, and the NAC approved its substance.
