232 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I rity and to create the kind of international order that I’ve just described. This is our goal. We’ve looked at the problems in Soviet-American relations in a fresh way, and we’ve sought to deal with them boldly and constructively with proposals intended to produce concrete results. I’d like to point out just a few of them. In the talks on strategic arms limitations, the SALT talks, we advanced a comprehensive proposal for genuine reductions, limitations, and a freeze on new technology which would maintain balanced strategic strength.3 We have urged a complete end to all nuclear tests, and these negotiations are now underway.4 Agreement here could be a milestone in U.S.-Soviet relations. We’re working together toward a ban on chemical and biological warfare and the elimination of inventories of these destructive materials.5 We have proposed to curb the sales and transfers of conventional weapons to other countries, and we’ve asked France, Britain, and other countries to join with us in this effort. We are attempting to halt the threatening proliferation of nuclear weapons among the nations of the world which don’t yet have the ability to set off nuclear explosives. We’ve undertaken serious negotiations on arms limitations in the Indian Ocean.6 We’ve encouraged the Soviets to sign, along with us, the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which would ban the introduction of nuclear weapons into the southern part of the Western Hemisphere.7 We have begun regular consultations with the Soviet leaders as cochairmen of the prospective Geneva conference to promote peace in the Middle East. 3 See footnote 4, Document 51. 4 Presumable reference to trilateral U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. talks on a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty, which began in Geneva in mid-July. Documentation on the talks is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI, Arms Control. 5 PD/NSC–15, “Chemical Warfare,” issued on June 16, directed a U.S. delegation under the auspices of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to initiate bilateral consultations with the United Kingdom, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, and Japan, followed by negotiations with the Soviet Union, on a ban on chemical weapons. PD/NSC–15 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI, Arms Control. 6 Discussions concerning Indian Ocean arms limitation took place in Moscow June 21–27. Documentation on the discussions is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Regional; Arabian Peninsula. 7 See footnote 4, Document 33.
