838 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV last September. Because of the intense political interest in M–X and the importance of this system to our future strategic posture, I believe it would be useful to provide you some additional information, and update you on our current activities. (U) The design upgrades are explained in the letter I sent to Committee Chairmen in Congress on April 29, 1980 (Enclosure 1). Essentially, we changed the missile transporter from an “integral” design, in which the missile and launch equipment are always mounted on the transporter, to a “non-­integral” design, in which the missile, launcher, and ancillary equipment roll out of a van-­like transporter into a shelter loading dock. This design change has two big advantages: it is cheaper, and it eliminates the requirement for a separate shield vehicle to cover the transporter. The new design cannot dash automatically from one shelter to another, but can dash into a choice of shelters from an alert posture on the road, if we come to believe at some future time that the Soviets have penetrated our screen of location uncertainty. Additionally, the new design is much more amenable to use of mass simulators, which we believe will probably be necessary. (S) You will note that my letter to Chairman Stennis announced these changes in a low-­key way;3 I wanted to let him know that we were doing everything possible to save costs and reduce the complexity of the system, without having the changes seem to amount to a new basing mode, which they do not. At this point, members from the affected states recognized that with the new dash method we could do away with the loop road, and use linear roads if we wished. Because the term “racetrack” had acquired pejorative connotations, it was easier for those members to support us if they could take the credit for “killing the racetrack.” Hence, the big headline in the Star. (U) The land saving made possible through going from loop to linear layouts will probably be about 5%. Together with reduced spacing between shelters, the entire system as now planned will extend over about 20% less land and will require about 1000 miles less of road than originally thought. (U) As we anticipated, the political opposition to M–X is quite strong and comes from a variety of quarters: —Those who don’t want any new missile system. —A small, highly vocal group that may not be totally opposed to new strategic forces, but doesn’t like our basing choice for M–X. Some of these advocate a new submarine-­based system because they have no concern about SSBN (or SLBM) vulnerability. —Those who are greatly concerned about environmental impact in the desert states. These people team easily with the first two groups. —Some strongly pro-­defense people, who believe that the Air Force’s vertical shelter recommendation was the best plan and the 3 Not found.
