III
Preface
The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official 
documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and 
significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The 
series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formu­
lation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative 
views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.
The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the respon­
sibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of 
the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, 
compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing 
proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of histor­
ical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the 
selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated 
by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regula­
tions, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.
A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was 
established by Public law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authoriza­
tion Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President 
George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a 
new Title IV to the Department of State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 
(22 USC 4351 et seq. ).
The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, 
accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy deci­
sions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of 
the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive 
documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the 
United States Government, including facts that contributed to the for­
mulation of policies and records that provided supporting and alterna­
tive views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.
The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secre­
tary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of 
historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or 
deletions made without indicating in the published text that a dele­
tion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that 
were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should 
be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The stat­
ute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more 
than 30 years after the events recorded. The editors of this microfiche
