National Security Policy  507
war, these restraints will tend to diminish during the period of this 
estimate.28
192. We cannot confidently estimate how the Soviets will calculate 
the risk in various contingencies during the period of this estimate. We 
believe they would consider that open attacks by Soviet forces across 
the frontiers of non-Communist states would in most areas involve 
risk of general war. The Soviet assessment of the degree of risk would 
depend on the particular frontier crossed, the magnitude of the issues 
at stake, and the whole complex of attendant circumstances.
193. Whether or not the Soviets actually use armed force during 
the period of this estimate, it is clear that the latent threat of Communist 
military strength will remain a basic element in the conduct of Soviet 
foreign policy. At times the Soviet leaders will probably bring this threat 
into the open, by menacing words or harsh diplomatic exchanges. They 
may go considerably further in certain situations—­e.g., by supporting 
indigenous Communist forces in local military action, or even sending 
Soviet “volunteers,” if opportunities should occur which did not seem 
to involve serious risk of large-­scale conflict, or if they judged that con­
fusion and division rather than a strong Western reaction would result. 
But we remain convinced that the USSR will not desire to let any crisis 
develop to the point of seriously risking general war.
194. Since the Soviets believe in irreconcilable conflict between 
themselves and the West, their major policy decisions will always be 
affected to a great degree by their calculation of the risks of war. In the 
present phase this calculation almost certainly causes them to prefer 
non-­military means of achieving their objectives. But we believe that 
they also see many intrinsic advantages in a comparatively peaceful 
course. Viewed in retrospect, it would seem that when the post-­Stalin 
leaders reassessed the situation bequeathed to them by Stalin they came 
to two basic conclusions: (a) that, on the whole, Soviet foreign policies 
had reached a point of diminishing returns; and (b) that these policies 
involved needless risks for the returns realized. To limit these risks and 
open new opportunities for enhancing the Soviet position, they appar­
ently decided on a number of major policy shifts.
195. As reflected in the main characteristics of post-Stalin foreign 
policy, these opportunities must have appeared to the present leader­
ship to lie broadly in two fields. First, concerned over the impetus to 
28 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not agree with the estimate 
that the restraints on Soviet courses of action imposed by fear of the US resorting to gen­
eral war will tend to diminish during the period of this estimate because of an increasing 
disinclination by the US to engage in an all-­out nuclear exchange. See footnote to para­
graph 2, Summary Estimate, page 1. [Footnote is in the original.]
