536
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Before definite negotiations are completed with Zahedi it is vital
that a U.S. representative be placed in contact with the Shah. This rep-
resentative should present the point of view that if the Shah will supply
the moral leadership the U.S. will support, by every means, the most
logical successor to Mossadeq. The alternative will be the continued
disintegration and eventual collapse of Iran. The point should be
stressed that this is the Shah’s final time for decision and, that failing
this time, he will have betrayed his country. Discussions should cover
the steps to be taken by the Shah in replacing Mossadeq by Zahedi,
worked out in all pertinent details. Should the Shah give the required
assurances, negotiations would be concluded with Zahedi. If the U.S.
representative felt that the Shah would not rise to the occasion, the pro-
jected operation should be discarded.
The choice of a suitable representative is of great importance.
George Allen, largely responsible for the Shah’s decisive action at the
time of the recovery of Azerbaijan, would be the ideal choice. A mili-
tary man, such as one of the former heads of the U.S. Military Mission
to Iran, is another possibility. It would seem less advisible to employ
the current diplomatic representative, because his presentation would
lack the special quality of that of a special representative and because of
the risk that his efforts might be disclosed and his usefulness in Iran
ended.
C. Forces which will play a role in any effort to replace Mossadeq and to
establish a stable government, and evaluation of their attitude
1. The Iranian Army
The bulk of the security forces have a strong sense of traditional
loyalty to the Shah, but the rank and file may be expected to follow the
orders of their superiors who were appointed to their present posts by
Mossadeq. The events of July 1952 when the action of force at Tehran
was not supported by the Shah tended to weaken the traditional bonds
of loyalty between the throne and the army.
Any coup promoted by Zahedi or any legalistic maneuver to put
him in power would fail unless supported by the armed forces at
Tehran. Until about a year ago the First Division at Tehran, the
so-called Guards Division, was in a position to control the course of
events and this force was loyal to the Shah. Mossadeq, realizing the sit-
uation, had this division split into three separate brigades with officers
of his own choosing in command. There are also two armored brigades
and the central MP Brigade at Tehran. Headquarters has no informa-
tion as to the personal sympathies or political inclinations of the com-
manders of these brigades. It is very doubtful if any of these com-
manders would obey orders of Zahedi directed at the overthrow of
