Arms Control and Disarmament  1323
in policy as a whole but also changes in the interdependence of vari­
ous items. Thus nuclear testing could be agreed to separately subject 
only to the condition of an agreed inspection system and the stated 
intention of the U.S. to resume testing at the end of two years unless 
international agreement on the cut-­off of production had been reached. 
Outer space cooperation could be dealt with separately. Missile control 
proposals were contingent on further feasibility studies by Dr. Killian’s 
staff. Inspection zones might be accepted independently.
General Fox asked if the target date for agreement—­September 1, 
1958—­assumed Senate ratification. Mr. Farley noted that the specific 
date is, of course, subject to more discussion and at any rate would be 
stated in terms of a specific date or after ratification of an agreement 
by all states, whichever was the later. He noted that all the provisions 
would require a treaty and thus be subject to ratification, although the 
President could, by executive agreement, stop testing.
Ambassador Wadsworth reviewed our position on the nuclear testing 
issue in the United Nations. He recalled that many of our friends had felt 
at the 12th General Assembly that testing should be stopped and that the 
vote on the issue had been a lot less favorable to us than in the past. Since 
the 12th General Assembly the feeling among the great majority of the 
delegations in New York was that the United States should stop testing. 
Even the SYG had said this publicly. He noted that these people appre­
ciate our need for continued testing, but feel that the unilateral Soviet 
cessation has changed the situation. He said that there will be a strong 
movement next fall for a resolution calling for cessation and that while 
this might not be successful, we certainly will lose many of our former 
supporters to the abstention list. He noted that this problem had many 
facets: for instance, a too rigid position by the U.S. may seriously jeopar­
dize public opinion in countries where we have military installations. He 
reported that the SYG felt on the basis of his Moscow trip that the USSR 
wants summit talks more than anything else. They object to our DC–SC 
procedure because they believe it is a trick to prevent a summit meet­
ing. They are also suspicious of the March 31 tripartite note for the same 
reason, feeling that the proposed preparatory talks would be used as a 
strategem to avoid a summit meeting. He reiterated his feeling that the 
testing question had gone far beyond being a theoretical problem. Even 
the Norwegians and Danes were becoming increasingly restive. Many 
nations of the world were hysterical and panic stricken at the thought of 
possible effects from fallout from nuclear testing. USUN feels we need a 
broad move at this juncture.
General Fox asked if the Secretary of State would have to tip our 
hand concerning any proposals we might make during the course of 
the preparatory talks, or whether we could have a surprise demarche 
such as the Open Skies proposal, which had a great impact at Geneva.
