466  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
wanted formal limits. This represented a major difference and we 
hoped the Soviets would study our proposal carefully.
The Secretary said non-­circumvention was a subject that had been 
discussed in Geneva. Shevardnadze knew we had a longstanding obli-
gation to cooperate with the United Kingdom on SLBMs. This would 
continue and START could not affect this commitment. We could not 
accept constraints on our commitment to support the independent 
British nuclear deterrent. That commitment had been made over a 
period of decades by several U.S. presidents. During this period the 
U.S. and USSR had reached agreements, SALT I and SALT II, neither 
of which had affected the continuing U.S. program of cooperation 
with the UK. So it was our position that we did not need any non-­
circumvention clause at all. Customary international law made it clear 
that states had an obligation not to circumvent the intent of a treaty. 
We would, of course, scrupulously comply with our treaty obligations. 
Therefore, the provision proposed by the Soviets would not in any way 
strengthen that obligation. The Secretary urged the Soviets to remove 
this impediment to concluding a START Treaty by dropping their pro-
posed non-­circumvention clause.
Shevardnadze replied that a non-­circumvention provision was sim-
ply necessary. The Soviets did understand U.S. relations with the UK, 
but they believed a solution could be found. Unless we recorded our 
joint attitude at the level of principle, we would open up dangerous 
opportunities for transfer of strategic weapons to other countries. For 
this reason, the principle of non-­circumvention should be recorded in 
the treaty. As for the U.S. relationship with the UK, we could find some 
proviso to make clear the non-­circumvention clause did not call into 
question U.S. commitments. This should be acceptable to the U.S. side, 
Shevardnadze stated, if the key question for the U.S. was compliance 
with its obligations to Britain.
Ambassador Burt said this sounded very constructive. In Geneva, 
however, the Soviets had proposed a very detailed provision that 
referred to technology transfer. In INF, by contrast, a more general sen-
tence had been proposed. Why was such complex language needed in 
START and not in INF?
Shevardnadze replied that he was not sure; perhaps the Soviets had 
failed to finalize something in the INF Treaty. Deputy Foreign Minister 
Karpov said that the point was that in INF we were destroying two 
classes of missiles, so we could limit the issue to non-­transfer of those 
systems. But in START, strategic offensive arms would remain in exis-
tence, so the question was more complicated; we had to deal with the 
technology as well as the systems.
