10 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI You may want to ask Frank Carlucci to review NATO issues with you over the next few months. (I talked to Frank yesterday and suggested a conversation. He agreed.) START: The IISS conference outside London was organized by Hans Binnendijk (formerly with the SFRC and Senators Percy and Lugar). Our allies like the arms control process (frequent consultations, summits, NATO meetings, involvement in US-Soviet relationship) as much as they do the results. After years of the process, many conference participants claimed not to know if we understood why we were in START or how we fit it into our larger strategic concept. They don’t seem to see “stability” and a lessened first-­strike threat as enough but aren’t sure what else or more they’d recommend. The European participants, and some Americans, had one valid critique: the US hasn’t thought through its future (START-­constrained) force structure.5 This leads to their fear that after INF banned long-­ range ballistic missiles and ground-­launched cruise missiles, START will further delink us from Europe. In fact, they fear we won’t be able to maintain our commitment of 400 SLBM warheads to NATO as we reduce. Several ideas such as surface or submarine based SLCMs (if Paul Nitze’s proposal to denuclearize the Navy can be beat back), or long-­range ALCMs were explored. It was a tossup whether it would be politically easier to deploy new ground-­launched systems or to deploy tactical air-­to-­surface missiles on dual-­capable aircraft (I think it would be tough either way but on aircraft, they’re far less visible—­at least until one crashes). Alternatively, a sea-­based system keeps the commitment but is unseen, thus losing the reassurance effect on one hand, and not meeting Helmut Kohl’s criteria that he who benefits should accept basing on their soil. Brent Scowcroft was somewhat critical of START but concluded saying it should be ratified. Brent’s main critique was that if START was intended to lead to greater stability then missiles should be de-MIRV’d by going to a small mobile such as Midgetman. Hal Sonnenfeldt was concerned with “fluidity”—­we are negotiating over forces we’re still debating at home, such as, mobile ICBMs, small ICBMs, advanced technology bombers, and SLCMs. Sonnenfeldt also felt reductions and stability are not central issues unless we have a settled strategic doctrine. Hal felt we couldn’t plunge off into new negotiations as there will be infinite disputes about Soviet compliance.6 5 Bush underlined this sentence. 6 Bush drew a vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this paragraph.
