134
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
45.
Study Prepared in the Office of Research and Reports,
Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, September 22, 1951.
THE IMPORTANCE AND AVAILABILITY OF IRANIAN OIL TO
THE USSR UNDER PEACETIME CONDITIONS
[Omitted here is a Foreword.]
Summary
For the purposes of this paper it is assumed that: (1) the USSR will
be willing to invest the necessary effort to exploit Iranian oil; (2) the
USSR will gain unlimited access to Iranian oil production under cir-
cumstances short of global war;2 and (3) the USSR and Iran will not
have access to US–UK controlled tankers or technicians.
This paper is limited to a discussion of the developments during
the first year of substantial oil shipments from Iran to the Soviet Orbit.
It does not consider the transition period3 that would be necessary for
starting up the refinery and acquiring such transportation facilities as
additional tankers and railroad rolling stock as might be needed.
The potential importance of Iranian oil to the Soviet Orbit is indi-
cated by the estimate that during the first year following the transition
period the Soviet Orbit could import and utilize approximately
2,900,000 metric tons of petroleum products. The USSR, if necessary,
could supply the technicians and materials required to operate the re-
finery at this level. The volume of imports could be increased in subse-
quent years as more and more transportation facilities become avail-
able and the level of production rises.
Of the 2.9 million tons of petroleum products which the Soviet
Orbit could import during the first year, the USSR could provide
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, ORR Files, Job 79S01097A, Box 1, Folder 14,
SIC/Z–14L(1)/51, The Importance and Availability of Iranian Oil to the USSR under
Peacetime Conditions. Top Secret; SUEDE; Dissemination to U.S. Personnel Cleared for
Special Intelligence Information. Sent to DCI, G–2, ONI, AIR, State, AFSA, NSC, JCS, and
OCI.
2 The bulk of Iranian petroleum products must be moved to the USSR by sea
through waters dominated by Western powers. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 This paper makes no attempt to estimate either the time required to place the
Abadan facilities in production again or the length of time necessary to put into operation
the rail and sea transportation facilities for carrying Abadan production. The refinery has
been shut down since 1 August 1951. AIOC officials estimate it would take their own
technicians two to three months to restore full operation of the refinery. Technicians not
experienced with the plant might require up to nine months to restore full production.
[Footnote is in the original.]
