508
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Throughout these negotiations I have consulted closely with the
Congress, and sought to respond to the needs of individual Members.
Wherever possible, we have attempted to include in the package fea-
tures to add political buoyance to offset those negative aspects we
could not avoid. At the present time, because we do not yet know fully
what concessions our trading partners will be able to deliver, it is not
possible to say whether the package is a net plus or net minus in terms
of domestic political acceptability. It is probably one of those issues that
will hurt in the short run and be praised in later years.
As our consultations with Congress have progressed, I have noted
a steady chilling in the atmosphere on Capitol Hill, exemplified most
recently in the soundings we have taken regarding obtaining an exten-
sion of the waiver on countervailing duties. Congressional concerns
over import penetration in sensitive sectors, such as steel and textiles,
combined with large trade deficits, have created an atmosphere which
is the worst imaginable in which to seek approval of the results of the
Tokyo Round. I cannot overemphasize this negative attitude that pre-
vails, even among some of the most ardent supporters of a liberal trade
policy.
It is my present view that the final package will be adopted, but
only after a bruising and costly fight. It will pit the relatively small and
disorganized, although highly respected, constituency which supports
liberal trade against a formidable coalition of labor and management
from numerous industries, most notably textiles, steel, dairies, and
chemicals. It will require an effort on the part of the Administration not
a great deal less than was mounted in the case of the Panama Canal
Treaties4 and the natural gas compromise,5 and the chance of success is
little, if any better. Needless to say a failure would be a major setback
for the Administration and for the credibility of the United States in its
international economic relations. It could also trigger a world-wide
protectionist retrenchment that would endanger the western world’s
economic prosperity as well as political stability. Obviously, we must
go forward. While the agreements themselves certainly will not dra-
4 Reference is to the Carter administration’s effort to secure ratification of the
Panama Canal Treaties concerning Panamanian control and operation of the Panama
Canal. The United States and Panama signed the two treaties in September 1977, but the
Senate did not vote to ratify them until March and April 1978.
5 Reference is to the agreement on the pricing of natural gas reached in April 1978
by members of Congress with help from Carter administration officials. (Steven Rattner,
“Conferees on Energy Agree on Gas Pricing, Ending Long Impasse,” The New York Times,
April 22, 1978, p. 1) On September 19, the Senate rejected an attempt by opponents of the
bill to send it back to a House–Senate conference committee for changes. (Richard L.
Lyons, “Senators Reject Attempt To Scuttle Gas Compromise,” The Washington Post, Sep-
tember 20, 1978, p. A1)
