National Security Policy 293 time periods by which we believe each specific accomplishment could be achieved. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. The USSR has continued to press ahead with its extensive guided missile research and development, generally along the lines indicated in our previous estimates. As a result of this effort, the USSR now has available for operational use a variety of missile systems. Soviet achievements in ballistic missiles have been especially impressive and have contributed to early successes in the USSR’s space flight program. Substantial success in developing surface-­to-­air missile systems has also been achieved. Available evidence is not sufficient to indicate equal emphasis and similar success in other Soviet missile programs. 2. By itself, each of the guided missile or space programs estimated as a future development appears feasible both as to technical achiev­ ability and date attainable. However, some programs may be slowed or even halted by the competition of other missile or non-­missile delivery systems, unforeseen development or production difficulties, rapidity of obsolescence, changing military requirements, and/or broad con­ siderations of Soviet national policy. On the other hand, a significant advance in one or more of the programs might be possible if a scientific breakthrough is achieved. 3. Surface-­to-­surface missiles. We believe that the Soviet ballistic mis­ sile development program has emphasized reliability and simplicity, rather than miniaturization or extreme refinement of design. System mobility appears to have been a basic consideration since the early developmental stages. In developing longer-­range systems maximum use has been made of proven components. 4. Since 1954 the USSR has probably had available for operational use ballistic missiles with maximum ranges of about 100 nautical miles (n.m.), 200 n.m. and 350 n.m. We believe that, depending upon various operational factors, nuclear, high explosive (HE) or chemical (CW) war­ heads would be used with these missiles.5 In addition, the USSR proba­ bly now has operational a very short range anti-­tank missile equipped with shaped-­charge HE warhead. 5. An extensive Soviet program to develop a 700 n.m. ballistic mis­ sile is indicated by a long series of test firings, averaging about two per month since 1955. We estimate that this missile probably became oper­ ational in 1956. On the basis of about a dozen test firings over the past year, we estimate that the USSR will also probably have operational in 1958 a modification of the 700 n.m. missile, capable of an 1,100 n.m. 5 Estimated nuclear warhead capabilities for these and other missiles discussed in this estimate are given in Annex C (limited distribution under separate cover). [Footnote is in the original.]
