270 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV garrisons in Berlin, just as it could have done in earlier decades; moreover, the Soviet reckoning of the results of escalating such a localized confrontation would not be very different from what it was before. The Soviets would still have to count on the dangers of a major engagement of large ground forces and its potential for escalation to one or another degree of nuclear warfare. In addition, INR would note that the arms control motives attributed to the Soviets in the Estimate are essentially those which would apply to any participant in arms control negotiations. For example, they reflect a desire to prevent or slow the competition in areas where they are disadvantaged, and the desire to trade minimal restraint on their side for maximum restraint on the other. The Soviets probably see a range of potential benefits—­political and economic as well as military—­in arms control. At the same time, however, they also realize that there are practical limits to what arms control negotiations can accomplish. [Omitted here is the body of the estimate.] 63. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 9, 1978 SUBJECT National Security Council Meeting and Lunch with the JCS—Wednesday, May 10. You are having lunch tomorrow with Harold and the JCS, followed by a half-­hour NSC meeting. The central focus of both meetings is the Defense Consolidated Guidance (CG). The lunch will also give you the opportunity to touch on some particularly sensitive matters with the JCS, especially those related to SALT and CTB; you may also want to use the lunch to cover some of the broader policy issues raised by the CG. At the NSC meeting you may want to move into some of the more important program issues raised in the CG. Your book contains back-­up material and NSC analysis of the CG, though it is not essential that you read this material for these meetings. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 101, Meetings: President/V-B-B & Turner Breakfasts, Luncheons & Meeting Topics: 1978. Secret. The date is handwritten. Carter initialed the first page of the memorandum and wrote at the bottom of it: “Perceptions NATO PRC— ANZUS—ASEAN—Japan—Korea MidEast/Persian Gulf Eastern Europe Turkey/ Greece.”
