December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
557
The purpose of this paper is to explain what has been achieved, the
role the United States has played, and the issues that remain. While
much information has been made public about the negotiations, pre-
serving the integrity of the negotiating process has required that the
talks be conducted confidentially. In such a situation and when issues
of a highly technical nature are involved, some confusion and misap-
prehension are bound to arise.
The United States has been a full partner in this process, as at
Camp David, because peace in the Middle East is crucial to its national
interests and to the peace and security of its friends there. We are in-
volved in the Middle East because of our permanent historic and moral
commitment to the State of Israel, because of our friendships and im-
portant interests in the Arab world, because of the strategic importance
of moderate government there, and because renewed tension or war-
fare in the area carries the risk of confrontation between the major
powers, severe global economic dislocation, and strains in relations
with our friends and allies. We have been able to participate in the
process and to play the role of partner because we enjoy the confidence
of both sides.
Where the Treaty Package Stands
Two Framework Agreements were signed by President Sadat and
Prime Minister Begin, and witnessed by President Carter, on Sep-
tember 17: A Framework for Peace in the Middle East, and A Frame-
work for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel.7
The first sets out broad guidelines for peace between Egypt and Israel
and between Israel and its other neighbors including the Palestinians,
with the objective of achieving a comprehensive peace; it describes in
some detail a framework for the West Bank and Gaza; it enunciates
general principles governing negotiations between Egypt and Israel;
and it sets out associated principles that should apply to peace treaties
between Israel and each of its neighbors. In the Framework for the Con-
clusion of a Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel, the Parties set out
the broad outlines for this peace treaty.
As a result of the negotiations that began on October 12, the frame-
work agreed upon at Camp David has been translated into a set of de-
tailed documents which comprise a treaty package. Agreement has
been reached on most of these documents. But as of December 17, nei-
ther Party is prepared to agree on all of the elements of the treaty
package. Until there is agreement on the complete package, there
cannot be a peace treaty.
7 For the text of these two documents, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp.
1523–1528.
