International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1023
308.
Report by the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy1
Washington, January 1978
U.S. INTERNATIONAL POPULATION POLICY
SECOND ANNUAL REPORT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Annual Report, agreed to by the eighteen agencies repre-
sented on the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy, reviews popu-
lation trends and program developments, broadly and on a country-
specific basis, and reaches certain conclusions as to how to achieve
better results in coping with this complex problem.
We recognize the adverse effects of current high developing
country population growth which results in: possible worldwide food
shortages, rising unemployment, frustrated economic development
amongst poorer nations, widespread environmental deterioration,
overcrowded cities where living conditions for countless millions are
worsening, social unrest, and both national and international tensions.
Above all, excessive population growth contributes in a major way to
the suffering and poverty of countless millions and limits the prospects
for a better life for their children.
While the pace of population growth seems to be slackening, it re-
mains too high in too many developing countries, where most couples
seem to desire at least four surviving children rather than the one, two,
or three that would make population stabilization possible sometime in
the next century.
Fortunately, there is mounting international attention to this situa-
tion, reflected in the fact that at least three-quarters of the people in the
developing world live in countries whose governments have recently
adopted population programs related to their economic development
plans. There are also increasing amounts of donor assistance from gov-
ernments, international organizations (especially the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) and the World Bank (IBRD)),
as well as from private organizations, prominently including the Inter-
national Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF). We strongly support
increasing U.S. contributions for the Agency for International Develop-
ment’s (AID) population programs, which, aside from their intrinsic
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780054–1154. No
classification marking. Sent under cover of a March 15 memorandum from Tarnoff to
Brzezinski. Forwarded to all diplomatic and consular posts as Airgram A–1345, April 5.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780052–1723)
