Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX League, transfer of League headquarters from Cairo, and expulsion of Egypt from the Arab Mutual Defense Pact. Such sanctions were agreed to at the Baghdad summit last November.3 On the important question of economic sanctions, Saud said his government would “maintain its economic contacts with Egypt” and continue “current commitments.” Further economic commitments were ruled out. [handling restriction not declassified] A contributing factor to Saudi attitudes is skepticism about US willingness to guarantee Saudi security. Such doubts will not be easily or quickly overcome. Prince Saud did say, however, that Crown Prince Fahd wants to reschedule his visit to Washington—an indication in part of the great apprehension among Saudi leaders that their “Arab commitments” will undermine the “special relationship.” [handling restriction not declassified] We expect considerable vacillation from the Saudis as their key leaders consider their next step. Barring dramatic treaty language or unilateral Israeli gestures on linkage, however, we expect a gradual and reluctant slide by Saudi Arabia into an Arab consensus position condemning the treaty and imposing sanctions, possibly including new limits on economic aid. [handling restriction not declassified] Iraq, Syria, and Libya will do their best to quickly push reluctant Arab governments into unqualified condemnation of the treaty and President Sadat. The actual treaty language is probably immaterial and unlikely to affect the attitude of the hardliners. The moderating role played by Syria and Iraq in the recent Yemeni conflict—after Saudi efforts to defuse the crisis had failed—probably gives them added leverage with the Saudis. In the short term, the peace treaty will quicken the pace of Syrian-Iraqi reconciliation, particularly in the area of foreign policy and military cooperation. [handling restriction not declassified] We look for Palestinian groups to show their anger over a treaty by: —Attempted acts of terrorism by radical Palestinians against Egyptian, Israeli, and perhaps US targets in Europe, the Middle East, and Israel proper. —Encouragement for continued protests by Palestinians in the occupied territories, and Palestinian demonstrations in Lebanon. It is possible that Yasir Arafat and the more moderate Palestinian majority will temporize briefly while they examine the terms of the peace for Palestinian gains and assess the reaction of other Arabs. Such restraint will likely soon give way if the Arab world, as seems likely, in-
