498  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Science Board. Senior levels in the DOD are unusually concerned about 
and focused on C3I issues currently. (U)
To date, net assessments of US and Soviet C3 have achieved:
—Improved and more orderly data bases on the subject;
—Descriptive characterizations of the two sides’ programs;
—Better understanding of the contrasting priority and place in 
overall military strategy assigned by the US and the USSR to C3 and 
C3I.
—Better understanding of the contrasting technology, manage-
ment, and organizational approaches applied by the two sides. (C)
The analyses of OSD/NA have by and large agreed with the now 
widely held judgment that the Soviets have sought and achieved a 
more robust and enduring C3 infrastructure at all levels of military 
operations than we. But these analyses have usefully stood apart from 
the crowd in emphasizing possible sources of vulnerability in both 
the physical structure of Soviet C3 and the Soviet organizational style, 
i.e., high degrees of centralization.5 By the same token, OSD/NA has 
stressed potential US strengths that could be exploited, e.g., superior 
communications technology, a rich civilian communications system, 
decentralized styles of management and command. The work of this 
office has also stressed the importance of basic doctrine, training, and 
organizational patterns. It has stimulated the study of counter-C3 tac-
tics by several operational commands. (S).
Thus, a good deal has been and continues to be done on C3I net 
assessments. OSD/NA is charged by Congress to produce an annual 
report. Further tasking by the NSC is not indicated. Further, the amor-
phous and large community that struggles with C3I as a problem of 
policy, resources, and programs is well charged up. It is most in need 
of a conceptual framework and policy guidance to shape its work. To some 
extent this can come from the Secretary of Defense. But, because much 
of the problem runs to the heart of defense policy and strategy, basic 
guidance must come from the President and the NSC. (C)
Strategy and C3I (U)
Clearly, military C3I capabilities we seek are a function of our strat-
egy. Even minimalist “fixes” to assure that SIOP execution messages 
get out represent strategic judgment as to the kind of war we expect to 
face and how we expect to fight. Beyond this, enhanced capabilities to 
manage crises, battles, and large conflicts at all relevant levels of vio-
lence; improving the survivability, endurance, and reconstitutability 
of such capabilities; relating such military capabilities to civil defense 
5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this and the previous 
sentence.
