It is idle to attempt to formulate a plan for the limitation of armament which attempts to change economic or natural laws, by taking into account deficiencies of weaker nations, in men, money, or munitions, on the theory of making the war potential of all nations adequate to meet all possible cases of aggression. Such an artificial effort to equalize what is not and can not be made equal is foredoomed to failure. QUESTION IV “Can there be said to be ‘offensive’ and ‘defensive’ armaments? “Is there any method of ascertaining whether a certain force is organized for purely defensive purposes (no matter what use may be made of it in time of war), or whether, on the contrary, it is established for the purposes of aggression?”

It would be very difficult if not practically impossible to say whether a particular armament is per se offensive or defensive. From a technical point of view, the terms “offensive” and “defensive” are employed as applying to the use of [or?] disposition of armaments rather than to armaments themselves. It is generally accepted by American military and naval authorities that a vigorous offense is the best defense. An inferior force may be used offensively and thereby obtain an initial advantage with a view to accomplishing a more efficient defense. It is quite conceivable that a nation considering her rights or her honor violated, although her armament may be no greater than would be generally considered necessary for the defense of her territory, would launch an offensive that would in reality be entirely in defense of her sovereign rights. Defensive peace armaments in the non-technical sense may be considered as those which are created and maintained solely for the internal and external security of the homeland and outlying possessions or dominions, and for the protection of the national rights throughout the world. Such armaments must not be confused with a police force, which is created and maintained to deal with domestic crime and disorder, and has no relation to national defense. As to the specific types of armament which may be
