Chapter 2, January–June 1989 113 that now, so we can pursue it much more seriously in Washington, to determine a realistic strategy for gaining Soviet acceptance. If all agree that falling off our sublimit proposal is primarily a tactical question, timing is not critical and we do not have to take this step before resumption. (You should keep in mind, however, that some have included dropping this sublimit as part of a negotiating package on new initiatives.) 3. Heavy ICBMs. A major U.S. objective in START has been to reduce Soviet heavy ICBMs. The Soviets have agreed to reduce their SS-18s by 50%. They have objected, however, to our proposed ban on flight-­testing, production, and modernization of heavies. The current issue is whether to modify our position and 1) seek the total elimination of heavy ICBMs and/or 2) modify our proposed bans. A significant consideration is the longstanding U.S. policy and legal requirement that any arms reduction agreement provide for U.S.- Soviet equality. Our current position would result in ultimate equality as the reliability of existing SS-18s degrades over time, the force ages and is retired. There are four options: — One option, favored in the PCC by OSD and Ambassador Rowny, would reach equality by eliminating all heavies, either during the 7-­year reduction period or over a longer period. Flight-­testing might be permitted during this period. — A second option is to stay with our current approach. — ACDA has proposed the third option, that we permit flight-­ testing in return for further (unspecified) cuts, but not the elimination of the SS-18. — The fourth option, favored in the PCC by State, JCS and DOE, would adopt a contingency position of the Reagan Administration, never tabled, that would permit flight-­testing and limited modernization of Soviet heavies (including the recently deployed SS-18 Mod 5) in return for an equal legal, but not practical, right for the U.S. to deploy a heavy ICBM. We believe an acceptable ultimate resolution of this issue probably rests along the lines of option four. In view of the history and significance of the issue, it must be handled with particular care. A proper tradeoff in the negotiations is not yet in view and nothing need be tabled in the first round. Your objective in this meeting should be to ensure that the issues and options are fairly stated. You should be aware that certain new initiatives and mobile ICBM options under consideration may decrease the number of heavies the Soviets may retain.
