34 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III —(After Cooper presents State’s adjustment assistance option)— Clearly from a foreign policy point of view this version of Option I is preferable; and it also has appeal as a means of aiding adjustment among workers, businesses and communities. —The ITC decision is too restrictive. It would trigger not only retaliation—but worse, emulation—we would risk a sudden burst of protectionist measures. Other nations would clearly see this as an excuse for imposing protectionist barriers for which these workers and industries are pressing hard. Callaghan and others have warned the President of this risk; and Mondale was also warned of it. The London Summit and relations with our allies and friends would be severely harmed, and there would be serious financial consequences due to curtailed capacity from such countries as Italy, Spain and Brazil. —The STR option would likely have a similar effect, and I am not convinced it can be modified to avoid triggering emulation or retaliation. I would, however, like to see the quota of 322 million pairs raised so that Spain and Brazil are not rolled back below 1976. Both have financial difficulties and both are extremely important politically. Clearly, it makes no economic or political sense to cut back their exports; they should have a higher level than 1976. This would improve Option III. Tab A Draft Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations-Designate (Strauss) to President Carter6 Washington, undated SUBJECT Nonrubber Footwear Import Relief Case Under the Trade Act’s provisions, you must decide by April 9 whether to grant relief to the domestic footwear industry in the form of restrictions on shoe imports, as recommended by the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC). The Commission recommended that a tariff of 40 percent be imposed on most nonrubber footwear imports above the 1974 level. The law allows you the option of deciding that such relief would not be in the national economic interest. A decision not to grant relief, 6 Confidential.
