International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1087
327.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts1
Washington, May 31, 1979, 0242Z
138588. For Ambassadors or Charge´ from the Secretary, inform
Consuls. Subject: Worldwide Status and Rights of Women.
1. A key objective of U.S. foreign policy is to advance worldwide
the status and conditions of women. I believe that special attention
should be given this issue as we approach the mid-way point in the
United Nations Decade for Women and the International Year of the
Child, and as we prepare for the Second Women’s World Conference,
scheduled to be held in Copenhagen in July 1980.
2. Despite the many commendable instruments and resolutions on
this subject, agreed to by virtually all nations, and despite some encour-
aging developments in recent years, the fact remains that progress has
been too slow. Women continue often to be victimized, their interests
and viewpoints overlooked, their educational and job opportunities
limited. Physical abuse of women persists to a shocking degree.
3. Mindful of the vital contribution which women can make to na-
tional development, the Congress in 1973 adopted the “Percy Amend-
ment” to the Foreign Assistance Act,2 which requires that our aid pro-
grams encourage and promote the participation of women in the
national economies of developing countries. Yet, the world commu-
nity, to a distressing degree, continues to be deprived of the full partici-
pation and talents of that most-overlooked asset of nations: women.
Meanwhile, urbanization and new technologies seem to create more
problems for women than for men.
4. Most effective in dealing with these problems will be the efforts
of women themselves, working together nationally and internationally,
but they need more active support of leaders, governments, and orga-
nizations, if the spirit of internationally approved resolutions is to be
translated into effective practice.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790246–0969. Un-
classified. Drafted by Good, Baer, and Green; cleared by Maynes, Dalley, Phyllis Oakley,
Bleakely, Cheshes, Schwebel, Graham, and Jennone Walker; approved by Wisner. In a
May 25 handwritten note from Green to Newsom, found attached to the May 8 draft tele-
gram to certain diplomatic posts (see footnote 3, Document 325), Green alluded to the
lengthy process involved in preparing the Department’s statement: “I would hope that at
long last we could get the message out. I have toiled on this for 2 years, fighting off efforts
by IO to make this even longer, and incorporating the many additions pushed by ICA,
AID and others who cleared.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P790085–0880)
2 See footnote 2, Document 324.
