1956  743
they want to come home. We all know they are being prevented from 
doing so, in spite of clear promise made on Sept 10 last year.
L. Mr. Ambassador, 250, 2,500, or 5,000 empty and fanciful charges 
unsupported by facts, unsupported by any evidence, unsupported by 
Indian Embassy, cannot balance off these thirteen Americans. Nor can 
any number hypothetical cases obscure or justify attempt your govt use 
these 13 Americans extract political concessions.
M. If your govt is really interested improving our relations, it 
will no longer delay in carrying out its obligation with respect these 
13 Americans.
70. Wang replied with prepared statement amplified by ref pen­
ciled notes saying that previously in course about dozen meetings he 
had been repeatedly and concretely calling my attention to series of acts 
testifying to US violation Sept 10 agreement between both sides and 
had asked me to promptly stop those unjust acts. However, so far they 
had not witnessed any steps improve situation.
71. Wang said, instead their attention repeatedly been called to fact 
my govt obstructing departure Chinese from US. He did not see how 
our persistence in ignoring agreement could possibly help in further 
progress our talks.
72. Wang said inhuman treatment received by Chinese national 
Liu Yung-­ming sufficed demonstrate how cruel US Govt been in its ill 
treatment Chinese nationals in US who desire come back China. He 
would make further observations concerning case Liu in few minutes.
73. Wang said next he would call my attention concrete fact that US 
Govt compelling Chinese students obtain entrance permits ­Taiwan and 
apply for permanent residence. Chinese student, Mr. Tseng Kuang-­chih, 
wrote family 1952 that he would be coming home after graduation in US. 
However, recently New Years card reached family in which he wrote that 
he been obstructed from returning by US Govt many years and not been 
able return up to present, and that US Govt was trying induce him apply 
permanent residence.
74. Wang said another Chinese student, Mr. Chao Chung-­yun 
previously often wrote to family and he also indicated he would come 
back after completion studies. However letter from him mid-­August 
1955 stated US Govt insisting on keeping Chinese nationals in US and 
that US Govt was annoyed with those Chinese who insist on return­
ing home, and US Govt giving them lot of trouble and trying to com­
pel Chinese students who did not apply permanent residence in US to 
apply Taiwan entry permits instead.
75. Wang asked were not difficult plights encountered by these two 
Chinese to whose cases our attention been called, were not these cases 
clear evidence of US violation of agreed announcement?
