534 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI SDI work, but that they have no desire to do anything precipitous, surprising, or destabilizing. On balance, U.S. SDI progress is forcing the Soviets to deal with the future of deterrence. Therefore, SDI progress helps, not hurts, the Geneva talks. START Timetable 18. Permreps were naturally interested in when the START Treaty would be finished. Ambassador Burt told them the goal set by President Bush and President Gorbachev at Malta was to solve all outstanding major substantive issues by the summit. He said that both delegations intended to remain in Geneva until then, with short breaks for the Baker-Shevardnadze ministerial in early April and summit preparations in May or June. He was hopeful that a completed treaty would be ready for signature by the end of the year. In response to a specific question on this point from French Permrep Robin, Burt indicated that he did not anticipate that the resolution of U.S. position on funding mobile missiles system would affect the June summit timetable. START II 19. Ambassador Burt’s remarks in his prepared statement regarding Soviet proposals for START II attracted considerable interest from Permreps. Both the German and Canadian Permreps asked him about Soviet thinking regarding any follow-­on negotiations. Canadian Permrep Smith noted that former Soviet START negotiator Viktor Karpov had recently told the Canadians that the Soviets were very interested in limiting or reducing MIRV’s in future negotiations. 20. In response, Ambassador Burt said though the U.S. had not taken a formal position on START II, he had been authorized to listen to Soviet ideas on the subject. He had begun such discussions with his Soviet counterpart. He had noticed a definite shift in Soviet thinking. After World War II the Soviets had looked at nuclear weapons as little more than long-­range artillery. But their strategic planners had begun to do their homework and were beginning to adopt traditional U.S. concepts on strategic stability, e.g., benefits of deMIRVing. Ambassador Burt confirmed that the Soviets do seem interested in deMIRVing under a START II agreement as a way of achieving greater stability. Their development of the SS–25 clearly demonstrated such an interest. In addition, the Soviets had presented ideas on reducing first strike instabilities, reducing warhead concentrations, and reducing the overall vulnerability of systems. 21. Both Burt and Smith noted in replies to questions that the U.S. was prepared to listen to ideas on START II, but emphasized that the U.S. intended to approach the issue in a thoughtful and prudent manner. Burt observed that there was one school of thought that the U.S. should take some time to assess what had been achieved in START
