With regard to the obligations of the Chinese Government Railways the United States Government has adopted the position that obligations for materials supplied to the Chinese Government Railways “constitute a part of the operating expenses of the railways, and as such should be met before any charges on the surplus revenues are provided for, or before, in fact, it can be said that any surplus exists” or in other words, “that such obligations for equipment become a part of the operating expenses of the railways and as such form a prior lien on the actual earnings of the railways before any surplus can be said to exist,” which position was transmitted to the Chinese Government by the American Minister in his notes No. 168, May 18, 1922,27 and No. 219, July 7 [8], 1922.27 On September 27, 1923, the American Minister, in his note No. 627,27 addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, called attention to the fact that although almost a year had elapsed no reply had been received, covering the principle outlined above to the effect that “obligations for the payment of equipment become a part of the operating expenses of the railways and as such form a prior lien on the actual earnings of the railways before any surplus can be said to exist for the payment of bonded indebtedness.” To this note an answer has been received which entirely ignores the point at issue. In view of this continued disregard of the rights of American creditors of the Chinese Government, the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China urge that the State Department instruct the American Minister to bring more pressure on the Chinese Government and that he insist that immediate arrangements be made to meet the obligations incurred by the Chinese Government Railways for materials supplied. 13 Transmitted by the consul general at Shanghai with despatch no. 2026, Jan. 14, 1924. The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China consisted of representatives of American Chambers of Commerce at Shanghai, Hankow, Tientsin, Peking, and Harbin. 14 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 271. 15 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 682. 16 For text of note of Minister of Foreign Affairs, see ibid. , p. 696.
