738 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX sector. Consequently, increasing numbers of intellectuals and Government officials are considering getting out. This may help account for the recent rash of Romanian defections. We have no hard evidence of increased Soviet pressure on Romania to change its position on Poland, and Romania has refrained from the kind of polemics manifested by the East Germans and Czechoslovaks. Pressure on Ceausescu is likely to mount considerably if the Soviets intend to intervene in Poland. Most curiously, we have seen two separate reports of statements Ceausescu allegedly made in private to the effect that were the situation in Romania as precarious as in Poland, he would be prepared to invite the Soviets in to stabilize the situation. We should be more alert than usual when it comes to demonstrating our support for Romania’s independent position in the Warsaw Pact. Indications on any front of our support for Romania’s continued independent foreign policy course could be particularly important in helping it maintain its precarious political equilibrium in the coming months. Tangible evidence of U.S. interest in and support for Romania will be particularly important if the Soviets should intervene militarily in Poland and the Romanians should decline to participate in or endorse the intervention. 233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Romania1 Washington, December 19, 1980, 0454Z 334596. Madrid for CSCE—Greenwald and Davidson. Subject: Counselor’s Meeting With Bogdan. 1. C-entire text. 2. Summary. During a tour d’horizon with Counselor December 16, the Director for the Americas in the Romanian Foreign Ministry, Corneliu Bogdan, stressed Romania’s firm commitment to the continuation of the Helsinki process and urged the U.S. to keep an open mind about the venue of the follow-on conference. Bogdan believed the 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800603–0381. Confidential; Priority. Sent for information Priority to Madrid for the CSCE delegation. Sent for information to Warsaw, Moscow, and USNATO. Drafted by Becker; cleared by Bridges, Barry, and in HA; approved by Ridgway.
