552
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
series of codes should be emphasized along with the added disciplines
and increased transparency obtained throughout the trading system.
These key elements can serve to clearly identify the Tokyo Round as
“the fair trade round” since they outweigh the substantial but relatively
less important movements toward trade liberalization which are less
popular short term.
Furthermore, since tariff reductions as usual represent the most
distasteful element for those directly concerned, this aspect should be
downplayed to reflect its much diminished importance. Although the
exclusive aim in the first five rounds and clearly the predominant result
in the Kennedy Round, tariff actions account for no more than one
quarter of the scope of the Tokyo Round. To reflect properly their re-
duced standing, we should differentiate our reports and commentaries
(including those from advisory groups) between (1) authority already
delegated to the Executive Branch by the Trade Act of 1974 (e.g.,
tariffs), and (2) the rest of the Tokyo Round results that require Con-
gressional approval. To do otherwise might encourage opinions to
follow traditional thinking on relative importance, thus focusing exces-
sive negative attention on this limited subject on which no further Con-
gressional approvals are required.
INITIAL IDEAS ON TRADE PROGRAM CONTENTS
The program should cover all three of the above subjects—in order
of importance: (1) the elements of a comprehensive trade program,
(2) benefits from the Tokyo Round, and (3) balanced tariff adjustments
by all major trading nations. Priority efforts should be aimed soon at
filling in the contents of the overall program since, with their domestic
focus, they will influence predominately the attitudes of the general
public and members of Congress.
ELEMENTS OF A COMPREHENSIVE U.S. TRADE PROGRAM
Elements making up the comprehensive trade program should be
fundamental in nature and devoid of superficial gimmicks. They
should be sound and necessary policies for a successful, long-term U.S.
position in international trade. To the extent that items with less eco-
nomic impact are considered, they should be only those with wide pop-
ular appeal that would help significantly to expand the positive con-
stituencies for the program. An initial list of program elements would
include the following:
A. Investment Incentives
The greatest trade threat that the United States faces is the possi-
bility of its vast productive base becoming obsolete and uncompetitive.
For this reason, a foundation stone for any effective trade program over
time must be an incentive program to encourage new investments and
