National Security Policy 19 Defense Reorganization—The President recounted to the Leadership the developments in regard to Defense reorganization. He said it seemed clear to him, though he might be speculating a bit, that the majority of the people over in the Pentagon desired to avoid any radical change since they felt the best chance of securing some improvement rested on a cautious approach to a number of relatively small things. The President said that Secretary McElroy appeared to be adamant on his right to establish new agencies within DoD as required for new developments. It also seemed clear that he hoped to get a greater degree of flexibility in the use of funds for new developments. He added that Bill Foster was strong for a tightening up of Defense organization all along the line. The President then said that he had listened to their plans for two and a half hours the preceding Saturday morning at the Pentagon and everything seemed to be in terms of “little improvements,” whereupon he challenged them to say how they were going to do something real instead of glossing over the problem. The President asserted to the Leadership that if something good did not come out of the Pentagon study, he would have to take the bull by the horns, otherwise he would lose his own self respect after having been into this business for eleven years. Presently, however, he very much wanted those in the Pentagon to develop an effective plan if they could so that subsequently they would be able to go to Congress and support the plan enthusiastically. Failing in this, the President continued, he would only be able to call in the Leadership, includ­ ing Democrats, in an effort to try to get direct Congressional support. He then restated his hope that it would not become a situation where the Defense people would be going to Congress opposed to what he thought we needed. Asked by Senator Knowland how much could be done under administrative authority, the President pointed out that administra­ tive action was sharply limited ever since Congress passed the law (National Security Act of 1947) and the President at that time signed it. The President then stated emphatically that at the very least Congress ought to repeal some of the restrictions on the Executive’s abil­ ity to shape organization. He strongly desired to see that all the strategic planning and the power to organize and direct the several unified com­ mands would be vested right in the Office of the Secretary of Defense. He asserted also that it was necessary to establish the authority of a unified commander to be the disciplinary director, as well as the policy director, of all Services in his command rather than continuing the present situa­ tion whereby the head of a unified command has to report the improper conduct to others and ask that they do something about it.
