Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
103
of freedom elsewhere.”2 Then, in his confirmation hearings, Secretary
Vance stated that “we must have policies based upon fundamental
values. In particular, we must stand for human rights.”3
The concern for human rights will be woven into the fabric of our
foreign policy. If we are to do justice to our goals, we must act always
with a concern to achieve practical results and with an awareness of the
other demands on our diplomacy. When it is desirable to do so, we will
speak out, trying to be neither strident nor polemical. This is not a
one-way street, and we must expect that at times others may criticize
us. We may decide to communicate by quiet diplomacy with the
country involved to see what can be accomplished that way. Or we
may prefer to approach the problem not bilaterally, but through multi-
lateral channels. In some instances of human rights violations, assist-
ance programs may be curtailed, but we must also recognize that to be
evenhanded, we should not just penalize but also inspire, persuade,
and reward.
Already our commitment has prompted definite actions. In pur-
suit of the goal of majority rule and equal rights in Southern Rhodesia,
we have urged the Congress to repeal the Byrd amendment.4 The State
Department expressed concern for the fate of human rights activists in
Eastern Europe, and President Carter wrote to Nobel Peace Prize
winner Andrey Sakharov to convey directly our hopes for the promo-
tion of human rights.5 As part of a continuing review process, we de-
cided to cut the level of security assistance to several countries because
of concern over human rights violations.6 We will be instructing our
Embassies to press the cause of human rights through private contacts.
We are playing an active part in the work of the [U.N.] Human Rights
Commission.
As an example of our humanitarian concern for the uprooted and
dispossessed, I would observe that during fiscal year 1976 our gov-
ernment has expended some $475 million on assistance to refugees on a
worldwide basis, and the United States accepted 31,000 refugees for
permanent resettlement in this country. We are of course continuing
our generous assistance to refugees in the current year.
2 See Document 15.
3 See Document 14.
4 See footnote 10, Document 19.
5 The President wrote to Sakharov on February 5. His letter is printed in Foreign Re-
lations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 5.
6 During Vance’s February 24 appearance before the Senate Committee on Appro-
priations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations (see Document 22), he indicated that the
Department had requested reduced aid to Argentina, Ethiopia, and Uruguay in the pro-
posed FY 1978 foreign military and security assistance legislation. (Bernard Gwertzman,
“Security Links Cited,” The New York Times, February 25, 1977, p. A–1)
