March 1952–February 1953
399
He as the leading figure Moslem world was issuing call for internatl
Moslem conference take place soon in Iran thru which he hoped create
Moslem world unity. United Moslem world would devote itself to
combatting aggressive communism, tyrannical imperialism, and colo-
nialism. He needed US help in his enterprise which if successful would
prevent another world war. If US was really working for peace and
against oppression it should give him help.
3. When I asked him what kind help he needed he said he was not
asking for money. What he wanted was for US to come out openly
against imperialism and colonialism as it had come out against com-
munism. If US should remain silent in face of imperialistic and colonial
policies of UK and France, opponents of imperialism and colonialism
could only draw inference that US was partner of imperialist and colo-
nial powers. I told him US was against imperialism and against kind of
oppression of colonies which was usually referred to as colonialism.
Main objective US at present, however, was to obtain maximum unity
of forces of free world in combatting internatl communistic aggression
which was greatest threat world peace. This unity could not be ob-
tained if one mbr free world wld publicly attack other members of free
world for certain practices or policies which it did not happen to ap-
prove. In present world situation US was of opinion it could contribute
most to cause of peace by endeavoring through persuasion and by pri-
vate conversations to prevail upon other free countries to desist from
policies or practices which might seem contrary to spirit of UN.
Kashani said only real way to combat imperialism and colonialism was
to come out publicly against them. If US should not openly take sides in
this struggle he would denounce it just as much as he intended to de-
nounce countries guilty of imperialism and colonialism. He gave
number alleged illustrations of US partnership with imperialism and
colonialism and oppression in general, touching particularly on Mo-
rocco, Tunisia, Egypt, and Palestine. He said US partnership with im-
perialist powers in exploiting weaker peoples not in keeping with prin-
ciples to which US maintained it adhered. Turning to Iran he wanted to
know why if US was not taking side of imperialism it was supporting
Brit blockade by boycotting Iranian oil. It was difficult to explain to ex-
citable and unreasoning person like Kashani why Iranian oil was not
being sold to US. I did my best however do so.
4. In spite of his intemperate language Kashani seemed to be in
personally friendly mood and from time to time softened conversation
with jokes and anecdotes. I do not know what he intends to discuss
during our next conversation. He may be more specific in indicating
kind of help he would like have. Few days ago Busheri, former mbr
Mosadeq’s cabinet who is on friendly terms with Kashani, intimated to
me that Kashani wld be happy if US cld help finance cost of transport of
