1538  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
413.	 Letter From Herter to Killian1
Washington, January 23, 1959
Dear Jim:
As you know the draft technical annex tabled by our delegation 
in Geneva on 16 December left open the question of what techniques 
would be included for the detection of high altitude explosions. Our 
delegation suggested to the Russians that a technical working group 
consider the problem of high altitude detection in view of the fact that 
the conference of experts last summer did not recommend any spe­
cific techniques for inclusion in the control system. Our delegation has 
asked for instructions on how this problem should be handled in the 
negotiations.
It appears to us that there are two possible approaches to this 
problem:
1. We could press for inclusion now of specific provisions for 
detecting high altitude explosions based on such knowledge as we 
have at present. Responsibility for recommended changes or improve­
ments in the system could be vested in the control commission in the 
light of further information and experience.
2. We could omit any specific high altitude detection system from 
the treaty but give the control commission responsibility for developing 
such a system within a given period of time. In this event the right of 
withdrawal would have to be protected if the commission were unable 
to agree on an appropriate high altitude detection system.
The Department of Defense has advised us that they do not favor 
incorporating provisions for high altitude detection at the present time, 
and thus apparently would prefer the second alternative. The Soviet del­
egation in Geneva has generally taken the position that the control com­
mission should bear responsibility for the development of changes in or 
additions to the system and that for the present we should proceed on 
the basis of the Experts’ report. In order to prepare for a governmental 
decision on which course to take I would like to request that you con­
vene a suitable panel of experts to consider this question in the light of 
the relevant technical factors. I believe it would be useful if such a group, 
in the course of their considerations, could look into the feasibility of 
conducting usefully instrumented outer space nuclear tests, both on the 
part of the Soviet Union and ourselves, within the next two four-­year 
periods, the firmness of the information presently available on which to 
base a high altitude detection system, and the possible implications for 
1 Source: Proposes panel of experts to examine detection of high altitude tests. Con­
fidential. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/1–2359.
