December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
737
6. His ability to use personal relationships in such a constructive
manner as this, which heretofore I personally had seen only in much
less significant situations.
For me personally, this of course is a tremendously meaningful ex-
perience. To play even a very small role in the achievement of peace in
the Middle East between Israel and Egypt, hopefully portending a long
term of peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors throughout the re-
gion, is something that I would have hoped to do, but never dared ex-
pect to do, or to be even a small part of, except for the fortuitous rela-
tionship which Jimmy Carter and I have developed with each other
over the past six or seven years.
Perhaps incorrectly, I feel that one of the reasons which has made
Jimmy Carter so tenacious in his efforts to bring about this peace in the
Middle East, even though probably subconsciously, is his relationship
with me, personally. Obviously there are even more compelling
reasons for him to have done so, but it is a source of tremendous satis-
faction to me that I have this particular feeling and it makes a lot of the
effort of the past four or five years worthwhile.
And, it also makes the “slings and arrows” of the last two years,
particularly from Jewish people and Jewish groups, lose their sting and
dull the pain.
Bob Lipshutz
210.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, March 14, 1979
The attached reflects an oral expression of opinion by Secretary
Vance in a discussion2 at the Cairo airport on March 13, 1979, with Pres-
ident Carter, President Sadat and Prime Minister Khalil.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 8, Final Treaty Package. Secret. On
March 14, Vance sent the letter to Cairo in an unnumbered telegram while en route to
Washington in Air Force One. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Ma-
terial, Cables File, Middle East, Box 48, 3/6–15/79)
2 See Document 202.
