1126  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Brooks pointed out that this provision had been agreed upon for sev-
eral months, and had been discussed extensively when negotiated. 
Brooks noted that in recent days the sides had agreed that differences 
greater than three percent would be called variants, but there could also 
be variants which differed by less than three percent. Therefore, Brooks 
said, how could the Soviet side stand by language which called for the 
exhibition of variants, agree that variants would be listed in the MOU, 
but say that these particular variants did not count?
10.  After a long recess to allow the Soviet delegation to confer pri-
vately, Nazarkin asked Brooks to read the language that the U.S. side 
wanted to include in para 5(a) of Annex 11. Brooks said that following 
“SS–25, SS–24, SS–18” the U.S. side wanted to insert ”, and variants 
thereof.” Nazarkin said that the Soviet side would accept the U.S. lan-
guage. (Comment: It is clear that this was a last ditch attempt by the 
military-industrial representatives to gain lost ground. Though not 
directly witnessed, it appears that the MFA and general staff represen-
tatives made a stand against this attempt. This interpretation was later 
confirmed, though obliquely, by Nazarkin to Brooks. End Comment.)
Miscellaneous
11.  Nazarkin said that he also wanted to confirm agreements 
reached on other matters. First, he said that the Soviet side accepted 
the proposal made by Sample earlier in the day concerning locational 
restrictions on solid rocket motors. This included language to go in 
the agreed statement, Article IV, and relevant provisions of the MOU, 
Annex I.
12.  Nazarkin also said that the sides had reached agreement in 
principle on the thirty-fifth agreed statement on the subject of dual 
inspections. He asked whether the U.S. side had specific language to 
propose. Brooks said that he had some language, and would provide it 
in the morning.
13.  Nazarkin said that he wanted to confirm the language for the 
agreed statement on retired and former types agreed to earlier by Ifft 
and Masterkov. Brooks agreed.
14.  Brooks noted that if the sides were to make a joint plenary 
statement on weighing, he needed a reaction to the U.S. draft. Nazarkin 
said that the Soviet side accepted the U.S. language in full.
15.  Nazarkin also noted that the sides needed to finalize the 
third country basing letters, which needed some updating from the 
November, 1990 drafts. Brooks agreed.
16.  Documents exchanged: None.
Brooks
