March 1952–February 1953
267
him Prime Minister would be issued and that in meantime Qavam
should at once assume responsibilities of Prime Minister. Qavam
turned from telephone to officers and told them that he expected them
to maintain complete law and order in Tehran. They were to act with
restraint. Nevertheless, they should make it clear that no (rpt no) dis-
turbances of any kind would be tolerated. Simultaneously, Qavam
gave orders that radio should inform public of his nomination as Prime
Minister and of his determination that law and order should be main-
tained in Tehran and throughout country. According to my informant,
certain manifestations which were being planned by various groups in
Tehran were hurriedly abandoned. Tanks were sent to quarters of city
where trouble might be expected. Both Chief Police and Mil. Gov. as-
sured Qavam that they were confident that with his backing they could
maintain order in Tehran with no (rpt no) difficulty.
5. According to my informant, he had long private talk with
Qavam early this morning during which Qavam discussed foreign pol-
icies and indicated, as he had on previous occasions, that Iran’s destiny
lay with Western world and that it was his intention cooperate closely
with West powers and gradually bring Iran into full and unequivocal
alignment with West.
6. According my informant, Qavam by no (rpt no) means jubilant
at his appointment. Instead, he feels great weight of responsibilities
and is looking particularly to US for cooperation and understanding
during trying period which is ahead.
7. According to informant, Qavam called on Shah at 9:30 this
morning and spent over an hour in conversation with latter. Upon his
return he told informant that he thought Shah really had begun to trust
him and intended work with him loyally.
8. My informant stated that Cabinet probably not (rpt not) be se-
lected until July 19 or 20. Qavam has decided to retain Portfolio FA
temporarily for self. It also likely, according to informant, that Ala will
go as Amb Wash and Sen-Ti will be Min. Court. These matters, of
course, must be coordinated with Shah.
9. After leaving Embassy, informant repeated our conversation to
Qavam who sent him back to me with message to effect that receipt fi-
nancial aid was of utmost urgency; that he really should have it today
(rpt today) or tomorrow. It would be misinterpreted if he would ask
Brit. for such aid before opening oil negotiations and therefore US was
only hope. He asked if US really interested in saving Iran it move with
unprecedented speed.
Henderson
