Covert and Overt Operations
781
First, with Chancellor Schmidt, who said it is up to you Algerians
to help the whole world by keeping Iran-US conflict from further
deterioration. We know that the US has reached the end of its patience
and will not hesitate to undertake drastic measures and military opera-
tions with foreseeable consequences. Furthermore, Schmidt asked
Algeria to help Europe. Europe is in a conflict of conscience, for reasons
of principle, Europe cannot tolerate a continuation of the violation of
diplomacy represented by the seizure of hostages in Tehran. Europe
must show effective solidarity with the U.S. but Europe is also aware
of its own interests in the region, of the sacrifices involved for results
that are not immediate. Europe also worries over the consequences of
an isolation of Iran for whom the only salvation lies in Arab and
European countries in the face of the Soviet option. The second meeting
with Pertini was even more sharpened, Pertini spoke primarily on
behalf of Italy for whom the situation is tragic and for whom Algeria
is the one chance to lead Iran to its senses.
2.2. Both Schmidt and Pertini would like to get Algeria to act as
intermediary so that the government or the leadership of Iran will be
able to make “a decisive step” enabling the Europeans to postpone, or
not take at all, steps that no one wishes to take. This step should occur
before the 17th.
2.3. After his return to Algiers, the President summoned GB and
discussed the matter with his government. Not only was the Algerian
government impressed by the initiatives of Schmidt and Pertini, he
also decided to make them its own and dispatched Deputy Minister
(following GB’s advice) in order for him to meet with Ghotbzadeh and
if possible with Bani-Sadr.
3. GB is a member of the Central Committee of the Algerian
National Liberation Front and a member of the National Assembly. I
have a great deal of esteem for him, his children and my children play
together, for months he has been telling me: “if you wish to succeed
here, forget conventional diplomacy and call things by their name. It’s
the only way to get to some result, maybe.”
He gave the same advice to his Deputy Foreign Minister who
followed the advice, in part only, this being his first contact here.
This is what he said: “If any country can understand Iran, Algeria
is that country. We have suffered under colonialism and imperialism.
We know all about what AMERICAN imperialism can do and has
done but it is not the only imperialism. Hostage taking cannot be
tolerated. As it continues the situation becomes serious, far more serious
than you, the Iranians seem to realize. Indeed, if the US and most
European countries were to take drastic measures that applied to all
countries that would continue to trade with you or to help you then
you should know that in spite of our friendship for you, we shall place
