Yugoslavia
235.
Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter1
Washington, May 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Objectives During Visit to Europe for Talks with Vorster and European Leaders
We are in the final preparatory stage for my forthcoming visit in
your behalf to Portugal, Spain, Austria, Yugoslavia and the United
Kingdom.
As currently scheduled, I will depart for Lisbon this Saturday for
meetings with President Eanes and Prime Minister Soares on May 16;
talks with King Juan Carlos and Prime Minister Suarez in Madrid on
May 17; and with Chancellor Kreisky in Vienna on May 18.
The talks with South African Prime Minister Vorster are set for
Vienna on May 19 and 20. I will then travel to Belgrade on the afternoon
of May 20 for meetings on May 20–21 with President Tito and members
of the Yugoslav leadership; then to London on May 22 to debrief
Prime Minister Callaghan and Foreign Secretary Owen on the Vors-
ter meetings.
There are three basic elements to the visit, each of priority impor-
tance to your foreign policy objectives. My purpose will be:
—to demonstrate in Portugal and Spain the United States’ support
for their return to democracy;
—to convey to Prime Minister Vorster your policy toward Southern
Africa including the United States’ views on the role South Africa
must play in current efforts to resolve the Rhodesian and Namibian
problems, and on the approach South Africa must take within its society
if our relations are not to suffer;
—to emphasize to President Tito the importance your Administra-
tion places on Yugoslavia’s independence, political unity and territo-
rial integrity.
I do not plan to become a negotiator on contentious issues in any
of my meetings, but I do anticipate an in-depth discussion with Vorster.
The following paragraphs summarize principal issues I expect to be
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Overseas
Assignments Trip Files, 1977–1980, Box 12, Vice President’s Trip to Portugal, Spain,
Austria, Yugoslavia, and England: Objectives, 5/4–10/1977. Secret. Carter wrote at the
top of the memorandum: “Fritz—Read notes. J.C.” Tabs A–E are attached but not printed.
750
