594 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Cubans and the Communists to take over the other countries of the Central American region. The President said that he had been very patient, that he had tried to conduct a democratic government and that he had attempted to avoid being repressive. He added, however, that the limits had now been reached and that the time for acting had arrived. Mr. Stewart asked President Lemus why his government had not availed itself of the Inter-American Peace Committee and the machinery which this Committee provided. He said he believed that it was exceedingly important that all the governments in this area inform the Inter-American Peace Committee of specific instances of interference in the internal affairs of their countries by Cuban representatives. In this way a documented file could be built up and could be used by the Peace Committee in carrying out the mandate which it had received from the Foreign Ministers in Santiago.2 The President asked about the procedures that might be followed in doing this. This was explained to him and the President took down the name of Mr. John Dreier.3 The conversation then turned more specifically to Cuba. After recounting some of his experiences with the previous Cuban Ambassador here, President Lemus declared emphatically that he was willing to act jointly with other Central American countries in breaking relations with Cuba. He said he would prefer that all five Central American countries take this action jointly. Mr. Stewart then told President Lemus of his earlier conversations with President Villeda Morales4 who had stated his willingness to follow his (President Lemus’) lead in this matter. Upon hearing this, President Lemus authorized Mr. Stewart to tell President Villeda when he saw him the next day that El Salvador was willing to break relations with Cuba and was prepared to consult with Villeda’s emissary to work out the arrangements. He said that he would be prepared to receive Villeda’s emissary here or to send an emissary to Honduras to work out the specific date and time. He also authorized Mr. Stewart to tell President Echandi of Costa Rica the same thing. The more the President talked of this prospect, the more the idea seemed to appeal to him and he reiterated his authorization for Mr. Stewart to discuss the question with Villeda Morales and Echandi. President Lemus then turned to the question of assistance. He explained that up to the present, El Salvador had carried the burdens alone. He mentioned the cost involved in the recent reconditioning in Costa Rica of 10 Corsairs belonging to the Salvadoran Air Force and 2 Reference is to the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics, held at Santiago, Chile, August, 12–18, 1959. 3 Representative of the United States on the Council of the Organization of American States, and Chairman of the Inter-American Peace Committee. 4 Ramón Villeda Morales, President of Honduras.
