5. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall in any event be or become liable for any loss or
damage to or in connection with goods in an amount exceeding 100 pounds sterling per
package or unit or the equivalent of that sum in other currency unless the nature and
value of such goods have been declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in
the bill of lading.
This declaration if embodied in the bill of lading shall be prima facie evidence but shall
not be binding or conclusive on the carrier.
By agreement between the carrier, master, or agent of the carrier and the shipper
another maximum amount than that mentioned in this paragraph may be fixed,
provided that such maximum shall not be less than the figure above named.
Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible in any event for loss or damage to,
or in connection with, goods if the nature or value thereof has been knowingly
misstated by the shipper in the bill of lading.
6. Goods of an inflammable, explosive, or dangerous nature to the shipment whereof
the carrier, master, or agent of the carrier has not consented with knowledge of their
nature and character may at any time before discharge be landed at any place or
destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without compensation, and the shipper
of such goods shall be liable for all damages and expenses directly or indirectly arising
out of or resulting from such shipment. If any such goods shipped with such knowledge
and consent shall become a danger to the ship or cargo, they may in like manner be
landed at any place or destroyed or rendered innocuous by the carrier without liability
on the part of the carrier except to general average, if any.
ARTICLE 5
A carrier shall be at liberty to surrender in whole or in part all or any of his rights and
immunities, or to increase any of his responsibilities and liabilities under this
convention provided such surrender or increase shall be embodied in the bill of lading
issued to the shipper.
The provisions of this convention shall not be applicable to charter parties, but if bills
of lading are issued in the case of a ship under a charter-party they shall comply with
the terms of this convention. Nothing in these rules shall be held to prevent the
insertion in a bill of lading of any lawful provision regarding general average.
ARTICLE 6
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding articles, a carrier, master, or agent of
the carrier and a shipper shall in regard to any particular goods be at liberty to enter
into any agreement in any terms as to the responsibility and liability of the carrier for
