Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the West Bank and Gaza with a view to facilitate the implementation of the Camp David “Framework”.12 As the Israelis balked and insisted on omitting any reference in the treaty to the Palestinian problem, you proposed dealing with the issue as follows: A) Emphasizing the comprehensive nature of the peace settlement in the preamble;13 B) Spelling out the steps which must be taken for the implementation of the provisions of the “Framework” in the West Bank and Gaza in a letter to be exchanged between Egypt and Israel and signed simultaneously with the treaty.14 The content of that letter as inunciated (sic) by you was to include taking certain steps on specified dates,15 namely the entering into negotiation and the holding of elections for the establishment of the self-governing authority, in implementation of the Camp David plan for full autonomy. C) Obtaining a letter from Israel to the United States on measures to be taken unilaterally for the purpose of improving the political situation in the West Bank and Gaza, such as lifting the ban on political activities, freeing political prisoners and allowing the return of some displaced persons for the unification of families.16 Although the idea of an exchange of letters was at variance with our concept, we cooperated with it and submitted several drafts for the letter. Discussions of these drafts, together with the U.S. draft, revealed an Israeli reluctance to be committed to any step beyond beginning the negotiations. With this Israeli attitude, the proposed date for holding the elections kept moving backward, from three to six months and finally to a full year.17 After being conceived as a fixed time, it was watered down to a target date which might and might not be met.18 Furthermore, the form of the document was changed from a letter to be exchanged between Egypt and Israel to a note issued by the United States.19 This was done despite the fact that Israel has accepted for several weeks the form of an exchanged letter. I honestly believe that this 12 Vance underlined this sentence. 13 Vance underlined the portion of this phrase beginning with “you proposed” and ending with “the preamble.” 14 Vance underlined this sentence. 15 Vance underlined and highlighted the phrase “taking certain steps on specified dates.” 16 Vance underlined and highlighted this point. 17 Vance underlined this sentence. 18 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence. He wrote: “target is fixed date” in the right-hand margin next to it. 19 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence. He wrote: “form” in the right-hand margin next to it.
