Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 719 During the subsequent attempt on April 24, two U.S. aircraft collided during a refueling stop, resulting in the deaths of eight Americans. For the text of Carter’s April 25 address to the nation, wherein he indicated that the rescue operation had been aborted but that casualties had ensued, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pages 772–773. During the morning of April 28, Vance met with the President at the White House, where he received the President’s letter accepting his resignation. He and Department of State Spokesman Hodding Carter III rode back to the Department of State and discussed the press conference Vance intended to hold later that morning. Vance recalled that it was “a sad moment and not the way I had wanted to end the work we had begun in January 1977 when we had forged what I believed, and still believe, was a foreign policy worthy of a great nation.” (Hard Choices, page 412) Vance announced his departure from his position during a briefing held in the Department of State’s press room: “I believe that all of you have received copies of my letter to the President and the President’s letter to me. “I have the greatest admiration for the President, and I am most grateful for the opportunity which he has given me to serve him and our nation. “As I leave office, I’m proud to have been able to participate in the important foreign policy actions and new directions which have been taken under President Carter’s leadership. They are important, not only for the present but for the future of our nation as well. “As you know, I could not support the difficult decision taken by the President on the rescue operation in Iran. I, therefore, submitted my resignation to the President last week. I have told the President that I continue to support fully his policies on other foreign policy issues. I have assured him that he can count on my support for his continued leadership of our nation. He will always have my deepest respect and affection. “Thank you all whom I have gotten to know well over these last 3½ years. That has also been a pleasure for me. “Q. What is it about the rescue mission that you could not support? “A. I do not want to go into details. I think my position is very clear on that, and that’s all I want to say. Thank you very much. “Q. Is anybody else leaving with you? “A. No. I hope that everyone in the Department will stay and support the Acting Secretary and the President, and I’m going to tell him that. “Q. Are you going back to Wall Street?
