December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
725
change. There is danger that it will be interpreted as meaning “in the
context of a comprehensive settlement”. We stand by what the United
States and Israel agreed to in Washington. On behalf of the Cabinet, it is
my duty to say that this is all that we can accept.
On Article 6–5, there is no problem. We found a synonym. We do
not want to add or detract. It is up to Egypt to accept the agreed U.S.-
Israeli proposal. We cannot do any more about it. We have to think of
Israel’s problems. We have done our best. We can’t do better.
On the bilateral letter, thank you for accepting our two amend-
ments. The aid references may be too general, but we will deal with aid
later. This is a bilateral problem and has nothing to do with Egypt. We
shall have some amendments to make at the proper time. This is not
now the issue.
On the letter, thank you for accepting my amendments to page 1.
On page 1 there is no problem. We are glad that you have accepted the
language on “as expeditiously as possible”. We are in full agreement.
Thank you for accepting our footnote. It is important morally and his-
torically. We are also glad that you included reference to the adminis-
trative council. This makes it clear that autonomy is the goal, not sover-
eignty or a Palestinian state. To us, this is the most vital issue after the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty. It should be clear to all that a Palestinian state is
out of the question. We only favor full autonomy. This is a fine concept
of Judaism and Zionism. It proves our liberal approach. Israel recog-
nizes the Arab nationality in Israel. There is no problem for us in also
recognizing the rights of Palestinian Arabs as we did at Camp David.
The administrative council reference applies everywhere that the self-
governing authority is mentioned.
On the question of Gaza first, we had a very serious debate. We de-
cided to leave the issue open. We could not agree to the American pro-
posal. We cannot let Egypt deal with Gaza first, then with Judea and Sa-
maria. We prefer to just keep to Camp David. To prove our good will,
we express our agreement to deal with Egypt if Jordan does not join the
negotiations. There will be no delay. We have left open for consider-
ation the Gaza proposal. Israel has proposed substitute language that if
Egypt should propose autonomy in Gaza first, Israel is prepared to con-
sider such proposals. Secretary Vance is empowered to say this. If there
is a concrete Egyptian proposal, Israel will consider it.
We cannot approve the reference to liaison officers. This is a matter
of principle. Egyptian occupation of Gaza gives Egypt no rights there.
Egypt cannot come to Gaza with liaison officers. We stand by Camp
David. If there is a strong local police force, then there should be liaison
officers of the three governments on this issue. This is an Egyptian pro-
posal to change Camp David. The two sides are free to change if they
wish. But we do not want to and we cannot do so. This is the decision of
