1956 641 their categorical and sweeping rejection of any mention of Taiwan area in any statement of agreement growing out of our discussions. I was sure public would have difficulty in understanding that in three months which had passed since we had made our proposal, their gov┬Ł ernment was still unwilling to make it clear it did not have concealed reservations on Taiwan area in any statement on renunciation of force. 27. I said that however, I didnŌĆÖt see how all of this would contrib┬Ł ute to our making further progress in our discussion and if this was attitude of their government, I wondered whether it really desired that we make progress. As I as well as my government was interested in making progress, I was unable to agree that we abrogate our agreement that nature of these meetings be private, and I was unable to agree either that meetings be open to public or press be informed substance each meeting. 28. I said I still felt interests and relations between two of us and cause of peace could best be served by keeping our discussions on frank open level that was possible under present arrangement and by informing general public of our agreements when we had reached them, rather than by informing the world of our disagreements as they came up here. 29. Wang said that other side had just asserted that Chinese side had not had sufficient time to study draft presented by US side. As to ideas US side has brought up, Chinese side had always been willing to give full consideration to those which were constructive, but he had to say that draft presented today did not contain anything new or constructive. All those amendments US side had presented that morning had been subject to long and tedious discussions, and during course of these Chinese side had on many occasions expressed its firm opposition. 30. Wang said he was sure US Ambassador was fully acquainted with course of discussions, in which it could be seen clearly how far Chinese side had moved and how the US side still stuck to its origi┬Ł nal position without making any progress. Views presented by US side had repeatedly been rejected by Chinese side, yet they have again been advanced, and Chinese side could not give consideration to them. 31. Wang said that in particular, he noted that US side had again advanced point concerning individual and collective self-┬Łdefense. Nat┬Ł urally, it was a matter of principle that every state was entitled to right of self-┬Łdefense and Chinese were prepared to recognize this. However, question was as to where it was to be applied, because there can be no objection if US exercises this right on its own territory. 32. Wang said that if, on other hand, it were on territory of another country, then certainly it could lay no claims to self-┬Łdefense. When Japan in 1937 began its aggression against China, she also claimed this action was in self-┬Łdefense. However, no people in world then recognized that
