122 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement should break we assumed that if Wang were informed as suggested he would ask for time and perhaps reconsider his own position and would most probably strive to avoid recess. We do feel however that if there should be any extended recess, it would be necessary to state the issue more than indicated your 516. Bear in mind that we do not know anything whatever now that we did not know before regarding return our citizens. They have given noth­ ing, not even information. Also we do not want ourselves to become committed to proposition that it will take time to clear up Item One of the Agenda. In view of Chou En-­lai’s July 30 statement the interpreta­ tion unless rebutted would be that we are making difficulties. Further­ more, we do not want to let Chou off the hook. Dulles 99. Letter from McConaughy to Johnson1 Washington, August 17, 1955 Dear Alex: Since my last letter I have received your first three letters, of August 10, 11, 12. The pouch service seems to be working better now. I hope we can make some arrangement for pouch service more frequent than once a week after the Atomic Conference closes. Last evening the Secretary sent you a personal message from him concerning the likelihood of travel by Americans to China after all detained Americans are released. You will note that a qualification was put in concerning the possible effect of the Foreign Assets Control Regulations. This is something that would have to be discussed with Treasury and Commerce. If we made exceptions for American travelers there would be immediate pressures to make corresponding provision for Americans who wanted to buy Chinese Communist merchandise. The whole economic warfare effort to deny dollars to the Chinese Com­ munists might well be undermined. So the question will have to be con­ sidered in the broader context of our entire policy of total severance of financial, trade and transportation relations with the China mainland. There is still food for thought in the Secretary’s suggestion though it 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.
