412  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Costa Rican Intentions and Hopes:
The Costa Ricans indicated that the Government intends to go for-
ward with a plan to improve the living conditions of the people of Costa 
Rica while at the same time developing their economy to increase the 
national revenue and provide a more equitable distribution of wealth. 
The educational and cultural level of the people is such that they would 
be able to use effectively any economic assistance which might be ren-
dered and fully discharge any obligations undertaken by accepting such 
assistance. An improvement in living standards is the best guarantee of 
the continued social stability of the country which have continued to 
improve through orderly evolution in contrast to the violence which has 
shaken neighboring countries. The Costa Ricans expressed the hope that 
the United States, bearing in mind the economic and social organization 
of Costa Rica, the cultural level of the people and their devotion to the 
democratic way of life, will make available the assistance necessary to 
develop the nation and its economy.
There appeared to be in Costa Rica a better understanding of the 
operations by the various lending organizations in the United States 
as well as a more coordinated plan than had been the case in some of 
the other nations visited. There would appear to be some misconcep-
tion, however, as to the ability of the United States Government to fix 
coffee prices and perhaps insufficient understanding of the importance 
of diversifying the country’s agriculture. The President spoke of his 
intention to develop cattle for the export of meat as they saw in this a 
promising and stable market. Tie President and his Ministers paid great 
tribute to the work of the agricultural experimental station at Turrialba 
which was visited by Dr. Eisenhower.
Conclusions:
The Government has developed a plan which is totally dependent 
upon the obtaining of (1) an agreement with the United States Treasury 
regarding a more favorably arrangement for Costa Rica in the collec-
tion of taxes from United Fruit Company, and (2) the obtaining of a 
$30 ­million loan to convert the internal debt into an external debt. The 
Costa Ricans have requested this loan as well as $5 million for develop-
ment of rural credit agencies and an unspecified amount for road build-
ing, an additional million dollars for the Children’s Hospital, $3 million 
for water supply of San Jose, and an unspecified amount for sewerage 
and further development of the water supply.
Despite the fact that considerable thought had been given to this 
plan, it appears that the following would seem to be needed for effec-
tive planning: (1) An inventory of the nation’s assets in both human 
and natural resources; (2) a study to determine the feasibility of agricul-
tural diversification and perhaps the establishment of new industries;
