Arms Control and Disarmament 1217 4. One feature of the August 29th Western proposals2 widely criticized at the recent United Nations General Assembly sessions by Free World nations as well as by the Soviet Bloc countries, has been the “inseparability clause”. This clause is contained in Section XI of the August 29th proposals. It states: “This working paper is offered for negotiation on the understanding that its provisions are inseparable.” 5. The U.S. Ambassador in Moscow recently has reported: “I con­ tinue to believe that the Soviets genuinely seek a first step agreement on disarmament and believe it is this they have chiefly in mind in press­ ing for high-­level talks” (November 23, 1957). However, he considers that the Soviets from their standpoint regard the August 29th proposals as so heavily weighted in the West’s favor that the United States should not realistically expect the Soviet Union to accept them, nor should the United States consider the Soviet rejection of them to be a fair test of whether or not the Soviet is genuinely seeking an agreement. (Cable of Ambassador Thompson, September 3, 1957) 6. [text not declassified] 7. The only feasible way to ascertain whether or not the Soviet Union will enter into an inspected and safeguarded agreement which is rea­ sonable and which would be mutually desirable because of a resultant reduction in the dangers of war, is to make an offer of such an agreement. 8. Making such an offer is also the only reliable manner in which the cohesion and support of the peoples of the free nations and of the uncommitted states can be maintained by the United States. This cohe­ sion and support of the peoples of the free nations is vital to the security of the United States. Separate Test Suspension 9. The United States has consistently held to the position that inspection is necessary for each step in each provision of any disarma­ ment agreement. Thus when the Soviet Union proposed the suspension of nuclear testing, the United States insisted upon the requirement of inspection. In the informal bilateral discussions, carried on with full knowledge of the other Western partners at London, the Soviet Union on June 7, 1957, agreed to inspection stations inside the USSR to moni­ tor the suspension of nuclear testing. 10. The United States has also consistently maintained that a first step should be carefully measured and should guard against a disad­ vantageous result in the event of violation by the Soviet Union. Thus the United States insisted that a first agreement for test suspension should be of limited duration so that laboratories could be maintained 2 See Annex D hereto. [Footnote is in the original.]
