344 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX problem. If it does, the Israelis should suggest another paragraph to include in the preamble. If the President can understand the Israeli concern, he’ll recommend to the Egyptians that they accept. But he has already gone to the Egyptians on the Israelis’ problems, and he has tried to get favorable action. He has not seen any comparable effort by the Israelis. They wait for the Egyptian draft, we modify it, and they keep pushing for better advantage. The President said that he found this very frustrating. He said that the Israelis were trying to undo the degree of linkage that had been established at Camp David. He knew that the Israelis had wanted none in the first place, but he could not understand why they now wanted to drop things, such as the U.N. Security Council endorsement of the treaty. Sadat also wants Israel to help out on international waterways, but Israel has not been forthcoming. On the points of importance to Israel, such as Suez passage, settlements, and others, the President has tried to help. If the Israelis now insist on the language they want in the text of the treaty, they are trying to undo any linkage at all. The Egyptian-Israeli treaty is based on the overall framework agreement. Sadat made sure that Israel would understand that at Camp David. He told this to the Israelis. Now the Israelis are trying to undo that minimum degree of linkage. Sadat has his integrity at stake. The President has told Hussein and Fahd and Assad that the two agreements are related. We have said that Sadat has not agreed to a separate peace treaty. For Israel now to create the impression of a separate peace would cause Sadat great problems. The President does not personally care about this issue, but he cannot accept the Israeli position in good conscience. Israel should be helping Sadat solve his problem. He cannot say that the Egyptian-Israeli treaty stands completely on its own. The Israelis know that there is an interconnection. Dayan said the President had referred to a political linkage, but not a legal linkage. The President agreed, and Dayan said that this is the Israeli position. Israel does not want a legal linkage. The President said that if the Jordanians and the Palestinians do not want to negotiate, neither he nor Sadat would use that as a pretext for saying that the Egyptian-Israeli treaty should not be honored. The Israelis could write something to deal with this situation. Dayan said that if there could be some statement on political linkage without implying legal linkage, the Israelis might be able to accept it. Barak was afraid that this might provide a pretext for not honoring the treaty, but the President replied again that a pretext can always be found. The Egyptians recognize that Israel wants to have influence in the West Bank and Gaza and in East Jerusalem. They know that Israel wants to keep settlements in the Golan. They are not forcing Israel to take a stand on these issues. They are not predicating this treaty on assurances that the Egyptian position
