Human Rights 157 8. Improving U.S. Performance and Defense of American Rights The visa policy review has not yet been completed, although a decision is currently pending by the President on this issue and on possible legislative amendment. This matter also will be treated as part of the PRM exercise. 9. Public Diplomacy Both as part of the PRM exercise and in response to tasking memorandums within the Department, USIA, CU, and PA are exploring ways to improve public awareness and understanding of our human rights policy.18 The first town meeting in Los Angeles emphasized the human rights policy and upcoming town meetings will advance that effort.19 18 For the USIA proposal, see Document 60. 19 The Department’s first town hall meeting took place at the Los Angeles Hilton Hotel on May 20. At one of the sessions, Derian summarized the administration’s human rights platform and reiterated the administration’s commitment to global rights issues: “We’re really concerned about basic human rights around the world. President Carter is very serious about human rights. This is not a fad. This commitment has become a key element in the consideration of American foreign policy.” (Tendayi Kumbula, “Human Rights Stressed at L.A. Meetings,” The Los Angeles Times, May 21, 1977, p. A–26) 54. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, June 8, 1977 OUTLINE—PRM 28 RESPONSE I. Objectives: A. The United States human rights policy must be consistent with existing international obligations, domestic law and our nation’s heritage. It must be reflected throughout the executive branch and be prem- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 23, Human Rights—PRM II. No classification marking. Drafted by Schneider and Vogelgesang. On June 8, Nimetz sent Christopher a memorandum containing ideas for the PRM outline, commenting that he had committed these ideas to paper without the benefit of the Schneider–Vogelgesang draft. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretary: Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology, Lot 81D85, Box 1, MN Chron—Official January–June 1977)
