484
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
With this statement Secretary Wilson expressed strong agreement.
In commenting on the President’s statement, Secretary Dulles
pointed out his fear that it was now too late to hope that any reasonable
concession by the British to the Iranians could result in a settlement.
The only thing which would produce a settlement would be a complete
British capitulation.
Secretary Humphrey inquired whether he was to understand that
Secretary Dulles was already convinced that Russia would ultimately
secure Iran in any event, or, in other words, that we are going to lose
that country.
Secretary Dulles replied in the affirmative, and Mr. Cutler pointed
out that this, of course, meant that with the loss of Iran we would lose
the neighboring countries of the Middle East and that the loss would be
terribly serious.
The President commented that we could not move forces of our
own into Iran, but this did not imply to him the necessity of sacrificing
the other Middle Eastern states, because it was possible to get United
States troops into some of these countries. The difficulty in trying to do
this in Iran was the probability that an attempt on our part to do so
would result in Soviet invocation of its treaty of friendship and non-
aggression with Iran. We would then find ourselves at war with Russia.
Mr. Cutler again pleaded the wisdom of an American policy in
Iran independent of the British, and suggested that it might even be
wise for the United States to buy out the British oil company.
The President replied that he had long believed that this should be
done, but he could see no way of convincing Congress that it was the
part of wisdom for the United States Government or any American oil
company to buy the bankrupt Anglo-Iranian.
Mr. Stassen noted that it might well be possible for the United
States to get its money back once Iranian oil began to flow again.
But the President observed that at the moment at least there was
no market for Iranian oil, and that to obtain one would require cutbacks
in production in other oil-producing areas.
Reverting to the President’s worries about the attitude of Con-
gress, Mr. Cutler inquired how Congress would like it if the United
States stood idly by and let Iran fall into the hands of the Soviet Union.
It was generally agreed that Congress would take a poor view of
this eventuality.
At this point, Mr. Jackson said he believed that another possibility
existed for saving the situation in Iran. He thought that if the United
States could manage to secure a peace between Egypt and Israel, and
that if the Roman Catholic Church, as seemed likely, would agree to the
internationalization of the Holy Places in Jerusalem, and finally, if the
