1955 29 People’s Volunteers in Korea were not permitted listen to explanations but forcibly removed to Taiwan to become “cannon fodder for Chiang Kai-shek brigands”. Their families on mainland unable effect their return. Wang said he had heard both Martin and I were in Korea at time Korean armistice and knew this case well therefore unnecessary say more. He did want to add that this is still pending case which enrages Chinese people. He could mention others similar character. However, considering atmosphere present talks perhaps not necessary enumerate more. It was only because I had mentioned alleged ill feeling in US he thought it might be useful explain how Chinese people feel toward US Government. Wang then started reading from another long prepared statement which opened by stating I had made repeated references to Chinese students in US and had said that US Govt had never exercised any restraint on them. I interrupted to state that was not what I had said. This morning I had again said that there had been restraints against some few Chinese students but that these had been removed and forcefully reiterated my previous statement no Chinese being prevented depart. Wang completely nonplussed at this point and fumbled through prepared statement seeking a reply. Only after full four or five minutes was he able continue. Changing his approach Wang declared he welcomed statement by me that restraints on Chinese rescinded. However this statement only very “general” to effect Chinese not restrained from returning their country. In the first place, US Govt failed provide complete list including names and addresses so it impossible check which actually desired return. It was not only impossible Chinese Govt communicate these people but also impossible families communicate with them and transmit funds. Secretary Dulles in press conference August 2 admitted he could not answer question whether Chinese have financial difficul­ ties and could not pay their travel. This is sharp contrast with Premier Chou’s statement regarding American nationals July 30. “Our nationals in US are confronted by great difficulties”. Consequently appropriate solution of return civilians both sides must be sought which beneficial both parties not one unilaterally. Otherwise apparently “unfair” solu­ tion would not be understood by people of world and Chinese peo­ ple could not accept. It precisely for this reason that he had proposed China and US each name third country to handle affairs of nationals of each in territory of other, in first place, return of nationals to respec­ tive countries: Wang welcomed statement that US willing take further time consider this proposition. Also expressed appreciation receipt list 76 students.
