584 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Long-Range Striking Forces 138. Since the end of World War II the USSR has devoted a major effort to the development of nuclear striking forces capable of attack­ ing distant military, industrial, and other targets, not only in and near Eurasia but in North America as well. This effort has been dictated by the fact that the US, itself possessed of long-­range striking forces, lay beyond the range of traditional Soviet military power. The principal component of Soviet military strength presently capable of long-­range nuclear attack is Long Range Aviation, equipped with medium and heavy bombers. The medium bombers of Naval and Tactical Aviation, as well as the light bombers of these components, contribute to the Soviet capability for attack on targets in Eurasia and its periphery. Ground-­launched and submarine-­launched guided missiles probably now supplement the bomber capability. 139. Long-­range bombers. We estimate the strength of Soviet Long Range Aviation, as of 1 October 1958, at approximately 1,450 bombers, including about 400 obsolete BULL piston medium bombers, about 950 BADGER jet medium bombers, and about 100 to 125 BISON jet and BEAR turboprop heavy bombers. At least one-­fourth of the BISON and BADGER regiments in this force have some aircraft of these types which are convertible tanker-bombers. Medium bombers have also been supplied to other components—­there are now about 250 BADGERs and a few BULLs in Naval Aviation units and about 100 BADGERs in Tactical Aviation units. 140. The capabilities of Long Range Aviation have been mark­ edly increased in the last five years, through the introduction of large numbers of modern aircraft, more realistic and larger-­scale training exercises, improvement of potential staging bases in the Arctic, devel­ opment of inflight refueling, and improvement of electronic equipment for ECM, bombing, navigation and other purposes. Nuclear weapons storage sites have been identified at many Long Range Aviation home bases, and we believe that nuclear bombs are now the primary weap­ ons of this force. A few BADGER units of both Long Range and Naval Aviation are probably now trained and equipped to employ air-­to-­ surface missiles suitable for use against ships and other well-­defined targets. 141. Despite these improvements Soviet Long Range Aviation still consists primarily of medium bombers, best suited for operations against targets in Eurasia and its periphery, and capable of attacking the continental US only through extensive use of one-­way missions. The history of the Soviet heavy bomber program leads us to believe that despite the efforts devoted to developing the BISON and BEAR, Soviet planners probably decided within the last year or two to forego a rapid build-­up with present heavy bomber models. This decision may have
