Eastern Europe Region
35
itself. If so, we should point toward a PRC meeting on Eastern Europe
somewhat later. We may need some additional study on Eastern
Europe, though I doubt that another round of studies would produce
much better results. A sharply-focused agenda paper might serve as
well. To that end, I prepared and sent to State a suggested set of
questions on both CSCE and Eastern Europe; that paper is attached.
Attachment
Paper Prepared by Gregory Treverton of the National Security
Council Staff8
Washington, undated
PRM 9 FOLLOW-ON: CSCE AND EASTERN EUROPE
POSSIBLE ISSUES FOR PRC CONSIDERATION
CSCE
The PRM follow-on draft9 is too general and too rhetorical to serve
as a basis for fruitful PRC discussion, let alone decision. But there are
decisions to be made, many of them tactical but most the sort that can
only be taken by the President. The President’s prestige is clearly on
the line at Belgrade; what we do there cannot be perceived as falling
off our commitment to human rights, much less as cutting a deal with
the Soviets. At the same time, CSCE is three baskets, not one, and there
is little to be served by turning the meeting into a confrontation.
Issues that should be considered:
Basic Purposes
No one disagrees that our basic objective is maximum review of
implementation without confrontation. But that raises the issue: how
compatible are those objectives? That in turn raises specific questions:
—presuming there will be some closed-session review of imple-
mentation, do we raise specific cases at all, only a few for illustrative
purposes shunning the most controversial (Orlov, Shcharanskiy),10 or
many including some of the controversial ones?
8 Confidential.
9 Follow-up Study to PRM/NSC–9: CSCE. (Department of State, Bureau of European
Affairs, Office of European Security Political Affairs, Conference on Security and Cooper-
ation in Europe, (CSCE)—1973–80, Lot 89D288, Box 1, PRM–9)
10 Yuri Feodorovich Orlov, founder of the Moscow Helsinki Group, arrested and
sentenced to ten years in prison in 1977. Anatoly Borisovich Shcharansky (Nathan Sharan-
sky), spokesman for the Moscow Helsinki Group and leading refusenik, was arrested on
charges of espionage in 1977 and sentenced to 13 years in prison.
