Chapter 2, January–June 1989  229
in our START position and to introduce new ideas. You need to decide 
which, if any, of our current approaches to change (in addition to those 
noted above), and whether to propose one or more initiatives that your 
negotiators can table in Geneva.
The discussion about our approach to airbreathing systems (pp. 
5-7), raised several issues relating to verification, Soviet force modern-
ization incentives, potential public relations problems stemming from 
claims about cuts to “6000 weapons,” and the prospects for our bomber 
modernization programs.
You may want to consider possible shifts in our current approach to limits 
on airbreathing systems in START.
New-Initiatives. You will be hearing about several possible initia-
tives that are currently being discussed informally within the agencies.
You will need to decide whether you want to propose one or more new 
initiatives at this, the first round of negotiations, during your Administration.
As you consider them, you will want to bear in mind the following 
factors:
— The resumption of negotiations is the ideal time for such ini-
tiatives, and especially for putting the “Bush stamp” on START and 
showing your leadership in this area. In their absence, critics will point 
to the absence of new thinking about strategic arms control six months 
into your administration. Finally, as a practical matter, it will become 
increasingly difficult to introduce new ideas into the talks during sub-
sequent rounds. In brief, now is much better than later.
— Most of the new initiatives involve various kinds of limits on 
multiple warhead (MIRVed) missiles, especially land-based MIRVed 
missiles. These systems play a major role in our strategic forces. As 
such, these initiatives could have a major impact on our deterrent capa-
bilities and our modernization programs, but their implications have 
not been thoroughly analyzed. Land-­based MIRVed missiles play an 
even greater role in the Soviet strategic force structure. In contrast to 
your CFE proposal, therefore, a START initiative to impose new limits 
in this area could drive the two sides farther apart rather than improve 
the prospects for a speedy agreement.
— Initiatives relating to MIRVed missiles are likely to have a major 
impact on Congressional support for the two mobile ICBM programs 
you have proposed. Any such initiative, therefore, would benefit from 
close Congressional consultations.
DEFENSE AND SPACE TALKS
As noted above, our current approach attempts to let us have it 
both ways: seeking virtually complete freedom to test SDI and deploy it 
when it is ready, but using the ABM Treaty to dissuade the Soviets from 
deploying nationwide missile defenses in the interim. The Soviets are
