110 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Department instructing them to seek to do that. He commented that the Vice President, however, has asked the President to send up a message to the Congress on the reconvening of the Senate in order to take effective initiative. Also, by a special message at that time he hopes to do something to hold the Congress to hard essentials as against many loose pending schemes that are being discussed. Mr. Anderson said he thought it very important not to send up new requests to this Congress, but to limit the message to repeating what the Administration has already asked for. Referring to an earlier point, Mr. Herter said that a check had been made to see whether there is pending legislation to which the proposal might be attached, and that there is none. Mr. Dillon said he would like to consult with the Congress about the proposal, and suggested that the State Department proceed to check with key members. The President indicated no objection. The President then said he thought he would mention the Latin American program in a specific way in his message,4 and leave the development of details until after he had met with the bi-­partisan group. [Here follows discussion of issues related to the Congo, Tri–Partite Arrangements, Arms Sales to NATO Allies, and Nigeria.] 4 See the editorial note, Document ETA–47. ETA–46. Memorandum from the President of the Export-Import Bank (Waugh) to the Secretary of the Treasury (Anderson) and the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1 Washington, August 4, 1960. SUBJECT Prepared new Program for Latin America The announcement made by President Eisenhower on July 11 for an increased economic program [for] Latin America has been read with interest by the Directors of the Export-Import Bank. The purpose of this memorandum is to consider the manner in which Eximbank may contribute to the success of the program. 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/REA Files, Lot 63 D 210, “Latin American Social Economic Development Program July–Sept 1960.”
