January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1221 The President said let’s not skim over these. He is bothered by them. Peres had told him that his view is that Israelis living on the West Bank should come under the jurisdiction of the SGA. How you could have settlers scattered all over the West Bank with it any other way bothers him. Ambassador Linowitz said that we should look at the Panama Treaties, and how we worked it out with regard to the employees of the Panama Canal Company. If someone violates both Panamanian law and U.S. law, we can bring him back here to be tried under U.S. law. So it would be with Israelis on the West Bank. If a crime is not under Israeli law, then the SGA would try him. The President said that this would be difficult for the Israelis (?). Ambassador Linowitz said that he doesn’t know whether the jurisdiction problem can be worked out. He thought he would explore it with Begin, and talked about it with Shamir when they were here. They haven’t rejected the idea totally. So let’s try this approach. The last of Begin’s points concerns security. We could try it on the basis of internal and external security as it affects Israel’s security. And that includes having the assistance of the police, etc. But there must be arrangements to ensure cooperation and coordination. He doesn’t know what course Begin will be on now. Begin is having a difficult time politically now. Begin did not go back to Israel a hero. The President said that they had said he had given too much. What was the basis for those allegations? Ambassador Linowitz said it was the Continuing Committee. There was unhappiness that Begin had agreed to defer any decisions. Second, there was the Weizman caper,4 which will cause increasing problems. There is also talk among various groups about getting out (of the coalition) if Weizman leaves, as may happen soon. Third, there was Peres. He (the Ambassador) had talked with Peres,5 who is not being helpful 4 In an April 16 interview on Israeli television, Weizman called for early elections in an attempt to unseat the Begin government. “Going to the people now,” he said, “in a situation of uncertainty on so many issues could restore public morale and help put the house in order.” (David K. Shipler, “Weizman, in Challenge to Begin, urges Early Vote,” The New York Times, April 17, 1980, p. A6) 5 No memorandum of conversation for Linowitz’s meeting with Peres has been found. Peres met with Carter at the White House from 9:30 a.m. to 10:05 a.m. on April 24. On this meeting, Carter wrote in the published version of his diary: “I met alone with Shimon Peres, chairman of the Israeli Labor Party. He said he had asked Begin for approval of a meeting with King Hussein and Begin refused. Peres had [British Prime Minister] Jim Callaghan ask Hussein, ‘Would you be willing to negotiate with the Israelis on the basis either of a partition or shared responsibility for the West Bank for a period of time? ’ Hussein’s response was yes. He proposed an informal meeting of the U.S. with the Saudis, Jordan, and Egypt re a resolution of the Mideast crisis, and then a report of the results to Israel. He repeated his belief that a Gaza-first arrangement would be preferable.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 420)
