634 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 205. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated PLANNING PAPER Human Rights: 1981–85 I. Background The international climate is going to worsen for human rights. Third World governments will feel increasingly threatened by a combination of hard times economically, internal pressures for change, and in some cases actual or feared Soviet or Soviet/Cuban efforts to exploit internal problems. The US public is also becoming more alarmed both about security threats and about economic problems and therefore exports. This could make it harder to keep American public and Congressional support for active human rights policies. The assumption that human rights and security interests were conflicting goals which had to be balanced against each other has always been analytically wrong. Respect for human rights is necessary to long-term stability, and therefore to US security interests. As President Carter said in his State of the Union message, “In repressive regimes, popular frustrations often have no outlet except violence.”2 Moreover, it is a concern for human rights that ties together the varied policies of this Administration: the human rights policy as such; our support for peaceful resolution of grievances in southern Africa, the Middle East, and Central America; our approach to North-South economic issues; and our strong resistance to Soviet violation of Afghan human rights. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 20. Confidential. The paper is part of a Department of State Briefing Book entitled “Five Year Project” and constitutes part XV of XVII of the larger report on U.S. Foreign Policy Objectives and Priorities, 1980–85. According to an August 4 memorandum from Donovan to Brzezinski and Lake, Carter had requested that Donovan organize and edit the Objectives and Priorities report, with input from the NSC, ICA, CIA, and Departments of State and Defense. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security—Molander, Box 77, Human Rights (Five Year Goals) [7–8/80]) Earlier versions of the human rights planning paper are ibid., and in the Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D180, SHUM Policies 1980. 2 The quotation is from a paragraph of the President’s January 23 State of the Union address, which reads as follows: “In repressive regimes, popular frustrations often have no outlet except through violence. But when peoples and their governments can approach their problems together through open, democratic methods, the basis for stability and peace is far more solid and far more enduring. That is why our support for human rights in other countries is in our own national interest as well as part of our own national character.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, January 28, 1980, pp. 198–199)
