Covert and Overt Operations 755 wondered if, in the wake of the rescue attempt, we may not wish to toughen the legislation by adding such authority. Otherwise, the legislation provides nothing more than administrative regulations for handling claims which would be resolved either by litigation or negotiation with the Iranians. (C) Secretary Miller strongly opposed including vesting authority. He did not believe that this action would help free the hostages, but it does have very serious disadvantages for us by adding to the world view that the U.S. is unreliable as a recipient of deposits. Certainly such authority should not be put in merely for show; and if we really intend to use it—especially to vest assets abroad—there will be serious controversy with our friends and allies. One of the effects of vesting assets would be to eliminate immediately the present system of offsetting claims against deposits. Those institutions which have claims but no attachable assets will press hard for vesting out of pure self-interest. However, it will be a net loss to the United States and would have an adverse effect on the dollar. Miller hoped that we would not act in a way which would do irreparable harm to Western financial institutions in the interest of a short-term advantage. (C) Secretary Brown acknowledged the clear disadvantages, but noted that we must be seen to be doing something. The more we can do in the economic or other fields, the less pressure there is on us to do something else. Paying compensation to the hostages would be useful in that regard. He thought the rest of the world would understand that this is a totally unique situation and not aimed at others, e.g. Saudi Arabia. Dr. Brzezinski said that the question was what it does for the Iranians and what it does for the President domestically by showing concern and taking a tough line. It was true that it would not budge the Iranians. There is a real question whether this is the moment. He thought that this single step now gave the appearance of dribbling out our actions. Perhaps it should be reserved for use later as part of a package. (S) Henry Owen agreed with Secretary Miller that such action would hurt the dollar, and the symbolism of a weakening dollar would also hurt the President. Mr. Cutler made clear that there was no consideration of seizing assets outside the United States. We have no authority to do so. He acknowledged that this action will probably not budge the Iranians, but that was true of each individual act we have taken in the sanctions area. If the situation was sufficiently grave to justify the risk of a rescue mission, he thought we could take this risk. (S) The Attorney General said he believed there were advantages in the legislation as now proposed. It provides the basis for settling claims by hostages and others. Inclusion of standby authority to vest would immediately result in pressure to exercise the authority so payment
