Afghanistan from a position of strength. He added that we also want to move on arms control, but we cannot do this in the face of actions of the sort going on in Afghanistan. Dr. Brzezinski commented that the Europeans understand the problem. Indeed, Giscard himself had identified the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as a strategic threat. So it is not that they do not understand. The fact is that they are afraid of the Soviet Union and they are trying to preserve detente in Europe, a detente that is divided from Soviet aggressive behavior in the rest of the world. Their second concern, he said, is that the Europeans do not believe that we are consistent. So they do not want to go along with us and then ultimately see us reverse our position. The Germans are particularly concerned that should this happen, they will have to pay a very high price for having supported us and then be left holding the bag. Dr. Brzezinski thus said he favored a constant, measured and assertive posture. No mixed signals and no radical departures. As for a letter to Brezhnev, he was against it. Our main problem is that we have not been able to both communicate effectively and convey patience. A letter, he said, is a dead instrument. It does not really convey meanings very thoroughly. He thought that conversations between Cy and Dobrynin were the best avenue. It was a shame that we cannot talk to others in the Soviet hierarchy, but Dobrynin had confirmed to him that Gromyko was now the only interlocutor. Dobrynin said that Brezhnev might have been able to do it in the past, but was no longer able to do so. He thought that a letter to Brezhnev or a meeting with Gromyko that was not well prepared in advance would not be helpful. The key thing was for all of us in all of our contacts with the Soviets to be steady in our position. Dr. Brzezinski said that the neutralization scheme, as developed by the SCC, put us in good posture. He thought that perhaps the Islamic Foreign Ministers might be induced to put forward such a scheme when they met. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] Admiral Turner then said that the major emerging issue from his analysis is whether we are going to stay consistent. Thus he questioned the idea of any neutrality proposals or any letter to Brezhnev. The Soviets feel we are falling apart with the Pakistanis and that the Europeans are beating a path to their door on the neutrality proposal. The Soviets are not suggesting neutrality and for us to do so only undermines the strength and credibility of our position. The Secretary of State disagreed with this analysis. He said that we have to put the monkey on their back about withdrawing. The President added that neutrality must be preceded by the Soviet withdrawal. Admiral Turner replied that he could not see why we had to get into a discussion of
