Afghanistan the aircraft the crates are taken to a warehouse controlled by Akhtar’s organization where they are opened and the weapons inspected and inventoried. The Pakistanis have excellent records which coincide with ours; what we are buying in Egypt is being delivered in Pakistan. The munitions are distributed through eight different exile organizations which are responsible for transporting the materiel in Afghanistan. There is no Pakistani distribution system in Afghanistan. Akhtar unilaterally monitors the distribution of the weapons and is confident that most of the materiel is indeed going to Afghanistan. Akhtar is distributing weapons into all parts of Afghanistan, not just the eastern area bordering Pakistan. We said we had noted the appearance of antitank rockets and land mines around Herat and encouraged Akhtar to continue to distribute the weapons in western Afghanistan through any means he deemed appropriate (i.e., via Iran). —The arms mix has been about right. The Pakistanis had a list of 24 items needed by the insurgents. These items divide basically into four categories: anti-armor, anti-aircraft, AK–47 rifles and ammunition, and miscellaneous equipment such as time detonators, gas masks and wireless equipment. —Akhtar said the present weapons delivery schedule of two C–130’s per week is about the right pace. We emphasized we stand ready to increase the flow whenever he can handle it and we are prepared to fly C–141’s directly into Pakistan under cover of the regular embassy resupply flight. —The Pakistanis need two C–130’s. Akhtar explained that overland transport is too slow and unreliable. The Pakistan Air Force has been helping but due to the loss of two C–130’s they can no longer do so and meet their other obligations. The request for a loan of two aircraft is legitimate. SA–7 MISSILES —Akhtar said the Pakistani Government had made the political decision to use the SA–7’s, “fully aware of its implications.” The Pakistanis forecast three levels of Soviet reaction. The least serious would be no reaction at all; second would be a ground incursion into border areas of Pakistan; and most severe would be a Soviet air strike at Pakistani airfields. We took no exception to his estimate. Soviet retaliation, to a certain extent, will depend on how and where the missiles are used. Akhtar explained that two Afghan groups had been trained in the use of the weapon. Each of these groups will take three missiles and one launcher. The targets will be Shindand and Bagram airfields. Akhtar refused to reveal any timing. The second group is scheduled to complete its training on 17 May. —In reply to Akhtar’s request for more SA–7’s we explained the difficulty finding these in the international market. We told Akhtar
