320 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement In the political field the Liberals and Conservatives now share the responsibility of Government. In response to the Secretary’s question whether they had agreed upon a candidate for the President, ex-­ President Lopez stated they had not done so, but they expected to do so in a couple of days, at the initiative of the Conservative Party. They will, however, propose a Liberal, Lleras Camargo, as President with a Conservative Vice President. The Secretary then stated that we had known Senor Lleras very favorably as Secretary General of the Organization of American States. President Lopez concluded the discussion of the political situation by noting how markedly the situation had improved as compared to the troubled times of preceding years. The present problems were mainly social. From this President Lopez went on to discuss coffee. He said that all of the coffee-­producing countries of Latin America faced the problem of stabilizing coffee. There had been a violent decline in prices from 90 cents per pound to the present 55 cents per pound. Colombia was having difficulty in financing the coffee crop. The immediate problem was whether they could hope for cooperation from the United States. What they wanted above all was assurance of some procedures to prevent the coming heavy Brazilian crop from being a catastrophic crisis. We assured the Secretary that all Latin Americans thought alike on this subject and asked what the Secretary thought about price stabilization. Mr. Rubottom here stated that while he was in Brazil 3 weeks ago he had heard the same analysis of the coffee problem and had stated that we were studying the coffee matter on a day-­to-­day basis. We then had and still have a hope of organizing an international coffee study group, but if this study were to lead to quotas and price stabilization it would be very difficult for the United States and it is still unclear whether or not we can participate to that extent. Here the Secretary observed that the problem of curing an international commodity surplus was very difficult. Sometimes the cure makes the disease worse rather than better. The United States has had (and still has) the problem of stabilizing the prices of our own agricultural production. It has cost us fabulous sums and has not done much good. For example, our cotton policy has resulted in many other countries beginning to grow cotton. Now we sell only a small percentage of the world’s imports and the plight of our cotton families is worse than ever. The Secretary invited the Colombian Delegation to meet with Secretary Benson, if they had the time, to review this matter. The Secretary remembered the Brazilian stabilization scheme of several years ago and how Brazil went practically broke on that scheme. An agricultural scheme that does not cut production is no good. Efforts to
