Afghanistan
111
not much greater than if we decided to provide quantities of lethal
equipment and training for the insurgency as described above.5
5 The summary of conclusions of the SCC’s March 6 meeting was sent under cover
of a March 19 memorandum from Dodson to Mondale, Vance, Brown, Jones, and Turner.
It noted that the final portion of the meeting was devoted to the CIA paper: “There was
a general feeling that internal and external media activity should proceed but that
possibilities and channels for support of dissidents and insurgents should be studied at
greater depth. The Attorney General suggested CIA prepare much more specific decision
proposals than it had submitted to date so that clear yes-or-no answers could be given
by the committee. CIA representatives stressed that gathering additional feasibility infor-
mation will necessitate contacts with regime opponents who may not be entirely forth-
coming about providing information on their capabilities and plans until they feel assured
that their requests for assistance have a serious chance of being responded to.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May
1978–7 Dec 1978) The portion of the summary of conclusions concerning Saudi Arabia is
printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula,
Document 187.
39.
Special Analysis Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, March 23, 1979
[paper number not declassified]
AFGHANISTAN: A Regime in Trouble
The insurgencies faced by President Taraki’s government since his leftist
faction seized power almost a year ago have now grown into serious threats
to the survival of the Soviet-backed regime. The USSR is clearly concerned,
and if conditions worsen in Afghanistan the Soviets could face an awkward
dilemma. ([classification marking not declassified])
The most damaging recent development has been the spread of
fighting to the previously quiet north and west. The causes of the revolt
that broke out in Herat last week and smaller outbreaks elsewhere are
still unclear, but Islamic opposition to the “godless” government may
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. Prepared by [text not declassified] and [text not declassified].
