538  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
conflict involving the use of military force or conducted in its shadow 
as the main propellant of fundamental changes in the Third World. 
They believe that military power will remain the cornerstone of Soviet 
policy. Their primary objectives in aligning themselves selectively with 
states and insurgent movements in Third World conflicts are to assert 
the USSR’s legitimacy as ideological vanguard of world “national lib-
eration” movements, to secure a major role in Third World affairs, to 
affect the outcome of regional conflicts in favor of Soviet interests, and 
to neutralize Western and Chinese political and military influence. The 
Soviet leadership has no illusions, however, about the difficulties of 
attaining these objectives.
2. While broad political objectives are paramount, the Soviets pur-
sue specific military objectives as well. These include acquisition of 
overflight clearances and access to facilities abroad for supporting mili-
tary operations of Soviet as well as friendly forces, especially emergency 
air and sea lifts of military equipment and supplies to Third World 
states and insurgent forces. Overseas facilities also can ease the logis-
tic problems of operating naval forces at great distances from Soviet 
waters. The Soviets deploy military forces in distant areas to show the 
flag, to maintain a military presence that can be augmented relatively 
quickly in time of crisis, and to monitor and, if necessary, counter the 
operations of Western naval forces.
3. Objectives of a lower order in Soviet policy in the Third World 
are to promote trade, to secure access to certain raw materials and 
foods, and to be capable of restricting Western access to these materials. 
Moscow’s efforts to foster both military and economic dependence in 
individual Third World countries go hand in hand, as the major recip-
ients of Soviet arms in 1978 also account for almost half of the USSR’s 
nonmilitary trade with the Third World. Soviet economic aid has not 
always resulted in a commensurate level of influence, nor do the Sovi-
ets expect economic interests alone to buy much influence.
Policy Appraisal
4. The Soviets have undoubtedly gained from the expansion of their 
military activity in the Third World. Soviet policymakers are probably 
persuaded that they have generally been on the right track, and their 
most recent ventures in Angola and Ethiopia have surely reinforced 
that conviction. Soviet political influence has grown in some countries 
at the expense of the West and China. Events in Angola and Ethiopia 
have enhanced the USSR’s image as a great power capable of project-
ing military force far from its shores. Military assistance to Africa and 
the Middle East has demonstrated the value of Soviet support, espe-
cially under emergency conditions. Moscow also has benefited from 
the international perception that the military balance has changed, to
