786 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II the Executive Order establishing the Presidential Commission on World Hunger.12 The Nature and Scope of the World Hunger Program Hunger persists in the world today despite abundant harvests in the past two years. One person in six suffers from chronic hunger and malnutrition, which directly or indirectly cause nearly twenty million deaths each year. Seven hundred million people are seriously malnourished. Nearly half of them are children. In many countries children under five make up less than one-fifth of the population but account for four-fifths of the deaths. Cyclical famines, such as that which occurred in the Sahel in 1973–74,13 take in addition the lives of millions more. The specific causes of hunger vary from one country to another, as do the potential solutions. However, there are certain underlying contributing factors that exist worldwide. —The world’s readily arable land is reaching its limits. —Untapped supplies of fresh water for irrigation are shrinking. —Food production in developing countries barely keeps pace with population growth, so that most of the increases in food production are absorbed. —Hunger is intimately linked with poverty, and only in rare instances has hunger been relieved without dealing with the general problems of underdevelopment. —Pressure on total world food supplies is growing because of increased consumption in affluent nations. —Distribution problems internationally and within countries are severe. Transportation systems in many developing countries remain rudimentary. Farmers in developed countries with only 30 percent of the world’s population grow 60 percent of the world’s food. Lower income groups cannot afford adequate quantities of food. —Land tenure patterns and persistent poverty discourage improving productivity in developing nations, by making the use of expensive fertilizers (the cost of which is tied directly to rising energy costs), pesticides and machinery economically inaccessible. At the same time, land in developed countries is reaching the limit at which these agricultural aids can increase production. 12 See Document 251. 13 The six states of the Sahel (Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, and Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso)) experienced severe drought and famine beginning in 1972. The FAO, through its Office for Sahelian Relief Operations (OSRO), coordinated the global response to the crisis. For documentation on U.S. actions with regard to the famine and African development programs, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–6, Documents on Africa, 1973–1976, Documents 5–6, 8–9, 13–14, 20, 36, 44–45, 47–49.
