706 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX countries object to all of this. They are against Sadat. Now there is a very serious problem on Israel’s northeastern front. They have 5,600 tanks there, and 6,000 guns. Israel has more than 3,000 tanks. That means they have a two to one ratio. We can defend ourselves only through counter-attack. We cannot withdraw to Haifa or Tel Aviv. If we reach the gates of Damascus, and this is possible, Syria may invoke its agreements with Egypt. Egypt would then be obliged to come to Syria’s aid. If these words “are not inconsistent with” are crucial instead of “do not derogate”, it means that Egypt will start a war while having a peace treaty with Israel. Therefore, we cannot accept. President Carter: Egypt is not trying to attack Israel, nor is the United States. The top sentence was added at the request of Egypt. They are not trying to preserve those parts of the 1960 and 1967 treaties6 which are inconsistent with this treaty. We can make it clear in the note that Article 6, paragraph 5, does prevail. We could add the phrase “are not considered to be inconsistent with”. Prime Minister Begin: Respectfully, I differ. That doesn’t change one iota of the meaning. We stand on the agreement we made in Washington. We do not accept this proposal from Egypt. Egypt cannot threaten war now. We would have five divisions across the Suez soon. But when the Baghdad states attack us, Egypt will have to join. I will read to you from the controlled Egyptian press. On February 20, 1979, one of Sadat’s close advisers wrote a letter to Khomeini in which he violently attacks Israel. He says the peace treaty will cease to exist. On January 26, 1979, another writer talked of Israel becoming a second Taiwan, an artificial entity established by force on others’ lands. Anis Mansour wrote in the magazine, “October”, that the Jewish people lie and are deceitful. Another author wrote of Israel not being a state and said that Israel was run by the Mafia. President Carter: What is the purpose of your reading this to me? Prime Minister Begin: This is the atmosphere in which the peace talks are conducted. President Carter: I have never detected any of this in my talks with Sadat. 6 Carter’s reference to a 1960 treaty is unclear, though it may likely be a mistaken reference to the 1950 Treaty of Joint Defense and Economic Cooperation Between the States of the Arab League. (See footnote 5, Document 166) The second reference is likely to Resolution 3, adopted by the Conference of Arab Heads of State at Khartoum in August 1967, under which Egypt had agreed to unite its political efforts on the international and diplomatic level with other signatories “to eliminate the effects of the aggression and to ensure the withdrawal of the aggressive Israeli forces from the Arab lands which have been occupied since the 5 June [1967] aggression.” Moreover, this was to be accomplished within “the framework of the main principles to which the Arab states adhere, namely: no peace with Israel, no recognition of Israel, no negotiations with it, and adherence to the rights of the Palestinian people in their country.” For the text of the Khartoum resolutions, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1967, pp. 590–591.
