380 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 111. Memorandum From Smith (S/P) to John Foster Dulles1 Washington, November 28, 1958 SUBJECT Basic National Policy: Approach to President 1. Present budgetary policies seem increasingly likely to have the following consequences: (a) The FY 1960 Mutual Security Program will, if there are signif­ icant BOB cuts in the Department’s request, be inadequate to achieve the development objective which you outlined to your Wednesday press conference: that of creating enough progress so that there will be a feeling of dynamism rather than stagnation. Recent NSC Planning Board discussion indicates that attainment of this objective would call for substantial increase in present levels of development financing. (b) Our local war capability will not be enhanced. As you suggested the other day, measures which might be directed to this end will prob­ ably be the first to feel the effect of a very tight DOD budget ceiling. (c) The result could be a gradual weakening of our position in Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, in the face of increasing Communist efforts at subversion and aggression. For we will not be able to offer needed help to countries which are progressively seeking economic growth; and we will not be able to respond effectively to limited mili­ tary challenges. 2. We would not wish this administration to be recorded as thus having presided, in its last two years, over a weakening of US strength which could have even more serious consequences than the economy drive which preceded the Korean aggression. What are the alternatives? (a) We could proceed with deficit financing of necessary additional national security expenditures, which would probably run to a very few billion dollars, at most. (b) We could raise these additional sums through taxes, e.g., a national sales tax explicitly designed to meet national security require­ ments until these could be covered out of rising revenues resulting from a resumption of economic growth. 1 Source: Defense budget; includes three transmittal notes. Secret. 5 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351.
