1086
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
344.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, February 18, 1980
Preparations for Global Negotiations
Over the past two months we have been preparing actively for the
COW preparatory talks March 31 to April 11 on Global Negotiations.
There is more work to be done, however, to develop further our posi-
tions and to map out tactics.
Strategy and Positions
Our strategy for the Global Negotiations is to use them as a means
of making progress on a few specific issues which we believe are of
global concern while working to prevent their undercutting ongoing
negotiations in specialized fora. To that end, we have selected three
specific issues—trade policy (protectionism), energy, and food and ag-
riculture—on which we believe progress can be made in a framework
that, despite our efforts, will inherently be highly politicized.
Through a discussion of trade policy, we want to see steady pres-
sure brought to bear on all nations to resist protectionist forces, recog-
nizing that industrial countries in particular have a responsibility for
keeping their markets open. We would like to encourage stronger posi-
tive adjustment policies, and urge LDCs to participate more actively in
the GATT.
In the area of energy, we would like to see discussion of the impact
of oil price increases on world economic growth, promotion of meas-
ures to conserve energy, and agreement on measures to increase energy
production, particularly in oil importing LDCs.
With respect to food policy, we would like to emphasize the need
for LDCs to develop food sector strategies, discuss the establishment of
food aid reserves by all donors, and push for increased assistance, espe-
cially by OPEC, for food aid and agricultural development.
We will urge that the sessions in New York negotiate general reso-
lutions on these issues, but then pass responsibility for negotiating spe-
cific technical agreements to the appropriate forum. In the case of en-
ergy, we may urge a new forum be created.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot
81D134, Box 7, E—Memoranda of Conversations, Jan. 1980–June 1980. Confidential.
Drafted by Cooper’s Special Assistant, Barney Rush. A typed notation at the top of the
page reads: “(Not reviewed by Mr. Cooper).” Rush initialed the memorandum on
Cooper’s behalf.
