Romania 661 purpose was to hammer home the point that has been made by almost every Romanian official in the past two weeks: the need for a reconsideration of the NATO commitment to a 3 percent increase in defense spending, because this is being used by the Soviet Union to justify increases in the Warsaw Pact defense budget. In response to a question about Ceausescu’s reference in his December 1st speech to “counter revolutionary activity” of some socialist states—which many in the West saw as an indication of an attempt by Moscow to form a fifth column in Romania—Mitran said that this was a reference not to Romania but to the Soviet Union’s use of Vietnam as a proxy against China. He also voiced concern about “alarmist” Western press reports which only served to make things worse for Romania. This was not Czechoslovakia, he emphasized. The Romanians knew what they were doing; they were not about to commit suicide. They knew the limits. However, within these limits they intended to stand firm.7 (S) It was obvious that our discussion, like Andrei’s conversation with Blumenthal, had not occurred by chance but had been carefully planned, and that as “your” representative, I had been singled out by Mitran for a message he hoped would be conveyed directly to you. (C) The official meeting with Andrei was followed by another official meeting with Cornel Burtica, the Minister of Foreign Trade, and a team of financial experts.8 The discussion, much of it quite technical, revolved around economic matters. Burtica made a strong pitch for MFN on a permanent basis and more US credits, arguing that the best guarantee of independence was a strong economy. He also asked for expediting export licenses. Blumenthal made no commitments but simply reiterated the basic desire of the US to expand economic relations with Romania in areas where this was mutually beneficial. He also gave Burtica a briefing on President Carter’s inflation program and its relationship to the stability of the dollar—a matter of great interest to Romania since 70 percent of Romanian foreign trade is in dollars. The Secretary also gave Burtica a rundown of his recent trip to the Middle East and expressed his concern about developments in Iran. Interestingly, Burtica said that Romania agreed with the US position regarding the Shah. It did not want to see anarchy or a vacuum in Iran and 7 Responding to December 8 reports in the Austrian daily Kronen-Zeitung suggesting that the Czechoslovak Ambassador in Bucharest was engaged in an effort to overthrow Ceausescu at Soviet behest, the Embassy in Bucharest reported in telegram 8859, December 13, that there was no evidence to support the story. Nevertheless, the Embassy expected the story to continue to surface. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780517–1037) 8 In telegram 8890 from Bucharest, December 15, the Embassy reported on the meeting with Burtica. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780517–1167)
