804 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement after issuance announcement only 6 Americans have returned. If we for moment followed my logic, then it was fact that six persons had returned to America after announcement issued. However, in 23 weeks after issuance announcement, despite fact their side repeatedly brought up question of imprisoned Chinese in US, their side still not been given any information regarding these people. 100. Wang said to continue the comparison between Chinese and thirteen Americans who now serving their prison terms, today their attention been called to fact that up to now 34 Chinese who have defi­ nite names and surnames, who desire return still being prevented doing so. And there additional 32 people who not been able return. 101. Wang said they had no information from me as to how many Chinese imprisoned in US. They believed this not matter running to few score, but probably running to over hundred. These people not informed of agreed announcement. These people desired return but being prevented from doing so. Yet Wang’s side not allowed even to know about their situation. This contrasts sharply with attitude of ­Chinese ­Government in supplying me with information respect to Americans in Chinese prisons. Manner of carrying out agreed announcement as between Chinese Government and US contrasts sharply with each other. 102. I said all I could say was I still have to see single fact or evi­ dence that any Chinese in US been obstructed, prevented or hindered in returning to Wang’s country if he desired return. That was all. 103. Wang said until all these people whose names he had given me, and until Chinese in US prisons accounted for, and until they actually able return, he could not consider US carrying out agreed announcement. They could not consider valid contention that Chinese free return. They still awaiting reply regarding these people. 104. Wang said, (consulting note passed him by Lai, who got infor­ mation from printed booklet entitled Mei-ch’iao Fen-­lei Ts’ai-­liao— material on overseas Americans by category) regarding my request for medical records on Bradshaw and Kanady, his information indicated that they not been hospitalized in China, and as far as his information concerned, Bradshaw been cared for by her friend Mrs. Laura Lau, who American. He not sure if medical records available. Of course, he would look into this matter and if they available, he would be glad comply with my request. 105. I asked if it agreeable to Wang to meet next Thursday, March 1. He agreed. Note: I have no comments on today’s meeting beyond those con­ tained my preceding summary telegram. Gowen
