432 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV get in touch with the force quickly, and how quickly it can respond. “Hard target” primarily implies accuracy (though warhead yields are not irrelevant). There are two classes of hard target: one is the roughly 1100 Soviet silos we would expect under SALT II; [3 lines not declassified] (There are also [less than 1 line not declassified] hard communications points; we do not have enough accurate weapons to target these now.) Thus far, ICBMs have had unique advantages in this respect—­ quick and reliable communications, a quick-­firing capability, short flight times, and high accuracy. SLBMs are currently weak here—­slow communication, mediocre accuracy, and limited warhead yield. [5 lines not declassified] Bombers have no quick response hard target capability. [2 lines not declassified] • Good C3. “Good” here refers to communications links that can transmit adequate amounts of data as rapidly as needed, and are not vulnerable to enemy attack. Simple execution [1 line not declassified] requires one level of C3 sophistication; a “warfighting” capability (see next below) can require considerably more. ICBMs have great advantages in C3. Though no C3 system can be invulnerable, [11 lines not declassified] The survivability of these aircraft—­because of the vulnerability of their bases—­is also limited in duration, thus limiting the endurance of this part of the C3 system. [2 lines not declassified] • Warfighting Capability. Sometimes called “flexibility” or “responsiveness”, this refers to the ability to do more than execute a massive pre-­planned strike—­to be able to use limited amounts of strategic force against particular numbers and types of targets during a nuclear war on the basis of what had occurred before. This includes retargeting, assessment of surviving US and Soviet forces, and connection to a surviving NCA. We have considerably more of that kind of capability today than we had in past; further developments in this direction are possible, at a price. Generally desirable characteristics to this end are the ability to retarget forces and execute missions promptly and with high probability of success, to limit collateral damage, and to restrict the size of each mission to the minimum deemed necessary. I should note that I doubt that this kind of a strategic war is among the likely possibilities, or that it could be fought without rapid escalation to an unlimited spasm. But there are many indications that the Soviets are structuring the forces to fight such a war. Their plans and exercises point the same way. If they think they have such a capability, and both we and the Soviets know that the US does not, adverse military consequences are possible, and adverse political consequences probable. ICBMs are the best of our forces for such missions. We can retarget them quickly and launch as few as one if necessary. We are now at the
