1978 513 —The growing Soviet “hard target” capability [less than 1 line not declassified] creates a Minute Man survivability problem. [2 lines not declassified] (S) These developments are creating a more receptive attitude in Defense and OMB to the idea of a fundamental review of continuity of government. (S) It should also be obvious to you that this issue is closely related to changing views on strategic doctrine. It is the crux of the C3I issue on the civil side. We could neglect continuity of government and emergency succession as long as we held a significant strategic lead. Today, without that lead, we need an effective leadership protection capability to enhance deterrence. (S) The argument can be made that PD–41 provides sufficient policy guidance (i.e. directing “greater continuity of government”) for FPA to proceed on its own program review without further assistance from the NSC. The flaws in this argument are two. First, FPA is so deteriorated that it does not have adequate staff for making such a review. Second, FPA does not have adequate clout to make all the Federal agencies—­for whose “continuity” FPA is planning—­take a review seriously. FPA could not even force all agencies to review the PEADs (Presidential Emergency Action Documents), during the first year of this Administration. (TS) What is needed, therefore, is a combination of staff reinforcement with expressed support from the NSC and OMB. With these, FPA can make progress. (C) —Staff support. The “management” part of OMB and Defense can be tapped to augment the FPA staff. If necessary, some tasks can be contracted to outside consultants. (C) —NSC/OMB support. The first thought, of course, is a PRM, but that is undesirable for two reasons. First, the non-­sensitive FPA programs have been through the PRM–32 process with no real result. Second, sensitive programs like Presidential successor plans and maintenance of the NCA in face of a Soviet de-­capitation attack on our C3I should not be treated in the PRM working group circles. (TS) In several meetings with OMB (Szanton and Jayne) FPA (Joe Mitchell), and Hugh Carter, I discovered that the preferred approach is an NSC/OMB jointly mandated study, guided by a small NSC/OMB steering group. The study results, of course, could be reviewed by an SCC if that is later determined appropriate. (S) The proposed memo at Tab A would authorize the study by FPA (FEMA as FPA passes to FEMA) under a White House steering group signed jointly by you and McIntyre.4 I have worked with OMB on the 4 Not found attached.
