Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  359
Burt noted that the drawing indicated nothing about time. If any 
of the flights illustrated on the drawing took less than 15 minutes, it 
would not be permitted. If the flights took longer than 15 minutes, they 
would be permitted.
Nazarkin said Soviet experts found a certain inconsistency in what 
Brooks had said, especially the remark that the U.S. proposal did not 
extend to present practices.
Burt said Brooks was only referring to a broader approach that 
would require changes in the operational practices of ships and 
submarines.
Khromov asked whether the U.S. had missiles with less than 15 
minutes flight time.
Burt replied that any missile can be tested with less than 15 min-
utes flight time. Therefore, any ban on STOF capability would require 
extensive definitions and stringent verification provisions. Under the 
U.S. approach, nothing would prohibit the Soviet Union from devel-
oping a missile that had the capability for flights less than 15 minutes. 
But it would declare that it would not test a missile in that fashion. 
After long study, the U.S. had concluded that this was the most practi-
cal approach.
Nazarkin said the Soviet side would address the U.S. approach in 
Geneva. At the same time, it wanted to keep the broader Soviet approach 
on the agenda. Nazarkin then turned to U.S.-­proposed additional ele-
ments of common ground on mobile ICBM verification. Regarding ele-
ment 1A, the Soviet side proposed an alternative: “Rail garrisons would 
be limited in size recorded in the MOU. The manner of recording the 
size is to be agreed by the two sides.” The sizes recorded in the MOU 
would be the limiting factor. Assuming size would be limited in terms 
of length of track and assuming the Soviet side had garrisons of 20, 30, 
and 100 km, 100 km would be the absolute limit. This approach would 
not require the sides to change existing practices.
Burt asked whether the Soviet side was accepting the basic princi-
ple of limiting the size of rail garrisons.
Nazarkin asked what was meant by “limiting?”
Burt said the U.S. side wanted limits on the size of rail garrisons 
the same way it wanted limits on the size of road-­mobile restricted 
areas. It was prepared to discuss size limitations that would meet both 
sides’ interests.
Nazarkin said there seemed to be a difference between the sides’ 
approaches. The U.S. approaches would appear to require changes in 
existing practices. The Soviet approach would not, although changes 
could be made in the future.
