100
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1130–115063
Secretary Vance
President Sadat
Secretary Brown (later)
Foreign Minister Kamel
Ambassador Ghorbal
Subject: Sadat explains difficulty of signing an agreement with
President Carter if Begin does not also sign. Such an agreement would
become the basis for further compromises in any future negotiations.
1207–123764
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Sadat agrees to President Carter’s request that the Egyp-
tian delegation not leave that day and wait until Sunday. This will
allow another effort to be made with the Israelis to obtain their agree-
ment to the revised overall and Sinai Framework texts.
1400–160065
Vice President Mondale (part)
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Vance
Defense Minister Weizman
Secretary Brown
Professor Barak
Dr. Brzezinski
63 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. In his
memoirs, Vance wrote of this meeting: “Friday, September 15, was a fateful day. That
morning I received word from Sadat that he wanted me to come and see him in his lodge.
When I saw him, his face was clouded and his mood somber. He was clearly deeply trou-
bled, and not his warm and empathetic self. He asked me to sit down and then told me he
had decided he must go home, as there was no hope that we could achieve an agreement.
I struggled to persuade him to stay, stressing the importance of our task and our respon-
sibility to our peoples and to world peace. I asked him to remember that it was his coura-
geous initiative that in large part had made it possible for us to be here at all, and that his-
tory would treat us harshly if we failed. I urged Sadat to think about what I had said
while I went at once to inform President Carter.” (Vance, Hard Choices, p. 224) Following
the meeting, Vance walked to Aspen Lodge, where he informed Carter of the discussion.
Carter noted in an annotation to his personal diary, “This was one of the worst moments
of my life.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 237)
64 According to the President’s Daily Diary, this meeting took place in Dogwood
Cabin from 12:07 p.m. to 12:36 p.m. on September 15. For Carter’s accounts of this
meeting, in which the President persuaded Sadat to remain at Camp David and continue
the negotiations, see White House Diary, pp. 237–238, and Keeping Faith, pp. 392–393. De-
spite Sadat’s agreement, Carter noted that the U.S. delegation continued to prepare
“failure plans” should the talks fail to produce an agreement by Sunday. He added: “But
I did not want to give up. That afternoon and evening I went over the proposals—the
Framework and the Sinai document—with Vance and Mondale. (Carter, Keeping Faith, p.
393) Quandt wrote that Carter had tasked him with preparing a speech announcing the
failure of the talks. (Quandt, Camp David, p. 240) Brzezinski’s handwritten note to
Quandt, outlining the points to include in the speech, including the U.S. role and interest
in securing Middle East peace and areas of agreement achieved is in the Papers of Wil-
liam B. Quandt, Private Collection.
65 See Document 50.
