1208
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance said that he would describe the negotiations. We
want a tripartite agreement: let’s work on it.
The President said he recalled that Israel had suggestions on Ar-
ticles 4 and 6.
Secretary Vance said he had discussed them at breakfast, but can’t
remember the details now.
The President called on Ambassador Evron.
Ambassador Evron said that the problem is that Egypt now takes ex-
ception to the whole paragraph.
Professor Lapidot called on Mr. Rubinstein.
The President said he had not been in this issue.
Mr. Rubinstein said that Egypt did not see Israel’s declaration, that
if there is no agreement reached (on the follow-on force), then Israel
will not withdraw in 1982. There is more than a hint of that in the docu-
ment, in section (sic!—paragraph) six to that effect. Egypt says that it is
not acceptable, any hint that Israel might not withdraw. The Israelis
think that the Egyptians know the Israeli position.
Prime Minister Begin said that, therefore, let’s have a trilateral and a
bilateral . . .
The President said he sees.
Secretary Vance said we have . . .
Prime Minister Begin said: . . . and an exchange of letters. They
should become an integral part of the treaty.
The President asked: who?
Secretary Vance said that this didn’t need to be crossed to the year
before withdrawal.
The President said that he could see that Sadat would be reluctant to
sign a document saying that Israel might not withdraw. We need to re-
serve the prospects on that. It is not in the (agreement?). He sees a
problem.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel would not require that of
Sadat: the United States gave the commitment.
The President agreed.
Prime Minister Begin said that this was central to it (the treaty?).
Mr. Rubinstein said that Egypt would object to a U.S.-Israeli agree-
ment saying this.
The President said he knows.
Mr. Rubinstein said that this is a crucial thing, which Israel cannot
accept.
The President said that it was not necessary to get agreement with
Sadat, but we could see, and try to remove it (the problem?).
