Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 4. Dayan agreed fully on importance of resolving remaining treaty text issues and gave his personal opinion that this was achievable. He agreed it was important to show results from Hansell’s and my visit. To achieve this, he said, it was important to persuade Begin of the points I had made to him, so that Israeli negotiating team would be given the right instructions. In response to Lewis’ question as to whether Begin would have problems with the Cabinet even if he agreed to some variations on Sadat’s proposals, Dayan replied that, if Begin were convinced, he could carry the Cabinet. He urged that we have several sessions with Begin while in Jerusalem and arranged on the spot for an initial meeting at the end of day. 5. Dayan showed no interest in getting into details of treaty article problems but came back several times to problem of how to resolve problem of West Bank/Gaza side letter. He is clearly increasingly attracted by the idea of concentrating on getting agreement with Egypt for establishing autonomy regime in Gaza and felt that in Brussels4 Khalil was more receptive to this idea, even if no parallel results were achievable on West Bank, than he had expected. He thought Egyptian- Israeli negotiations could well lead to agreement on West Bank/Gaza autonomy regime in nine months so that Sadat would not have to send ambassador to Israel before autonomy regime was in place in Gaza. It would simply not work, however, for Sadat to make ambassadorial exchange conditional on this; Sadat would have to drop this idea, Dayan said. 6. Meeting with Begin was relaxed, serious and free of polemics. At Dayan’s suggestion, I went over much of the same ground with Begin that I had covered with Dayan at lunch. I stressed the President’s and your commitment to finish the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations. Both Lewis and I made clear that your inability to respond at this time to his desire that you come to the area reflected no diminution of your commitment to help complete the negotiations. I noted other urgent foreign policy demands on your time and your desire to have a better sense of the prospects for success than was now the case. Begin listened thoughtfully to my presentation and at no time engaged in recriminations about your December visit.5 7. In his comments, Begin dwelt at some length on overall trends in the area which clearly weigh on his mind. He cited concerns that Iran would be lost to the West if Khomeini takes over there, current Palestinian National Council meeting in Damascus, talks about Syrian-Iraqi union and King Hussein’s recent statements6 and visit to Damascus.
