1092  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
673.	 Telegram 16 to Geneva1
Washington, July 9, 1956, 3:56 p.m.
16. For Johnson.
1. Letter from Mackensen to his father dated April 30 indicates he 
has been brainwashed to attack our position on implementation and to 
elect to remain in Communist China after his term completed. Letter 
describes in glowing terms his trip around China with other prisoners. 
Says he is receiving QUOTE first-­class treatment UNQUOTE in prison 
and is completely satisfied that Chinese side carrying out its part of 
Geneva Agreement on return civilians. He declares QUOTE I am some­
what disturbed that Chinese in U.S. aren’t faring so well. Though our 
ambassador at Geneva and British Charge d’Affaires in Peking have 
had complete reports on Americans in China, so far as I know, so far 
there have been no comparable reports from our side on Chinese in 
America to Ambassador Wang or to Indian Embassy. It seems to me 
if we are to carry on negotiations in good faith, then we must do so 
on basis of complete equality and mutual benefit. How else can nego­
tiations be successful? At same time I have read letters from Chinese 
who have relatives in America (particularly students), whose where­
abouts and disposition have become a question. Whatever you may 
have heard concerning this matter, it is evident that there have been all 
kinds of intimidation, restrictions, and other unsavory methods used 
against patriotic Chinese in our country—and their families at home 
have all suffered because of this. They are innocent victims of unwar­
ranted discrimination. UNQUOTE
Goes on to say his detention completely different from QUOTE 
what Chinese in US are facing UNQUOTE. He was detained for QUOTE 
open hostility to trends in Chinese domestic affairs and for aiding 
those who would turn back the course of Chinese history. UNQUOTE. 
Declares he intends to resign from Board of Foreign ­Missions and 
request permission to remain and work in China when his term up in 
ten months. Full text by letter.
2. Indian Government requested and received our permission 
July 7 to inform Chinese Communists text our circular letter to Chinese 
prisoners. You should anticipate possible Chinese Communist reaction 
tomorrow’s meeting.
Dulles
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–956. Confidential; Priority; 
Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger.
