Summaries of Compilations  LIX
Costa Rica
U.S. Relations With Costa Rica
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
Relations with Costa Rica during the 3-­year period were unmarked 
by crises and difficult problems. The close of the period, however, 
saw the emergence of an issue that plagued the United States in Latin 
America and other parts of the world: the effect of the threat of commu-
nism on everyday U.S. relations with friendly and sympathetic govern-
ments. The question was whether that threat made the United States 
neglect its old friends while pursuing the support of more recalcitrant 
countries.
Early in 1958 the election of Mario Echandi Jiménez to the 
Presidency of Costa Rica offered a leader whom the United States 
saw as both friendly and oriented toward the stability of business and 
investment. (CR–1) During March, President-­elect Echandi visited 
Washington and met with President Eisenhower and officials from the 
Departments of State and the Treasury. Echandi stressed the need for 
economic development in his country and also gave assurances of his 
awareness of the threat of communism in the hemisphere, particularly 
from infiltration of labor unions. Proud of his country’s record for toler-
ance, he said that Costa Rica would continue to provide safety to polit-
ical exiles but would not allow them to launch subversive operations 
from Costa Rican territory. (CR–2, 3, 4, 5)
One of the principal issues during 1958 and 1959 concerned 
Echandi’s desire for a reallocation of tax revenues stemming from the 
profits of the United Fruit Company’s operations so that Costa Rita 
would receive more than the 50–50 division currently in effect. U.S. 
officials, particularly in the Department of State, were quite agreeable 
to an arrangement on a 75–25 basis. In fact, however, legal technicalities 
uncovered by the Department of the Treasury served to delay a reso-
lution until the end of 1959. At that time, a 60–40 arrangement retroac-
tive to January 1, 1958, was announced, but the smaller than hoped for 
reallocation and the seemingly endless delays left Costa Rica less than 
totally satisfied. (CR–6, 7, 8, 15, 16, 17, 18)
Echandi continually stressed his commitment to democratic 
principles and private enterprise as well as his concern for modest 
financial assistance and loans which would boost the local economic 
structure. (CR–5, 9, 10) Lack of immediate response from the United 
States, however, produced a further feeling of dismay and dissatisfac-
tion in San José. This in turn affected Echandi’s attitude toward U.S.
