First Responses 45 3. Iranian Assets. There is a report that Iran has ordered the withdrawal of all their assets from U.S. banks.5 The Federal Reserve can probably delay acting on this, but private banks will find it much more difficult. By declaring a national emergency, all Iranian transactions could be blocked. Dr. Brzezinski and Lloyd Cutler will talk to Treasury Secretary Miller and ask that he contact Federal Reserve Chairman Volcker to see what can be done to delay any withdrawals without taking dramatic, overt actions. Their views will be sought on the implications of any freeze or other public act on our relations with other major depositors. (TS) 4. [1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified] 5. Energy. Secretary Duncan will present a memo on Tuesday6 outlining the range of options available to us in the event oil deliveries are cut off. Basically, these fall into four categories: (1) acts which the President can take unilaterally; (2) actions which the State governments can take; (3) voluntary actions; and (4) emergency legislation. (C) The following issues were discussed in restricted session: 1. Future Options. David Aaron will chair a group composed of Hal Saunders (State), Frank Carlucci (CIA), and Robert Komer (DOD) to examine the longer term implications of a possible disintegration of Iran and how we could best position ourselves to influence the course of events. The group will look at means of improving our intelligence [less than 1 line not declassified], identifying groups which might cooperate with us, and evaluating contacts with expatriate opposition groups. (TS) 2. Evacuation. State is working with the Swiss to develop a plan for bringing our people out if they should be released. An incomplete survey indicates 87 known Americans still in Iran in addition to the hostages. There are probably others that we do not know about. The two largest groups are the Fluor personnel (about 50) building the refinery in Isfahan and 30 Americans associated with the international school in Tehran. Secretary Vance intends to inform Fluor to pull their people out or their passports will be revoked. (S) 3. Emissaries and Negotiating Efforts. Ramsey Clark in Istanbul is attempting to negotiate his entrance as a private citizen. Bill Miller will be told to return. An emissary of the Pope was to see Khomeini this 5 As reported in a November 9 memorandum from Poats to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 29, Iran 11/1/79–11/14/79) 6 November 13. See Document 25.
