692 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Tab A Memorandum5 Washington, undated TOWARD A PRM ON WORLD FOOD POLICY I. The Mechanics of the Study A. Process: We are agreed that the PRM process is appropriate for this review. The strengths of the PRM process are that it is a tested approach to problems which cut across departments and agencies, and it is respected by the bureaucracy which will delegate high-level attention to its preparation. B. Participants: Every agency which will play a significant role in the policy implementation should be included, but every effort should be made to limit the participants to those who have a legitimate interest. Suggested participants include: Agencies Executive Office of the President State National Security Council Treasury Office of Management and Commerce Budget Agriculture Domestic Policy Council Health, Education and Welfare Office of Science and Tech- Agency for International nology Policy Development Office of the Special Represent- Central Intelligence Agency ative for Trade Negotiations United States Representative to Office of the Special Assistant the United Nations for Health (Bourne) National Science Foundation National Institutes of Health C. Chair: Since a committee cannot be successfully run by a committee, the PRM would be run under joint NSC-Domestic Policy Council management with full participation by other Executive Office of the President offices as appropriate.6 Serious problems have arisen in 5 No classification marking. 6 Daft transmitted a copy of the “Toward a PRM on World Food Policy” memorandum to Eizenstat under a July 9 covering memorandum, in which he indicated that he supported “the general thrust of the proposal, though much work on the detail remains.” Eizenstat wrote on the memorandum: “Lynn: Is a jt. NSC–DC management idea feasible? Shouldn’t we defer to NSC & simply participate & let them chair? Let’s talk.” (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger [2])
