314
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
112.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Response to the Soviets Regarding Afghanistan: A Menu of Possible Actions
To emphasize the outrageous and unprecedented nature of the
Soviet coup in Afghanistan would be to belabor the obvious. Any
failure to respond adequately on our part would be perceived as glaring
weakness by our Allies, by the non-aligned, and especially in the Per-
sian Gulf. The domestic near-consensus on Iran could evaporate over
Afghanistan. It is therefore imperative that we not only act to counter
what the Soviets have done in Afghanistan, but that we are perceived
as having done so.
The speciousness and bald-faced arrogance of the Soviet action can
hardly be exaggerated. There was no need, for example, to announce
Amin’s immediate execution, which gives the lie to the Soviet assertion
that they were invited in by the Amin government. Furthermore, the
use of the recently-signed Friendship Treaty with Afghanistan as the
juridical basis for their actions creates a logical implication that the
Soviets could equally undertake the overthrow of any of the ten govern-
ments with whom they now have such treaties, e.g. India. Equally to the
point, would Sadat and Siad have thrown out the Soviets so cavalierly
if they had felt that one serious Soviet option was to fly in an army
and set up their rivals in power?
I. The Public Posture
We have no real option of downplaying the significance of the
Soviet action. We need a clear, sharp and unequivocal response, which
should be given full play by all our communications media. The themes
we should stress are as follows:
a. The fact that Amin was assassinated within two days of the
Soviet invasion makes a mockery of Moscow’s claims that it was invited
in by the Amin Government. That Amin’s family was killed along with
him shows the kind of people we are dealing with.
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
ski’s Geographic Files, Box 17, Southwest Asia/Persian Gulf—Afghanistan, 1/5/80–10/
1/80: Soviet Union. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System.
