1957  1295
detail as early as December 13. As you know, extensive changes in 
Chou’s travel plans have been made, or at least announced, since then.
We have sent you what little we have on Nehru’s conversations 
touching on China matters while he was recently in this country. We 
have no reason to think that anything took place in those talks which 
would influence our tactics with Wang. I gather that Nehru is not san­
guine about the prospects for any immediate favorable action on the 
prisoners by Peiping.
We are in a rather difficult position in our efforts to hold the line 
on travel of Americans to Communist China. The unexpected entry of 
the 3 American newsmen into Communist China has complicated our 
problem. The present disposition here is to refrain from any sort of legal 
or administrative sanctions against these three. The “Look” Magazine 
people have already ordered Stevens and Harrington out and the 
“Afro-American” publisher has promised to advise Worthy to leave 
promptly, although Worthy is not actually an employee of the “Afro-
American” and may not feel obligated to respect their wishes. Wiggin of 
the “Washington Post” is making a comprehensive study of the whole 
subject for the American Society of Newspaper Editors. While he is not 
entirely unsympathetic to our position his report may make it more dif­
ficult to hold the line 100 percent. There is a strong effort to break down 
our position to the extent of letting in a selected few newsmen. But we 
do not see how we can discriminate against people in other occupations 
who have plausible reasons for going in. We intend to continue to use 
all the moral suasion we can while avoiding tangles with the courts and 
with public opinion. It seems important to get out a better statement of 
our reasons for opposing travel to Red China than we have yet done. 
Such a statement is being worked on now.
Our difficulties have been compounded by the digging up of a 
1952 press release (copy enclosed). This release announces that all pass­
ports will be stamped not valid for travel to various Communist coun­
tries including Communist China but explains that “this procedure in 
no way forbids American travel to those areas.” None of us were here 
when this press release was issued. Do you recall any background on 
why it was stated that we would not object to travel in Communist 
China? That is hard to understand since it was issued at a time when 
the Korean War was still going on and more than 40 Americans were 
unjustly imprisoned in Communist China.
Our endeavor to keep the pressure on the Communists to release 
the American prisoners by refusing passports to mainland China 
until they are released has been further damaged by the action of the 
defense lawyer in the Powell sedition case, Abraham Lincoln Wirin. 
He has given the court a long list of witnesses in Communist China 
whose testimony he claims is essential to his clients’ defense. The judge
