434 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX devise a blend of pressure tactics and assurances which we would direct at Sadat to get him to back off most of his present demands as reflected in his latest letter and in the instructions given his delegation. We would at the same time need to insist on at least a bit more give from the Israelis—e.g., to set a target date now for West Bank/Gaza elections. —Alternatively, we can determine that it is in our interest to face up to and resolve at least some of the problems inherent in the West Bank/Gaza negotiations in the context of the Egypt-Israel talks, even if it means delaying the conclusion of a peace Treaty. If we do this it would be on the grounds that to postpone tackling these problems would make it even more difficult for us to get negotiations started and going somewhere once the Egypt-Israel Treaty is signed. The merits of these two strategies are finely balanced and we will need to consider the pros and cons of each course very carefully in making our decision. The Pros and Cons A case can be made that in getting Sadat to accept the ambiguities in the Camp David Framework about the West Bank/Gaza process we already issued a rather sizeable promissory note on the future in order to pay for the present, and that we should not compound this by attempting to postpone the tough issues any further. Our credibility in Arab eyes is already at stake in having announced publicly that we differed with Begin’s understanding of what was agreed to at Camp David about settlements and our inability thereafter to get him to stop or even exercise restraint in continued settlement activity. In his public statements Begin has taken the line that what he agreed to in the Camp David Framework was really nothing more than the Begin self-rule plan.11 This has fed the worst fears of the Arabs that the negotiations on the West Bank/Gaza will not be able to produce any real relinquishment of Israeli control over these areas. If we press Sadat now to abandon his insistence on further “linkage,” he might, in order to explain to other Arabs, let it be known that it was we who pressed him to drop his insistence on this matter. This will only deepen Arab suspicions of our commitment to a comprehensive settlement, and could make it very difficult if not virtually impossible to get either Jordan or Palestinians to step forward to join the process envisioned at Camp David, or to enlist Saudi support for that process. The actual signing of an Egypt-Israel Treaty will produce shock waves throughout the Arab world. So far Sadat’s course of action has been seen as a potential threat to the other Arabs, but it will come as a 11 See footnote 2, Document 5.
