418 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 enough to meet Allied concerns since he also said we would press ahead with sanctions and wanted the Allies to do the same. Would you like me to do a draft message trying to sort this out to Thatcher, Schmidt and Giscard?4 (S) 4 There is no indication that Brzezinski approved sending the message. 159. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, January 22, 1980 In the next several months, you will shape, define and execute a new American foreign policy that will not only set the tone for U.S.- Soviet relations for the next twenty years, but will largely determine whether or not our country will play an effective role as the leader of the Free World and, in that way, diminish the possibility of nuclear confrontation. We live in a more dangerous world today than it seems we have lived in since the Cuban missile crisis. For you to pursue this new policy and to execute the decisions that you must make, it seems to me that you have to be relatively unrestrained both politically and substantively. For that reason, it seems that we must have two very high priorities over the next 30– 45 days. First, we need to eliminate Kennedy from the political race so that you will not be preoccupied with the campaign nor restrained politically from doing whatever is necessary to meet the Soviet challenge. You will need to have the time to focus on this problem and the flexibility to make decisions that will be unpopular with some of the elements of the Democratic Party—the registration decision is a good case in point. Also, if we wrap up the nomination, it will give us more time to prepare for the general election and pull the party together for a tough general election campaign. 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 1/80. Eyes Only. Presumably this is a version of the 5-page memorandum Jordan recalled as approved by Vance, Brzezinski, and Carter on January 23. (Jordan, Crisis, p. 125)
