514
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
that the President’s remark would give encouragement to circles in
Congress which oppose abolition of the requirement for annual review
of Hungary’s most-favored-nation tariff status, and to certain Hungar-
ian-American circles. Esztergalyos said the latter would pose problems
“not for Hungary, but for the Department.” The Counselor took note
of the Ambassador’s comments, recalling that an Hungarian Embassy
officer had earlier raised the question in EUR/EE.
5. CSCE/Madrid. The Counselor asked about the Hungarian dele-
gation’s position at Madrid. Ezstergalyos replied that:
(A) Hungary does not want to see Madrid become a “mudslinging
forum” since this “would kill the whole process.” It would be better
to have discussions without illusions.
(B) Disarmament will be a main issue in the political field. Hungary
is willing to accept that Madrid should not be used as a disarmament
forum, but hopes for a kind of post-Madrid mandate to discuss this
key issue.
(C) Hungary also seeks how to resolve larger common European
projects such as energy, water resources, communications, and trans-
portation issues. Progress in such areas pays not only economic but
political dividends in contributing to reduction of tensions and to
greater understanding. Esztergalyos said the idea would not be to
institutionalize such project discussions since institutions come to fend
for themselves, but a start could be made at Madrid. He cited the
Hamburg scientific forum as having shown an interest and willingness
to start.
6. The Counselor said that the U.S. regarded the Hamburg experi-
ence as very important for Madrid. While the public may focus on the
CSCE biennial reviews, day-by-day gradual progress is the real CSCE
“process.” There had been a vigorous exchange of views at Hamburg.
While there had been no agreement on implementation, there had been
a candid discussion and a final document. The U.S. looks at Madrid
in the same way. We have no desire to be confrontational, but we
should be candid, thorough, and have a full review. We will focus on
balance of all aspects of the Final Act.
7. Esztergalyos agreed that all three baskets are a unified whole.
He emphasized that actual fulfillment of individual Helsinki commit-
ments is a bilateral task between participants. He noted that it is helpful
that the November conference convenes only after the FRG and US
elections. Otherwise there would be pressure for electoral publicity-
plays. The Counselor responded that the Final Act was signed for the
U.S. by a Republican administration and has been implemented for
several years by a Democratic one, and that U.S. views on CSCE tran-
scend party lines.
