Romania 615 Ceausescu’s Objectives: To express his support for the UN as a disarmament forum. He will probably raise this issue and may ask if you plan to attend the SSOD. Essential Factors: Representatives of the U.S. and Romania met in Washington in mid-March to discuss preparations for the SSOD scheduled for May 23–June 28, 1978. The Romanian delegation pressed for a larger role for non-nuclear states (e.g., Romania) in disarmament discussions and hoped that the SSOD would give the UN a more active role in disarmament. We agreed there could be improvements in multilateral disarmament mechanisms but argued that there must be a continuing and experienced disarmament negotiating body, and that disarmament agreements must be based on consensus. Substantively, the U.S. is actively engaged in reviewing policy issues for the SSOD. Points to be Made: —The recent US-Romanian talks on the SSOD were candid, and fruitful for the U.S. Despite some difference in the views of our two countries, it is very important to achieve consensus agreement on the final documents produced in the SSOD. —(If asked): The U.S. has adopted a strong and positive approach to the Special Session. We hope the meeting will generate broad agreement on principles and priorities, and thus give an impetus to progress on disarmament issues of pressing concern. We are conducting an extensive review of a broad range of disarmament issues for the SSOD. 11. Africa Particularly in view of your recent visits to Nigeria and Liberia, Ceausescu will want to hear your views of developments on the continent, especially on movement toward majority rule in Southern Africa and toward the peaceful settlement of the Ethiopia-Somalia dispute. 12. Hungarian Minority in Romania Recently, 66 members of the Congress wrote you a letter expressing their concern about Romanian treatment of the Hungarian minority and requesting that you raise the issue with Ceausescu.15 We have received an indication that Ceausescu may raise it himself because of his fear of Hungarian irredentist aspirations and will seek to explain Romanian policy toward minorities. Points to be Made: (If Ceausescu raises) —Express your satisfaction that the issue has come up and appreciation for Ceausescu’s explanation. 15 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the margin. See Document 196.
