Arms Control and Disarmament 1425 of other countries having authority over areas within which control posts should be established would of course be consulted. The progress and results of these negotiations might be duly reported to the United Nations and its organs with disarmament responsibilities, through the intermediary of the Secretary General. The United States is also prepared, unless testing is resumed by the Soviet Union, to withhold further testing of atomic and nuclear weapons for a period up to one year beginning October 1, 1958, while agreement is being reached both as to the terms of suspension of testing and the detailed arrangements for inspection. Further, if agreement on the terms of an effectively inspected suspension of nuclear tests can be achieved, the United States is prepared to suspend testing on a year-­by-­ year basis, subject to a determination at the beginning of each year of extension that satisfactory progress is being made (a) in installing and operating the agreed inspection system, and (b) in reaching agreement on and implementing major and substantial arms control measures, such as the United States has long sought. As the United States has frequently made clear, it does not consider that suspension of testing of atomic and nuclear weapons is in itself a measure of disarmament or limitation of armament. The significance of an agreement for a monitored mutual suspension of tests is that it may lead to other and more substantial agreements relating to limita­ tion and reduction of such weapons and to other essential phases of disarmament. This is our hope. End text. Dulles 365. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Herter and John Foster Dulles1 New York, August 20, 1958, 1:25 p.m. Sec. said he gathered peaceful uses is still being batted about. H. said no not at all—President made decision this morning and McCone is very unhappy. Sec. said he thought it was a mistake to put peaceful uses in this statement. Sec. said what this public statement is is an exercise in 1 Source: Statement on cessation of nuclear testing. No classification marking. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
