880
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
As the National Academy of Sciences has noted, increased U.S. de-
velopment assistance is badly needed to improve and expand Third
World research and training programs in the physical, biological and
social sciences. Particular attention should be directed at methods of in-
ducing poor farmers to increase production, improving the manage-
ment of water resources, reducing post-harvest losses in the field and
in storage, and developing appropriate technology for small farmers.
Further, the United States should make better use of its wealth of expe-
rience to help developing nations establish effective agricultural exten-
sion services and farmer cooperatives. In this regard, the Commission
is highly supportive of the intent of the Title XII amendment to the For-
eign Assistance Act of 1961,9 calling on U.S. institutions to devote
greater effort to solving the food and nutrition problems of the devel-
oping countries.
3. Famine Relief and Starvation as an Instrument of War
The Commission recognizes that famines will occur in the years to
come, despite efforts to alleviate world hunger. The international com-
munity must, therefore, maintain mechanisms to deal with unpredict-
able, short-term famine caused by weather, war or human error.
The Commission lauds international efforts in recent years aimed
at improving the mobilization and coordination of international famine
relief. However, the Commission is concerned over the lack of re-
sources available to help disaster-prone nations develop the infrastruc-
ture and contingency plans necessary to mitigate the worst effects of
famine before it occurs. The Commission believes that it is more
cost-effective to invest in pre-disaster planning and prevention assist-
ance than simply to give emergency relief.
The Commission also is concerned that large numbers of indi-
viduals face starvation as the result of war and political decisions, as in
the case of Cambodia. The recent International Conference on Humani-
tarian Law in Armed Conflict adopted two Additional Protocols to the
1949 Geneva Convention which, among other things, prohibit the star-
vation of civilians as a method of warfare (including denying suste-
nance to the civilian population by destroying or removing food sup-
plies or other related objects indispensable to their survival), and
9 The International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1975 (P.L. 94–161; 89
Stat. 849) amended the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (P.L. 87–195; 75 Stat. 424) to in-
clude a Title XII provision, which called for efforts to strengthen the capacity of U.S. land
grant universities to apply science to solving food and nutrition problems of developing
nations.
