International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
19
plan and IMF loan have already been completed. They are taking in for-
eign exchange at a record clip—$2 billion in January alone—and have
thus bought time to try to deal with their fundamental difficulties (low
productivity, an anti-growth tax structure, etc.). The “Barre plan” is
starting to bite in France, but the municipal elections in March could
bring new speculations against the franc. The underlying situation is
shaky in both countries, and unemployment will remain high. Close
surveillance by the U.S. will be essential.
Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN): We strongly advocated
rapid and comprehensive revival of the Multilateral Trade Negotia-
tions (MTN) in Geneva as a major element—along with more rapid eco-
nomic growth in the stronger economies—in avoiding protectionism.
I recommend that you promptly appoint a permanent Special Trade
Representative.10
He should begin early consultation with the major protagonists—prob-
ably bilaterally—to begin developing a negotiating package.
The U.S. should press the negotiations as fast as possible while avoiding a
commitment to the end-1977 deadline.
I remain convinced that we must make a major push to move the
MTN or protectionist pressures will grow. There was a notable lack of
enthusiasm for pressing MTN on the part of everyone I talked to except
the Japanese. On the other hand, all countries are worried about our
own possible protectionist moves in the next few months—on steel,
shoes, color TV—which could set a pattern. The British and Italians say
it would put them under “irresistible pressure” to restrict imports. I be-
lieve that the new leadership here and in the European Community in
Brussels may open the possibility for movement on agriculture—which
has been the major stumbling block so far with MTN.
International Monetary Issues: No problems arose over the funda-
mentals of the existing system, based on flexible exchange rates. We
stressed the need to assure adequate international financing capabil-
ities, to tide over the sizable payments deficits which will continue to
arise, but offered no specific proposals—except to suggest that Saudi
Arabia, and perhaps a couple of other OPEC countries, might be
brought into the picture. There was general enthusiasm for the latter
idea, and we may be able to draw on British and French expertise in the
Middle East to develop a specific approach. (However, we were cau-
tioned—by the debtor countries—against creating any new “creditor’s
club”.) In response to questions all over, we indicated that we had not
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of
conversation of this telephone conversation was found.
10 On Mondale’s February 2 memorandum (see footnote 3 above), Carter wrote “VP
take lead” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation.
