1186  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
found Uruguay a convenient financial “safe-­haven’’ and Uruguayan 
tax laws have encouraged the establishment of holding companies 
which have their investments elsewhere. There has also been a con-
siderable tourist business, mostly from Argentina, and a considerable 
number of political refugees—Argentines and others—­have invested in 
residential and business property in Uruguay.
Along with this situation, there has been an interesting but small-­
scale development of intellectual and artistic life in Uruguay—­which 
has strangely seemed to parallel the “safe-­haven” spirit in a degree 
of isolationism and an anachronistic clinging by small groups, to out-
moded political ideas such as anarchism and early Marxian socialism.
Uruguayan economic and social (and intellectual) development 
seem largely to have stood still in the past 15 or 20 years, as neigh-
boring countries have developed. This has been partly due to the 
inefficiency of government operations which have wasted manpower 
egregiously, with the natural result that the public has had to pay the 
bill one way or another. Stating this in another way, so much manpower 
has been wasted that productivity has not been sufficient to pay the bill 
for goods and services, with the result that they have been paid for by 
credit expansion and a slow drain on the gold reserves and the result-
ing inflation which made the public pay.
The present Uruguayan Administration is definitely determined to 
make the Government and the Government business operations more 
efficient, and considerable progress will undoubtedly be made in this 
direction. The amount of progress that will be made, however, is a moot 
point, since the lack of stimuli to and checks on the Government utility 
and industrial operations is much less than on private corporations. 
There is some sentiment among leaders of the present Administration 
actually favoring the sale to private owners of certain Government 
business operations, but it is very unlikely that this will be done, even 
with the least efficient such as the fishing industry. The most that can be 
expected is that some increase in private enterprise may be encouraged.
The prospects for significant economic progress in Uruguay, once 
Uruguayan agriculture is brought up to optimum productivity, do not 
appear to be outstanding. There may, however, be many ways in which 
Uruguay can profit from closer economic integration with Argentina, 
and this may offer the promising possibility for real future economic 
progress. Uruguay has suffered from a lack of products which the 
Argentines are interested in buying. And the most obvious way in which 
Uruguayans could profit from an increasingly prosperous Argentina 
would be to devise every feasible means of attracting larger numbers 
of Argentine tourists; Argentine tourists already spend a substantial 
amount every year in Uruguay, and it might be possible for Uruguay 
to attract large enough numbers in the future to create enough foreign
