Human Rights —There is a presumption that our votes in the executive boards of the IFI’s in support of our human rights policy should be used sparingly and designed to advance the overall strategies we will work out for individual countries. —When we plan to cast a non-affirmative vote or make a statement of concern for or condemnation of human rights practices in the IFI’s, we should apprise other nations of the rationale for our proposed action and seek their understanding and cooperation. —The information on human rights which the U.S. uses to arrive at its judgments should be available to other IFI members to the extent possible. —In the longer run we should develop a consensus among IFI member governments in support of our human rights policy and seek to persuade these governments that IFI managements and members should give great weight to human rights factors when assessing the suitability of proposed loan programs. D. Use of Overseas Broadcast Facilities and Cultural and Educational Programs. International awareness of the effort to preserve and extend human rights will, in itself, contribute to the success of our policy. That awareness can be increased by appropriate use of the facilities and programs of the United States Information Agency (USIA), Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty and the State Department’s cultural and educational programs. Domestic awareness and understanding of our policy can be promoted by the State Department’s Bureau of Public Affairs. 1. USIA. USIS posts abroad offer important opportunities available to the U.S. for the creation of intellectual, philosophical and (to at least a limited degree) political “infrastructure” in support of human rights. USIS posts are engaged in dialogue with influential elites and “establishments”—as well as the next generation of leadership. Seminars, symposiums, relations with editorial writers, bar associations and the like offer important opportunities to kindle and sustain the spark of concern for group three rights, in particular. The USIA, through its radio broadcast facilities, in print and via television, can present and elaborate our human rights concerns directly to audiences abroad. Although all communications media can and should be used, radio is our primary direct channel to mass audiences. Where other media are controlled, radio is particularly important. Coordinated, balanced and consistent future programming should develop the theme that human rights is a universal human aspiration, not an American idiosyncracy, and should cover positive
