32  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and the International Bank in New Delhi,2 discussions with the Latin 
Americans on the Bank should be minimized, and work should pro-
ceed toward the development of a United States position, with the 
understanding that the position would not be made final until after 
October.
The Secretary reported to the Council on the Staff Committee dis-
cussions and reviewed briefly the main points raised in NAC Document 
No. 2383 and Document No. 2383 (Supplement).3
Mr. Waugh stressed the importance of avoiding too early a for-
malization of the United States position on the Bank, since the pattern 
might become a precedent for other regional banks. He also empha-
sized the need to determine the specific purposes of the Institution. He 
had been impressed by the lack of planning in Latin American devel-
opment programs, and by the internal financing problems of these 
countries. He felt that most of the problems that would face the new 
Institution would arise in countries that were unable to handle their 
internal financing problems. The Latin American countries wanted low-­
cost housing, schools, hospitals, hotels, and local currency financing 
for projects financed by the Export-­import Bank and the International 
Bank. They did not need for their development programs more dol-
lars than were available from existing institutions. He felt it was of the 
utmost importance to develop clearly the ways in which the new Bank 
would avoid competition with existing institutions. He believed that in 
view of the prospective large United States budget deficit the Congress 
would scrutinize very closely any proposals for new institutions, and 
felt this was a further reason for developing carefully the way in which 
a new institution would operate.
Governor Szymczak4 said that the basic views of the Federal 
Reserve Board were reflected in the document and its supplement. He 
agreed that the Bank should supplement rather than compete with 
existing institutions. The most vital point was that the Bank would pro-
vide an opportunity for Latin American countries to obtain experience 
in lending money. In response to a question by the Chairman, Governor 
Szymczak said that the Institution should not accept deposits, in view 
of the long-­term character of its loans. Mr. Southard commented that 
lending experience by Latin American countries would be a useful 
by-­product of the Bank, and said that experience in the International 
Monetary Fund indicated that Latin Americans can be critical of the 
proposals and performance of Latin American countries.
2 The referenced meetings took place October 6–10, 1958; pertinent documentation 
is in Department of State decimal file 398.13.
3 Not printed; a copy is in Treasury Department Files.
4 M. S. Szymczak, Member, Board of Governors, Federal Reserve Board.
