574
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
233.
Telegram From the Secretary’s Delegation in London to the
Department of State1
London, May 24, 1979, 0129Z
Secto 4025. Department for Christopher only. White House to Dr.
Brzezinski for the President. Subject: Meeting With PM Thatcher.
1. Secretary Vance met for an hour with PM at No. 10; also present
were Foreign Secretary Carrington; Lord Privy Seal and House of
Commons Foreign Affairs Spokesman Sir Ian Gilmour; Brian Cart-
ledge, P.M.’s Private Secretary for International Affairs, and U.S. Am-
bassador Brewster.
2. Topics covered were SALT; Begin and Middle East; C.T.B.;
Turkey; Rhodesia and Southern Africa.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
13. Discussion then turned to C.T.B. Mrs. T. indicated that she had
private scientific advice, unknown perhaps to Carrington and Gilmour,
that Soviet salt mines made it possible to defy detection; especially if
timed to coincide with predicted earthquakes. Secretary said simply
that our scientific advisors did not agree with hers and suggested that
we send our most knowledgeable to talk with hers.
14. Mrs. T. then harked back to Eisenhower moratorium2 and the
advantage this gave to Soviets who used moratorium to prepare for
tests while we did not. Result, she said, would be spate of Soviet tests
which left US behind. Secretary said this is why we would have safe-
guards program which would put US in position to respond quickly if
Soviets took actions putting US at a disadvantage. He said we were sat-
isfied we could plan tests and keep test scientists and engineers in alert
status for that length of treaty and that the stockpile would not be deni-
grated during the three year period of the treaty. On the way out the
PM asked Secretary who we could send over and he suggested Frank
Press as an outstanding expert in this area. She was extremely pleased.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840171–0149. Se-
cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Also sent Immediate to the White House. The conver-
sation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII,
Western Europe.
2 On October 31, 1958, President Dwight D. Eisenhower and UK Prime Minister Ha-
rold MacMillan announced a one-year moratorium on nuclear testing, to which the So-
viets agreed a few days later. (American Foreign Policy, Current Documents, 1958, pp.
1356–1357)
