National Security Policy  659
in the Port Security Program be held in abeyance pending legislative 
and judicial developments with respect to other personnel security 
programs.
The problem of strengthening the Port Security Program has been 
re-­examined within this Department and has been the subject of a dis­
cussion with the Secretary and Under Secretary of the Treasury. The 
proposed Executive Order, by conforming the provisions of Executive 
Order 10173 to the program conducted by Treasury under that Order 
subsequent to the Ninth Circuit decision in Parker v. Lester, would have 
served to eliminate a dilemma which has faced the Commandant of the 
Coast Guard, in that the Commandant has been forbidden by court order 
from discharging fully his responsibilities under Executive Order 10173. 
However, it is agreed that the proposed Order would not have enabled 
Treasury to conduct a more effective screening of merchant mariners and 
dock workers than that currently being conducted under the limitations 
imposed by court decision. It is also agreed that because of the prob­
lem of confrontation it does not appear possible at the present time to 
strengthen the Port Security Screening Program either by legislation or 
executive order.
Final resolution of the issue of confrontation in one Personnel 
Security Program will logically lead to insistence, judicial or other­
wise, that the same rule be applied in the other programs. Since the 
Port Security Screening Program involves persons who are neither 
employees of the United States nor employees of contractors of the 
United States, it would appear that security interests would be better 
served if this issue were to be considered in connection with the more 
critical Federal Employees or Industrial Personnel Security Programs. 
As a practical matter it appears that some resolution of the confron­
tation issue may be fast approaching. Already a number of bills have 
been introduced this session of Congress relating to various aspects 
of Personnel Security Programs and the Supreme Court is expected to 
hear argument during March on the case of Greene v. McElroy which 
will test the validity of the Industrial Personnel Security Program.
Sincerely,
Attorney General
