Afghanistan
571
however, that your action has violated the sovereignty of an independ-
ent nation.
The continued Soviet military presence in Afghanistan will inevita-
bly continue to raise concerns about the desire of the Soviet Union to
conquer and subjugate the Afghan people and the further possibility
of Soviet military action against Pakistan and Iran. Both the presence
of Soviet troops in Afghanistan, and the precedent of their use there,
are of serious concern to Pakistan and other states in the region. The
Soviet action in Afghanistan and increasing Soviet military activity
along the northwest border of Iran also generate apprehension about
the possibility of Soviet actions to undermine the independence and
territorial integrity of that country.
It should be evident that the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet
military forces from Afghanistan is necessary to restore stability to this
region. The actions of the United Nations and the Islamabad Conference
of Islamic States have made it clear that most of the peoples of the
world share this conviction.
For our part, we have no interest in seeing a government in Kabul
hostile to the Soviet Union. A return to a neutral, non-aligned but
genuinely independent Afghanistan would be in the interests of all
and we would support such a development.
There are similar dangers in the Middle East and in particular the
Persian Gulf. It is essential you understand that the United States has
vital interests at stake in this region. We are prepared to defend those
interests. But if there is restraint on both sides, as befits our two great
nations, and respect for the independence and territorial integrity of
the states in the region, our respective interests need not lead to confron-
tation. In this connection, I must note that the substantial Soviet/Cuban
presence in the PDRY is a matter of grave concern to us and perhaps
we should search for ways whereby we could reduce the possibility
of confrontation.
The US has made clear that it supports the independence, unity,
and territorial integrity of non-aligned Yugoslavia. In my discussion
with Ambassador Dobrynin, he indicated that the Soviet Union does
also. We welcome this position. We and our allies have no intention
of interfering in Yugoslavia’s internal affairs and would view any effort
to weaken Yugoslavia’s internal cohesion or undermine its independent
foreign policy with gravest concern, as we understand you would.
In his State of the Union message, the President gave particular
emphasis to the importance of SALT in the prevention of nuclear war.
It is the President’s intention to press for the ratification of SALT II at
the earliest moment that the political climate permits. In the meantime,
as we have said privately and publicly, we believe that observing the
mutual constraints imposed by the terms of the SALT I and SALT II
