Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
495
For millions of people around the world today the Universal Dec-
laration of Human Rights is still only a declaration of hope. Like all of
you, I want that hope to be fulfilled. The struggle to fulfill it will last
longer than the lifetimes of any of us. Indeed, it will last as long as the
lifetime of humanity itself. But we must persevere.
And we must persevere by ensuring that this country of ours,
leader in the world, which we love so much, is always in the forefront
of those who are struggling for that great hope, the great dream of uni-
versal human rights.
Thank you very much.
102.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Two Years Down; Two to Go (U)
After each half year in 1977, I sent you an appraisal of the Admin-
istration’s foreign policy record.2 Two years since you took office may
be an even better time to review both the record and the tasks ahead. I
haven’t tried to examine the whole field—focusing only on a few sa-
lient areas. (U)
1. War and Peace. The main accomplishment of the last two years
was in reducing the chances of war in the two most dangerous areas of
possible US-Soviet conflict: (C)
a. In the Middle East, there is a greater chance of setting in motion a
process that could lead to peace than at any time since the creation of
Israel. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 27, Goals/Initiatives: 6/77–12/78. Confidential. Sent for information. Owen sent the
memorandum to Brzezinski under a December 8 handwritten note, indicating that it was
for the President. Dodson wrote the following comment on the note: “ZB—I did not clear
this with anyone—it seemed like a personal analysis. CD.” Brzezinski initialed the
top-right hand corner of the memorandum and, according to an attached NSC Corre-
spondence Profile, sent it to the President on December 11. The President wrote “Gen-
erous—J” in the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. Also printed in Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Document 184.
2 For Owen’s 1977 mid-year appraisal, see Document 54. The end of year appraisal
is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Document 91.
