1979 635 status of NATO consultations; c) development of force posture options within the USG. (An example is at Tab A.)4 You will receive a more complete memo on this subject in your briefing book for the Schmidt visit. You should instruct Harold to present you with specific deployment options by the end of June for our decision and then discussion with the allies in July. 3. The main business of this meeting is to discuss M–X alternatives and basing, which constitute the most important immediate decision required for long-­term solutions to our strategic problems. Harold Brown will present the results of PRC deliberations, options on basing, options on the missile choice, and supporting analysis. 4. Time permitting, we shall have a brief discussion of the strategic problem we may face in the early 1980s when Minuteman will be highly vulnerable but offsetting new force deployments will not yet have been made. We want to elicit views as to whether we have a critical problem in the early 1980s and, if so, what short-­term fixes might be in order. Several options have been surfaced, e.g., uploading more weapons on our Poseidon SLBMs, delaying deactivation of Polaris SSBNs, raising bomber alert rates, and accelerating B–52/ALCM conversions. We want to determine whether a more systematic look at these and other possibilities is in order. You should also ask Harold to present you with specific proposals by the end of June. Throughout the meeting you should keep in mind three questions5 as criteria for decisions and guidance you may give on strategic matters: a. In view of the continuing Soviet buildup and capability, what will be required to maintain stable deterrence in the 1980s and beyond? b. In the event of a strategic crisis with the USSR, what will be required for a stable bargaining posture? c. Finally, if deterrence fails in a crisis, what will it take to make our military power support politically selected war aims instead of letting our military posture draw us into a meaningless spasm war?6 (TS) Analysis of M–X Choices As I see it, you have two broad options to choose between—­you can deploy a survivable land-­based ICBM system (Harold’s option A) using one of the mobile/shelter systems that have been proposed, or you can place more emphasis on strategic aircraft and SLBMs and maintain an ICBM that is not independently survivable (Harold’s option B). 4 Not found attached. 5 An unknown hand underlined “three questions.” 6 An unknown hand drew a bracket in the left margin next to points a–c and wrote: “key issues.”
