420 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement if any, of these efforts lies solely within the Costa Rican Government, but no serious problems of overlapping have been noted to date. Special Operational Suggestion A limiting factor in granting larger scale assistance to Costa Rica is the fact that unlike the situation existing in many other Latin American countries, Costa Rica does not have any funds available from PL4807 sales nor is there any prospect of obtaining such funds under the current rules. While funds may be available to the country from international lending institutes for defraying the foreign exchange requirements of development projects, it is not possible to take advantage of these available lending resources because of the inability to finance out of current budgets the local currency cost of such development projects. Ambassador Willauer believes it is poor Hemisphere economics to base economic development on the accident of a special country’s ability to create counterpart funds by the use of Public Law 480. More thought should be given to the possibility of creating a common fund from the counterpart funds created in various countries for use in development projects throughout the Hemisphere. Until such time as funds for local use are available, Costa Rica would be greatly limited in pursuing any development program which might evolve from the overall economic plan cited as a special U.S. objective in this country. Conclusion It is believed that the degree of consultation and review constantly being carried on among U.S. officials in Costa Rica gives ample assurance of an effective U.S. assistance program in Costa Rica, both in planning and in execution. The Embassy is firmly of the opinion that emphasis must be given toward implementation of what have been cited as special U.S. policy objectives in Costa Rica. It is quite likely that these will form the basis of subsequent recommendations for additional U.S. assistance for Costa Rica. Aside from any such special program, in the meantime, the current assistance program is undoubtedly contributing toward an eventual solution of some of the major economic and social problems of the country. Richard A. Godfrey Commercial Attaché 7 Reference is to the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, approved July 10, 1954, which provided for disposal of agricultural surpluses. For text of the Act, see 68 Stat. 454.
