exchange of notes, as authorized on page 6 of Instruction 556, based on the tabulation of State laws regarding alien ownership of real property transmitted with this Instruction. There was a disposition to agree that substantial reciprocity existed, but on further reflection the legal experts of the Foreign Office reached the conclusion that under such an arrangement, under Austrian judicial procedure the courts would insist upon examining each case arising here on its merits, a procedure which would prove clumsy, and perhaps embarrassing. In the end, therefore, it was decided to adopt the proposal for the substitution of the three paragraphs set forth on pages 6 and 7 of Instruction 556. In the revised draft which accompanies this despatch92 these three paragraphs appear in lieu of the former first paragraph of Article I. The main difficulty was, however, regarding the inclusion of the final paragraph providing that nothing in the treaty shall be considered to affect existing immigration statutes or the right of either party to enact such statutes. There was a very strong preference expressed by Schüller’s colleagues for the procedure followed in the cases of the treaties with Germany and Hungary, namely for the omission of the paragraph, the Senate reservation and the exchange of notes. I pointed out that the German and Hungarian treaties were negotiated before the Senate acted, but it having acted, the Department would feel that it was inviting adverse criticism if it should submit a future treaty without such a corresponding provision. The fact that such a provision was incorporated in the subsequent treaty with Esthonia made no impression on the Austrian negotiators. They cared nothing for Esthonia but attached much importance to the German and Hungarian precedents; they finally receded however, but I was warned that the inclusion of this final paragraph would lead to a parliamentary attack when the treaty came up for ratification—perhaps from representatives of all parties, inasmuch as the very small Austrian quota affects this country adversely. The separation of families consequent upon the operation of the immigration law is the subject of much complaint to which cabinet ministers and deputies have constantly to pay heed. It was the opinion of the negotiators that a Senatorial reservation and an exchange of notes would not attract so much attention. As to this Article, therefore, the American proposals are all accepted.
