1096 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II World Bank lending for fossil fuel development is projected to reach $5.6 billion, and to support projects totalling $18.6 billion. This volume of lending is expected to result in the production of energy equivalent to two million barrels of oil a day. When hydroelectric power projects are included, about 15 percent of overall Bank lending during the next five years will be for energy purposes. The Inter-American Development Bank will be devoting a large proportion of its lending to develop geothermal, hydroelectric, and other energy potential in Latin America over the next several years, and the Asian Development Bank has embarked on a large lending program to finance the production of primary energy fuels. These Bank funds, moreover, should encourage additional private investment in this critical area, thus improving the oil supply situation for the world as a whole. An interagency task force has been created under IDCA’s leadership to identify additional techniques for channeling private resources into exploration and development of new energy sources in the Third World. It will help obtain the most workable solutions from all agencies of our government and the business community in solving energy problems. Financing —The United States should cooperate with other countries and international institutions to forestall debt problems in developing countries and to respond to financing problems promptly, and with adequate resources to promote adjustment without political upheaval and economic stagnation. Financial problems in developing nations have the potential to reduce world trade, impede adequate development, and bring instability to the private financial sector. From the development standpoint, no strict lines can be drawn between financial and other problems; when a developing country suffers a balance of payments crisis the price is paid in reduced growth. Trends in the global economy in the 1970s have resulted in major attention being given to the issue of “debt” within the context of the adequacy and direction of financial flows to developing countries. Various actions have already been taken to help these countries. Further efforts to prevent or alleviate debt problems must recognize that crises can result from overborrowing or misuse of funds, as well as from insufficient foreign exchange receipts due to changes in patterns of trade and payments. Moreover, the solutions to the financing problems of the poorest countries, which are heavily dependent on concessional assistance, are different from those of middle-income countries, which are heavily indebted to private creditors. IDCA will
