Non-Proliferation
897
5. Initial Nye comment on Soviet proposal for joint declaration was
to defer any response re issuance at top level. Since list of topics par-
allels suppliers guidelines, he suggested that this purpose could be
served by the joint suppliers declaration when guidelines finalized
and published. Morokhov indicated proposed declaration would pre-
cede further and complement existing suppliers efforts and be wider in
scope.
6. NPT and Treaty of Tlatelolco: Nye noted President Carter sup-
port for universal NPT adherence, but mentioned full scope safeguards
and Tlatelolco as partial steps which are useful in specific situations
(i.e. in India and Latin America). Nye reported some indications In-
dians may be willing to consider full scope safeguards and US impres-
sion Brazil might waive entry-into-force provisions of Tlatelolco if
USSR signed Protocol II. Nye repeated US request for USSR to recon-
sider their Protocol II position. Soviets responded by reiterating their
support for full scope safeguards and NPT. Timerbaev (USSR) said
Protocol II position is being studied but remains unchanged for now.
He suggested Tlatelolco approach too complicated to obtain full scope
safeguards. Nye reported some preliminary indications Argentina
might move towards acceptance of full scope safeguards.
7. Morokhov reiterated the suggestion for joint messages—per-
haps along with UK—encouraging NPT adherence. NYE said US fully
accepts spirit of this suggestion but sometimes best diplomacy lies not
in such joint approaches, but in exchanges of information—such as
the present one—regarding measures to strengthen nonproliferation
regime.
8. EURATOM and NPT Safeguards Agreement: Morokhov said
situation was dangerous,9 represented clear cut NPT violation, and
asked if US would consider joint action at September board to urge
EURATOM to conclude this matter speedily. Nye said US also con-
cerned, that we have indicated our concern to EURATOM, and are pre-
pared to do so again, but did not indicate willingness to act in IAEA
board.
9. Full Scope Safeguards: To Soviet question on French position
Nye said may have to consider fall-back in September if their position
is clearly negative. Nye encouraged USSR to make public statement
similar to US and others as way of moving French in this direction. Mo-
9 In telegram 124488 to Brussels, May 28, the Department of State said that “there
continue to be reports of major obstacles to the implementation by the IAEA of effective
safeguards in EC NNWS [European Community Non-Nuclear-Weapon States]. In partic-
ular, there appears to be a continued unwillingness on the part of EURATOM to fully
allow the independent verification activities by the IAEA which are called for in the
IAEA/EURATOM safeguards agreement and which are essential for effective IAEA safe-
guards.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770191–1100)
