1956  1073
665.	 Letter 48 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 48
Washington, June 25, 1956
Dear Alex:
We have decided to put some pressure on the Indian ­Ambassador 
here to proceed with the prisoner interviews. We are calling him in 
some time today. We plan to hand him a letter signed by Mr. Robertson 
emphasizing the urgency of the matter in view of the fact that the pris­
oners were informed some time ago that they would shortly receive a 
visit. We shall also remind Mehta of the repeatedly expressed Indian 
interest in the question of Chinese prisoners in this country, and the 
gratification which Mehta expressed on May 31 when he was informed 
of our decision. We intend to indicate our belief that the Indians should 
proceed with the interviews regardless of any inexplicable shift which 
may have occurred in the attitude of the Chinese Communists. We will 
let him see that in our view the Indians have an obligation to us and to 
their own conscience, and that they should not unquestioningly play 
the Chinese Communist game in this matter against their better judg­
ment. We have an added reason for moving rapidly on this, in that we 
find that we are on weak grounds in stalling off the GRC on its insistent 
request to interview the prisoners. Article VI of the Treaty of ­January 11, 
1943 on the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights in China (copy 
attached) gives the Chinese this right specifically with no conditions 
attached as to the purpose of the visit. The Chinese are really aroused 
over this whole question. It has posed some very acute problems for 
the new Ambassador Hollington Tong. He has done his best to pla­
cate ­Taipei but he feels that the rise of this issue just at the beginning 
of his Mission, has given him a bad start in Washington. In a letter of 
June 23 (copy attached) the Chinese indicate that they will take any of 
the prisoners who wish to go to Taiwan if no Indian representative, or 
representative of another third country is present, when the wishes of 
the criminals are ascertained. You will see that there are some possibil­
ities of our getting some good out of the situation even if the Indians 
let us down. We will do all we can to exploit the position in any event. 
It has occurred to me that if we cannot use the Indians we might have 
a representative of the International Red Cross, or the American Red 
Cross to accompany our representative when the prisoners are inter­
viewed. The International Red Cross would of course be preferable. 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
