538
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
4. Political groups
a. Dissident elements of the National Front
Within the last year the National Front of Mossadeq—a very loose
association of individuals of varying stature and power to influence the
public—has tended to break up. These dissident elements are active
within the Majlis—Haerizadeh, Baghai, and Makki—and without it.
There seems little chance that these elements will coalese in positive
support of such a figure as Zahedi and it also seems unlikely that they
can assemble sizeable groups of anti-Mossadeq demonstrators.
b. Tudeh Party
The Tudeh Party has consistently and bitterly attacked the political
activity of Mossadeq. However, since one of its basic aims is to disrupt
internal security it has rushed to support of Mossadeq in his attacks
against the Shah. By 4 April 1953 Tudeh members had been alerted to
the possibility of a coup against Mossadeq and had been ordered to be
ready to “protect” Mossadeq.5
The Tudeh Party may be able to assemble up to 10,000 demon-
strators at Tehran from its Party members and the several pro-Soviet
front groups active there. However, on 15 April 1953 it assembled only
about 1,000 people in a pro-Mossadeq, anti-Shah demonstration.
c. Iran Party
This group is a leftist element of the National Front and is strongly
pro-Mossadeq. It claims a membership of 10,000, with the percentage at
Tehran not defined. This figure is much exaggerated, especially in view
of the resignations of ranking members that took place at the recent an-
nual convention of the Party. The Party’s strength is in the member-
ship of a considerable number of high level permanent officials of
the government and the Party has not mustered its members for
demonstrations.
d. Third Force
This political group is headed by Khalil Maleki, once a leader of
the Tudeh Party and more recently party organizer and theoretician for
Baghai. Maleki claims 10,000 members, certainly an exaggeration as the
party publications appeal to intellectual socialists. The Third Force has
been pro-Mossadeq and is not expected to lend its support to the Shah.
It has no record of mustering demonstrators.
e. Baghai’s Toilers Party
Earlier a lieutenant of Mossadeq, Baghai has openly opposed him
over the allegedly undemocratic and unconstitutional methods of Mos-
sadeq. Should a show down between Mossadeq and the Shah be di-
5 See Document 185.
