Comprehensive Test Ban
409
174.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
Geneva, October 27, 1977, 2048Z
9319. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations: Rec-
ommended Strategy.
CTB Message No. 46.
For the President and Secretary of State from Paul Warnke.
1. Summary: I believe strongly that most effective and expeditious
way of promoting concrete CTB negotiations on terms favorable to US
is to (a) recess current round late next week (Nov. 3 or 4); (b) approach
Soviets at high political level as soon as possible after recess to present
package proposal designed to maximize pressure for Soviet acceptance
of PNE ban; (c) begin a relatively brief round (about two weeks) at end
of November or beginning of December to table US package formally
and provide further explanation of it; and (d) resume more detailed ne-
gotiations in latter half of January. This message outlines reasons for
this recommended approach. End summary.
2. After merely repeating previous positions in first weeks of
present round, Soviets have recently made substantial effort to create
impression that they are willing to compromise on some key CTB
issues, particularly on questions of procedures for carrying out on-site
inspections and of seismic stations on US and Soviet territory designed
and operated to provide authenticated seismic data. They have also
said they expect to present new position on question of nuclear weapon
state adherence requirement for treaty entry into force. On central issue
of Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNE), however, they have continued
to insist that exception be made for such explosions. On an informal
basis, they have mentioned various schemes which they assert should
meet our concerns about the military benefits of PNE, such as (a) US
access to Soviet PNE designs and devices; (b) joint US-Soviet program
for device development and production; and (c) US supply of devices
for projects on Soviet territory. (It is not clear whether this last idea in-
cludes Soviet supply of devices for US and third countries.) Morokhov,
head of Soviet Delegation, recently returned from consultations in
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770395–0558. Se-
cret; Exdis; Immediate. Sent for information to London and Moscow.
