1024  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
634.	 Letter from Osborn to Clough1
Geneva, June 1, 1956
Dear Ralph:
After talking the last meeting over with Bob Ekvall, I had worked 
up a paragraph or two on renunciation for possible inclusion in the 
Ambassador’s “comment” telegram. When I showed the draft to the 
Ambassador, his reaction was, while agreeing with the analysis, to 
doubt the utility of putting it in the telegram. He suggested I send it to 
you in a letter, and so I am enclosing it.
I would certainly agree with the Ambassador that the Department 
appears to face the possibility of a resort to the public by Wang with 
equanimity. It is also true that if in fact the CHICOMS do go to the 
public on the basis of the May 11 draft, they will not be in too strong a 
position. Even Wang seems to realize this, and that is probably why he 
has been making such determined efforts to lure us into making textual 
criticisms. His tactic would possibly be to then table a new draft appar­
ently meeting our objections without really doing so. This would put 
Peiping in a stronger public position than the May 11 draft alone.
Possibly Wang may have another try or two at getting us to talk 
textually. If this fails, Peiping may decide to go to the public anyway. 
If Peiping takes the issue to the public solely on the basis of the May 11 
draft, the CHICOMS are going to have a hard time convincing peo­
ple this draft represents a really sincere effort to reach agreement on a 
meaningful renunciation of force. Accordingly they might stress, rather 
than the draft itself, Wang’s repeated offers to consider alternative sug­
gestions, and our “obstinate” refusal to offer any. They might even, as a 
minor gambit, play Wang’s trick of “assuming”, since we concentrated 
our objections on the time limit clause, that the United States had no 
objections to other parts of the draft. This would not fool most intelli­
gent observers, but it might injure feelings on Taiwan.
Alternatively, Peiping might decide that the May 11 draft is com­
pletely unsuitable as a basis for a public position, and Wang might be 
instructed to table a new draft, even in the absence of textual comments 
from our side. Our failure to take this new draft as the basis for discus­
sion would bring on a threat to go to the public, and this time it would 
be genuine.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; 
Official–­Informal. Orborn signed the original “Dave.”
