International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
49
You are familiar with some of the details of this case from my pre-
vious memorandum (Tab II).3 After innumerable interagency discus-
sions, a number of options have been rejected. No agency recommends
implementation of the tariff rate quota system proposed by the ITC; it is
simply too restrictive. Other recommendations for import quotas, vol-
untary restraint agreements or tariff increases were also considered un-
acceptable or unworkable. All agencies recommend that the President
announce a program of expanded adjustment assistance, regardless of
whether he also decides to provide import relief. Thus, it all boils down
to two options:
I. No import restrictions; with special adjustment assistance.
II. Tariff rate quota; with special adjustment assistance.
State, Treasury, CEA and HUD support Option I. The details are
set forth in Tab A.4 In brief, under this option the President, on April 9,
would announce:
—establishment, by Executive Order, of an Office of Structural Ad-
justment to coordinate and oversee programs to assist workers, firms
and import-impacted communities adjust to import competition. This
office would use existing legislative authority under the Trade Act, the
Public Works and Economic Development Act, manpower and em-
ployment training programs, and other programs under the Small
Business Administration and DOD to stimulate productive economic
activity in areas suffering from import competition.
—plans to introduce new legislation to facilitate adjustment. These
would include a Trade Adjustment Bank, tax relief and/or subsidies
for US shoe firms, and additional amendments to the Trade Act to im-
prove existing programs.
STR, OMB, Commerce, Labor and Agriculture (all largely for do-
mestic political reasons) support Option II (Tab B).5 This would establish
a tariff rate quota which would increase duties on imports above 322 million
pairs (1976 imports amounted to 370 million pairs). This option:
—establishes as its base the average of 1974–76 imports (306.6 mil-
lion pairs).
—provides for a special growth basket of 15.3 million pairs (5% of
1974–76 imports) open to all foreign suppliers.
—sets quotas for 18 countries plus the EC with an “all other”
basket category for the smaller suppliers.
—imposes a 40% duty on above quota shipments.
3 Tab II, attached, is printed as Document 10. It sets out the options discussed here.
4 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Option I (No Im-
port Restrictions, Special Assistance Program).”
5 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Option II (Three
Year Tariff Rate Quota).”
