248  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
talks here. He too had paid attention to articles carried American press 
and found a number of newspaper comments on announcement which 
were not appropriate. For instance, some said PRC invited UK to take 
care of ­American nationals in China. This did not correctly reflect agree­
ment because PRC agreed UK would be invited to implement a portion 
of agreement. Wang said he wished inform me full text carried all media 
throughout China at specified time agreed upon and given prominent 
headlines all newspapers so he believed all people could learn of news 
and read announcements; radio stations broadcast full text in Chinese 
and English.
3. Wang then proposed US Government present official text of 
agreed announcement to UK and he would present same to GOI thus 
completing official procedures regarding invitation of third powers. 
After these official procedures concluded his government would for­
mally notify UK Charge in Peking.
4. I replied I noted his statement on publication announcement in 
Chinese press and radio. I asked how it would be brought to atten­
tion of Americans many of whom do not understand ­Chinese. Was 
there any English language newspaper which Americans read? Also 
since Americans in jail do not have access to normal media of com­
munication, by what means would they be informed of terms agreed 
announcement? We had informed GOI and invited it in accordance 
with terms announcement to assume its functions in US. Apart from 
whatever action we may take with reference to UK, I was interested to 
know action his government had taken to invite UK perform its func­
tions under agreed announcement. I requested information on steps 
taken to inform Americans in jail and permit them to communicate 
freely with UK Charge. I particularly concerned on this point because I 
understood during meetings last year that he had agreed all Americans 
in jail would be permitted send and receive letters. However, still four 
in jail from whom no letters whatsoever received. I found it hard believe 
persons incarcerated so long would not want to write their friends and 
relatives if given opportunity. I also asked what arrangements made 
for UK Charge interview Americans when Charge received request 
from imprisoned American and my government desired facts inves­
tigated. I asked what was “prescribed period” mentioned in NCNA 
­September 11 announcement regarding release Fathers Gordon, Hyde 
and Joyce. I requested dates and time when 10 Americans released 
would arrive in Hong Kong. Also requested specific information on 
health, welfare each detained American not yet released. Explained this 
question raised several times in talks during past year but only infor­
mation we received was that all were in good health except Mrs. Brad­
shaw. However, we had learned several persons had been seriously ill.
5. Wang said his government gave agreement wide publicity 
to inform Americans and not to prevent them from being informed.
