886 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV What Has Been Done Based upon reviews and recommendations from the agencies, in response to conceptualization and coordination by the NSC, you have directed (a) that we maintain “‘essential equivalence’” in general purpose and strategic force levels (PD–18); that strategic defense is part of the overall military balance (PD–41); that national objectives be met for telecommunications to support all levels of conflict (PD–53); that mobilization planning guidance be developed for all agencies, DOD being only one of them (PD–57); that a conceptually new approach be applied to “continuity of government” and maintenance of the National Command Authority under nuclear attack (PD–58); that a significant step be taken in the evolutionary process of our targeting policy (PD–59).5 An elaboration of each of these is important to give you a more textured appreciation of the overall policy changes. (C) PD–18, signed in August 1977, put stress on reversing the conventional force balance adverse trends in Europe, acquiring a U.S. rapid deployment force, and maintaining strategic force “essential equivalence” in face of the continuing Soviet buildup.6 It directed a number of follow-­on efforts, because, as PRM–10 showed, the implications of “parity” with the USSR were complex and needed several additional U.S. responses. (C) PD–41, on civil defense policy, signed in September 1978, revived the view that defensive capabilities are part of the strategic balance, even if only a small part.7 The idea of “defense” was abandoned in the 1960s after serious attention to it by both President Eisenhower and, for a time, President Kennedy. Studies by CIA corroborated the Soviet open literature about Soviet civil defense capabilities, and a dispersed Soviet population, even partially dispersed, might make a difference of tens of millions of initial survivors. Changes in our targeting could not reduce the difference significantly. (C) PD–53, national security telecommunications policy, was signed in November 1979.8 It set forth, for the first time, national C3I objectives which Defense, as the executive agent of the National Communications

5 Carter underlined “‘essential equivalence,’” “telecommunications,” “mobilization planning guidance,” “maintenance of the National Command Authority under nuclear attack,” and “targeting policy” in this sentence. The Presidential Directives are printed as Documents 31, 91, 165, 176, 201, and 208. 6 Carter underlined “PD–18,” “reversing the conventional force balance adverse trends in Europe,” “U.S. rapid deployment force,” and “maintaining strategic force ‘essential equivalence’” in this sentence. 7 Carter underlined “PD–41” and “civil defense policy” in this sentence. 8 Carter underlined “PD–53” and “telecommunications” in this sentence.
