March–August 1953
653
ticular point might be made of providing military items such as trucks
and communication equipment which have civilian uses.
2. Since it is quite likely that a coup against the Mosadeq Govern-
ment will result in serious urban disturbances and possibly outbreaks
resembling civil war in the provinces, the new government will prob-
ably face an initial problem of restoring order. Riot-quelling weapons,
small arms, and money should be available in case the U.S. Govern-
ment desires to furnish such equipment clandestinely to any Iranian
forces.
III. Economic Measures
1. Budgetary support will be an important and immediate need of
any successor to Mosadeq. At first, foreign budgetary aid should be
given as privately as possible without requiring public agreements or
commitments on the part of a new Iranian Government. A covert oper-
ation might meet this problem for the first month particularly in pay-
ment of security forces, a maximum figure (based on last year’s Iranian
budget) of $5 million a month. Grant budgetary aid should not be
forced upon a new Iranian Government with requirements for formal
commitments or acceptance of a large community of Americans to su-
pervise disbursements.
Appendix I describes in detail Iran’s yearly budgetary deficit ($45
million if the NIOC sells enough oil to cover its own expenses). A basic
assumption to this estimate is that a new government will not be in a
position to continue Mosadeq’s clandestine printing of new currency.
2. Note cover is an explosive political problem in Iran. Mosadeq has
officially denied the fact known to the Embassy that his Government
has printed 1.5 billion rials illegally. A new government, exposing this
fact, could brand Mosadeq as a liar and malefactor. It would not be dif-
ficult in Iran to add a rumor that Mosadeq and his associates had pro-
fited personally from the illegal and secretive expansion of the note
issue. Such an exposure might, however, create panic in Iranian finan-
cial circles and would effectively prevent the new government from
taking Mosadeq’s course of inflation.
A public offer by the U.S. Government to make up the illegally dis-
sipated Iranian gold reserves would have a dramatic and extremely
useful political, financial and psychological impact in Iran. Perhaps no
other move could so effectively and immediately demonstrate U.S.
support of the new government. It would allow full play of the new
government’s propaganda to show up Mosadeq as a liar, cheat and
thief. It is a step which would require no expenditure of money by the
Iranians and no foreign supervision of disposition of the funds. At the
same time, in the peculiar atmosphere of Iran it would be considered an
important and beneficial type of foreign aid.
