672 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement GT–10. Memorandum for the Files, by the Officer in Charge of Guatemalan Affairs (King)1 Washington, November 24, 1958. SUBJECT Summary of Discussion at Development Loan Fund Regarding Loans for Guatemala PARTICIPANTS DLF - The Hon. Dempster McIntosh Mr. William Ryan Mr. Hart Perry Mr. Gonzalez ICA - Mr. Rollin S. Atwood Mr. Grover Kincaid Mr. Oscar Powell, USOM Guatemala STATE - Mr. Herbert B. Leggett Mr. Bayard King Mr. Harry Conover Mr. Samuel Bogley, ICA Hosing Consultant Ambassador McIntosh opened the meeting by saying that he believed loans to Guatemala were justified. Guatemala is a key country and should be helped. He asked Mr. Bogley, a private mortgage banker who had recently, at the request of ICA, made a three weeks’ survey in Guatemala, to describe how the money for the housing loan would be disbursed. Mr. Bogley explained that the funds would be lent to the Bank of Guatemala which in turn would discount mortgages of private individuals accepted by private banks in Guatemala. The mortgages would be carefully screened and guaranteed by an FHA-­type organization for which Guatemalan legislation was now being sought. Without such an arrangement, the Guatemalan individuals would be unable to borrow money to build badly needed housing for themselves, as there was a scarcity of capital in Guatemala and prohibitive interest rates were the rule. For such loans, the house purchaser would pay about 7 1/2% interest. Mr. Bogley said he was very much in favor of such an arrangement which he thought would be workable. Mr. Atwood strongly endorsed Mr. Bogley’s favorable view of this proposed loan ($12 million), and said he felt that it was necessary to give this kind of assistance to Guatemala for political and other reasons. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 714.5–MSP/11–2458. Confidential. This memorandum was routed through Rubottom, Snow, and Stewart. Rubottom noted on the source text: “Important, yes, but will need continued backing from ARA, E. & W.”
