Dominican Republic  465
important strategic area. An orderly transfer of power thus would be in 
our over-­all interest, particularly if such a transfer also gave promise of 
political and social responsibility. We hope for a greater measure of the 
latter if Ramfis or Hector Trujillo receive power.
Upon his return to the Dominican Republic we propose that 
Ambassador Farland inform Trujillo of our position as set forth above 
and how it affects the following specific items of interest:
l. Espaillat: Our investigation of the Galíndez-Murphy case has 
repeatedly brought Espaillat’s name to light. The Department of Justice 
has shown interest in questioning him regarding these cases and we 
have asked formally that Espaillat make himself amenable to the usual 
procedures in the United States in such matters. We are determined to 
continue our efforts to interrogate Espaillat in the United States under 
conditions where he can be charged with perjury if he lies. We have 
drafted a new note asking that Espaillat come to the United States to 
testify. We propose to authorize Ambassador Farland to so inform 
Trujillo and, in the context of the discussions, say that he will recom-
mend to the Department that it not be delivered if its purpose can be 
achieved informally (i.e., if Espaillat would make himself available). 
The Ambassador would explain that we have no desire to embarrass 
the Dominican Government by presenting a formal note if the matter 
can be arranged informally. (Draft note TAB A).7
2. Other Improper Activities in U.S.
An indicated in our note of November 11, 1957,8 (TAB B) we have 
been disturbed over evidence of unregistered Dominican Agents oper-
ating in the United States, the organization of picketing demonstrations, 
and distribution of propaganda of a type which friendly governments 
do not ordinarily disseminate in another friendly country. We expect 
that these improprieties shall cease, as requested in our note.
3. Dominican Meddling in Guatemala, Haiti and Other Areas
The activities of John Abbes Garcia and Onessimo Valenzuela in 
Guatemala following the assassination of Castillo Armas9 were of seri-
ous concern to us. Dominican radio attacks on Guatemalan political fig-
ures have gone far beyond the bounds of propriety and truth and have 
tended to sow confusion, distrust and division among non-­Communist 
political elements in Guatemala at the very moment when these ele-
ments should have been encouraged to submerge their differences in 
7 No attachments were found with the source text.
8 Not found.
9 Col. Carlos Castillo Armas, President of Guatemala until his assassination on 
July 26, 1957.
