310 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III The contingency we need to worry about is not a modest and orderly further depreciation of the dollar. That should cause no major problem for us, although some other countries—Germany in particular—would complain. Given an outlook that shows no improvement in the U.S. trade balance over the next two years, we do not want to close the door on gradual exchange rate adjustment as a means of ultimately reducing the deficit. We would be in serious trouble, however, if there should occur a massive capital flight from the dollar and a sharp depreciation of its value in foreign exchange markets. Failure to get an energy program might lead to this result. And, given the nature of foreign exchange markets, it could conceivably be set off by events we cannot now foresee. Such a development could: —Depress economic growth and reduce unemployment abroad by adversely affecting business investment and consumer spending. —Create major disturbances in money, capital and commodity markets that could threaten the stability of the domestic and international financial systems. —Detract from U.S. ability to exercise leadership in world affairs, both political and economic. Foreigners equate a strong country with a strong currency. —Exacerbate inflationary pressures in the United States by increasing import prices. —Increase protectionist pressures as sentiment grew to curb imports as a means of aiding the dollar. —Lead OPEC to raise the price of oil and shift to other currencies for oil investments. We must avoid such developments. Current Situation Since the beginning of 1977, the dollar has declined by more than 20% against the Swiss franc and Japanese yen, and by 10% against the Deutschemark—but by only 4.7%3 against all OECD currencies on a trade weighted average. The bulk of this change occurred in the fourth quarter when there was downward pressure on the dollar in the markets reflecting: 1. growing awareness of the size of the U.S. trade and current account deficits; 2. a perception that no effective actions were likely to be taken to halt and later reverse the deteriorating trend—and in particular, doubts that an effective U.S. energy policy would be introduced; 3 An unknown person underlined “4.7%.”
