360
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Thornburg is full of ideas if occasionally vague as to their implementa-
tion and not always aware of area problems.2
2. As for the program, I find it basically sound but “sensitive” and,
with due regard for proper operational security, most difficult to phase.
3. The appearance of George Allen on a general Middle Eastern
tour is bound to draw Soviet fire from the onset which, however, ought
to dissipate to some extent by the time he gets to Iran. What Allen can
do with the willy-nilly Shah is the moot question.
4. Other problems that you undoubtedly will be interested in are:
a. The question of the British. It seems to me that we cannot take
unilateral action in Iran without, at least, their concurrence. It will cer-
tainly require considerable diplomacy in winning them over to this
plan.
b. [1 paragraph (3½ lines) not declassified]
c. Timing will be a vital problem once the program is translated
into a project.
5. Once you have reviewed this program, the obvious next step is
to get Byroade or Jernegan in State to study it.3
[name not declassified]
2 See Documents 117 and 118. In the margin is a handwritten note by [name not de-
classified] to Kermit Roosevelt that reads: “Kim—will appreciate your keeping me in-
formed of the progress of the proposal.”
3 On October 24, [name not declassified], Special Assistant for Liaison with the De-
partment of State, wrote a memorandum to NEA/CPP stating, “I discussed this matter in
State with Mr. Berry, who said you would find one hundred per cent support in the De-
partment of State for the premise that Mr. Thornburg’s program, based as it is on strong
action by the Shah of Iran, is completely unrealistic. He said that he had discussed this
problem with Mr. Joyce, who concurred. If the Shah were such a man as his father had
been, Thornburg’s suggestions might prove of value. As it is, there is a universal accep-
tance in the Department of State of the view that the personality of the Shah is such that
he would be incapable of carrying out the action suggested by Mr. Thornburg.” (Central
Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Intelligence, Job 80B01676R, Box 41, Folder
20, Shah of Iran Operations)
