562 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Shevardnadze: Yes, that would be very good because we really have, as I have said, a number of substantive and technical problems. And I remember the final stages of the INF Treaty, we really had a lot of difficulties with some of the technical problems that posed themselves. Baker: Well, as you noted, I have got a list of the problems that need to be solved and I will present it to you tomorrow in the small group meeting on arms control and you can compare our list against any list you might have. You are quite right that we have a very big job if we are going to get ready by the 30th of May. Shevardnadze: With respect to some of the substantive aspects of the reply, I do believe that it is not desirable at this time when we have a number of substantive differences to add to any of them. In other words, our real task right now is to try to reduce the substantive differences and not necessarily put a new one on the table—­an additional item that we really don’t have time to work out. But in the context of your proposal, I have a suggestion to make. We would be ready to make a substantial cut in our mobile SS–24s if you would decide not to deploy your MX missile in a mobile form. We could record that in a political document if you’d like. To be more precise, we would be ready to stop deployment of these missiles by January 1, 1991. We would not be able to stop deployment during this year. This is our initial position. You will, of course, want to study it and discuss it. As you remember, I said in Namibia that there is a need for bold steps and major tradeoffs that are equitable if we are going to secure stability in our countries over time. The second point in the letter I should note focuses on fixed MIRVed missiles in the next negotiations, and our readiness to discuss this. But cuts in one component should not create instability in other components. We are ready to discuss all problems, all issues, including major cuts in warheads in all missiles—ICBMs and SLBMs. We also are willing to discuss cuts in ALCMs and bombers. In other words, I think we need to have a full discussion of the strategic triad. There are quite a few different variants that need to be considered and I think all these elements must be taken into account if we are going to have a real balance. There is a factor I would like you to consider and that is that we now have a situation that has been typical in your country for a long time. That being, that all of these issues of parity, balance, the end of the arms race, are being scrutinized by our legislature. That is not new for you but it is new for us. And I must tell you quite frankly that we are hearing that we have made too many concessions. Both Gorbachev and I are being criticized quite seriously. We are being told that we make too many one-­sided concessions; we are being told that the INF treaty was an example of that; we are being told that in these agreements now
