endanger the safety of treaty ports on this waterway. The resulting adverse effects upon the whole position of foreign interests in China hardly require to be emphasized. (3) Canton. The aggressive attitude of the Communist Government now installed at Canton is proved by recent events and it is impossible not to feel considerable uneasiness regarding the position of the foreign community at Shanghai [Shameen?] who are on the defensive; the danger presented by Canton is not purely local. The Canton authorities possess in the Whampoa Officers’ Training School, an institution which His Majesty’s Government are reliably informed is a distinctly military asset. It is partly staffed with Russian instructors and must be regarded as the possible nucleus of a military force which, under conditions now prevailing, may seriously affect the whole Chinese situation. Indeed, recent events appear, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Naval authorities, to indicate the possibility of a Russo-Chinese attempt to blockade the passage of the Canton river. In these circumstances, it is subject for consideration whether immediate steps ought not to be taken if possible to avert and, failing prevention, to provide against a combination of dangers which, if they materialize, must inevitably lead to forcible action on a considerable scale for the protection of foreign interests, life and property. In deciding what policy they should adopt to cope with the exigencies of the situation, His Majesty’s Government are above all anxious that their attitude should in all respects possible correspond with that of the United States Government. I am accordingly instructed to enquire whether the United States Government are in general agreement with the foregoing summary and, in the affirmative event, I should be grateful to learn at the earliest opportunity, what steps your Government consider should be taken to meet the situation, together with a statement of their reasons for any action proposed. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON 32 Post, p. 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 527].
