Hungary I also sought assurances from Bartha concerning the permanent public display of the Crown in Budapest. For obvious reasons I was not as specific as the language in para 3c of reftel concerning the date and U.S. delegation head. 7. Bartha’s personal response was as follows. (He explained he must now seek the government’s approval before he can respond officially.) A. Place of return: Full agreement with U.S. plans. B. U.S. delegation: Full agreement. Would appreciate concrete information. C. Date of return: Full agreement. Would appreciate confirmation. D. Hungarian participants: Full agreement to participation of Cardinal Private, Protestant leaders, and leaders of Jewish community. He suggested representatives of women’s and youth organizations. We told Bartha that we wanted as little party involvement as possible. Bartha said he understood completely. He added that, for planning purposes, there is no thought being given to attendance by any prominent party leader. E. Nature of public ceremony: Full agreement. Bartha said he does not have government approval but he believes that Parliament is the correct venue. F. Permanent display: Bartha told me that the Crown will be displayed in a manner similar to the display of the British Crown Jewels in London, with one exception: No admission will be charged. It is the plan of the Hungarian Government to put the Crown on public permanent display as soon as possible. In reply to my allusion to the possibility that the Crown would be given to the Russians, Bartha assured me in unequivocal terms that there is no such possibility: “I can assure you that that question is utterly ridiculous. The Russians have their own jewels. These jewels are treasured relics of the Hungarian nation. We have been struggling for a long period to get them back. We will not now give them away. In fact, we have a law which requires that the Crown remain in Hungary.” In reply to question from DCM, Bartha stated that this law is still in force. He agreed specifically to our reporting these assurances to Washington. G. Media participation: Full agreement with participation by foreign and domestic (press, radio, television) media representatives. H. Joint communique: I gave Bartha the text of our joint communique and Bartha agreed with its thrust. He or Nagy may suggest some change in the wording. I. Remarks at return ceremony: Bartha thought, on a personal basis, that the remarks should be short. They should give a brief historical background of the Crown and allude to its role in the future as a factor in improved bilateral relations.
