468
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Finally, this document also outlines a variety of security arrange-
ments to reinforce peace between Israel and her neighbors. This is, in-
deed, a comprehensive and fair framework for peace in the Middle
East, and I’m glad to report this to you.
The second agreement is entitled, “A Framework for the Conclu-
sion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel.” It returns to Egypt its
full exercise of sovereignty over the Sinai Peninsula and establishes
several security zones, recognizing carefully that sovereignty right for
the protection of all parties. It also provides that Egypt will extend full
diplomatic recognition to Israel at the time the Israelis complete an in-
terim withdrawal from most of the Sinai, which will take place between
3 months and 9 months after the conclusion of the peace treaty. And the
peace treaty is to be fully negotiated and signed no later than 3 months
from last night.
I think I should also report that Prime Minister Begin and Presi-
dent Sadat have already challenged each other to conclude the treaty
even earlier. And I hope they—[applause]. This final conclusion of a
peace treaty will be completed late in December, and it would be a
wonderful Christmas present for the world.
Final and complete withdrawal of all Israeli forces will take place
between 2 and 3 years following the conclusion of the peace treaty.
While both parties are in total agreement on all the goals that I
have just described to you, there is one issue on which agreement has
not yet been reached. Egypt states that agreement to remove the Israeli
settlements from Egyptian territory is a prerequisite to a peace treaty.
Israel says that the issue of the Israeli settlements should be resolved
during the peace negotiations themselves.
Now, within 2 weeks, with each member of the Knesset or the Is-
raeli Parliament acting as individuals, not constrained by party loyalty,
the Knesset will decide on the issue of the settlements. Our own Gov-
ernment’s position, my own personal position is well known on this
issue and has been consistent. It is my strong hope, my prayer, that the
question of Israeli settlements on Egyptian territory will not be the final
obstacle to peace.
None of us should underestimate the historic importance of what
has already been done. This is the first time that an Arab and an Israeli
leader have signed a comprehensive framework for peace. It contains
the seeds of a time when the Middle East, with all its vast potential,
may be a land of human richness and fulfillment, rather than a land of
bitterness and continued conflict. No region in the world has greater
natural and human resources than this one, and nowhere have they
been more heavily weighed down by intense hatred and frequent war.
These agreements hold out the real possibility that this burden might
finally be lifted.
