284 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 105. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 18, 1979 SUBJECT Iran: Our Strategy for the Next Phase I enclose the SCC minutes for today.2 You will see from them that the question arose whether we are retaining sufficient momentum. My own gut feeling, supported by Jody and Harold, is that we are locking ourselves into a litigational pattern which may make it more difficult for us to bring the issue to a head and which may also cause us gradually to lose domestic support. We could ultimately find ourselves in a position in which we may need to escalate and yet the public may not be prepared to support us. This is related to a more perplexing question: What does it take to jolt Khomeini into recognition of the fact that the release of the hostages is necessary? By moving step by step we are “inoculating” the Iranians against the consequences of their actions, without really frightening them. There is no doubt in my mind that your very forceful message that was sent after the Camp David NSC had the desired effect.3 Since then, however, the Iranians may have concluded that we are so committed to a negotiated solution that they can stall the process indefinitely. Finally, to obtain international support, we may also need to remind the international community that the only tangible alternative to international solidarity is unilateral U.S. action. [less than 1 line not declassified] we may have trouble in the UN getting support for Chapter VII. We are more likely to obtain such support if our friends become convinced that the only alternative to tangible international support is unilateral U.S. action which may indirectly affect them as well. Since next week may see a number of key people going away on their holidays, I would recommend that you hold a strategy meeting, (a formal NSC) to review and approve our strategy for the next two or three weeks.4 The previous meetings in which you personally took 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 18, SCC Meeting #232 held 12/18/79. Top Secret. At the top of the first page of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig—What is the UNSC count as determined by our UN delegation?” 2 See Document 104. 3 See Document 52. 4 See footnote 1, Document 104.
