1388 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement protection which the United States would receive from implementa­ tion of the various proposals for surprise attack inspection which have been presented in the disarmament negotiations and/or which were discussed in the Second Interim Report of the Working Group on Dis­ armament Policy, dated April 18, 1958. If there are other measures which have not been considered in our past proposals, or measures requiring further study, which you conclude might form a basis for international agreement to lessen the chances of a successful surprise attack and/or lessen the danger of acci­ dental war, I would appreciate your including them in your report. Because of the Soviet proposal of July 2 that a conference of experts be convened to discuss the technical questions concerning surprise attack, and also because of the requirement that the United States be in a position to discuss these matters with our allies in the very near future, it would be most helpful if the preliminary report could be made available by July 31, or earlier if possible. I am aware that in such a short period of time analysis and conclu­ sions of the Science Advisory Committee might be useful in assuming the validity of some of our present proposals, advancing our prepara­ tions for possible technical discussions with the Soviets, and deciding on further studies needed for policy decisions. Mr. Philip J. Farley and members of his staff will be available to assist you in any way you may wish in formulating and developing such a study. Sincerely yours, John Foster Dulles 341. Letter From Killian to John Foster Dulles1 Washington, July 10, 1958 Dear Mr. Secretary: In your letter of July 3, you asked whether the President’s Science Advisory Committee could explore in a preliminary way some of the general facets of the Surprise Attack problem, with particular reference 1 Source: Problem of surprise attack not limited to technical or scientific issues. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament, Surprise Attack.
