692
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to those which the USSR has with Warsaw Pact countries. The Soviets
have also proceeded with the construction of permanent barracks and
garrison areas and are reportedly restructuring some of their units in
Afghanistan in order to wage a more effective counterinsurgency
campaign.
It can be expected that with the arrival of good weather, Soviets will
step up their operations against the rebels. Operations will probably
be concentrated in the eastern provinces where the insurgents have
been most active. Closing the border with Pakistan to rebel movements
will surely be one of the aims. While this offensive will result in consid-
erable bloodshed on both sides, it will probably not be decisive. The
resistance may be forced to subside momentarily to regain its breath,
but its almost certain revival will continue the attrition of Soviet forces
in Afghanistan.
Limiting the Cost
The Soviets seem prepared to shoulder the Afghan burden for
some time to come, but there are signs that they hope to accomplish
their goals without significantly augmenting their forces. Since late
February, Soviet troop levels have not greatly increased and now num-
ber 85,000 in Afghanistan and another 30,000 involved in the interven-
tion, but held just across the border in the USSR. While they will
probably augment these slowly over the next month or so, there are
no indications they plan a massive increase. Unless the Soviets dramat-
ically increase these forces—which they may have to consider if opera-
tions this spring and early summer falter badly—they remain unlikely
to crush the insurgency quickly. However, for now, they seem in no
hurry and appear to prefer to test their capability to do the job with
their present forces for a full campaign season. Their current game
plan for stabilizing the situation includes the start of a long-term effort
to rebuild the Afghan armed forces, as well as limited combat engage-
ments for Soviet troops which are enough to hold the major cities and
to prevent general deterioration.
