176 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement United States and the USSR. As stated in national policy, the basic threat to U.S. security is the Communist Bloc determination and ability effec­ tively to direct rapidly growing military and economic power toward the objective of world domination. The most dangerous military mani­ festation of this threat is the possibility of general war. The over-­riding military requirement thus continues to be the development and main­ tenance of adequate and safe-­guarded nuclear retaliatory power. As the USSR approaches relative nuclear parity with the United States it becomes even more essential to deter conflict. The United States must ensure that the Soviet leaders recognize as unacceptable the conse­ quences of retaliation for actions which the United States considers threaten its ­security. c. Nuclear Weapons Usage. Primary reliance on nuclear weapons as a deterrent, and for selective use in actual conflict, is the keystone of U.S. policy and posture. This concept is the only course of action open to the United States compatible with the economic well-being of the United States and the free world, and hence with the preservation of our fun­ damental values and institutions. d. Limited Aggression. With regard to the position taken by the majority of the Planning Board in connection with paragraph 14 of NSC 5810, it is the view of the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force that review of this paragraph should be deferred pending the State-Defense-Joint Chiefs of Staff consideration of limited aggression now in progress. However, a valid statement of national policy in this regard is a continuing essen­ tial; therefore, current national guidance, as repeated in paragraph 14, NSC 5810, should remain in effect for the interim. In this connection the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force agrees that within the total United States military forces there must be a capability of deterring or, if necessary, defeating, local aggression with forces able also to contribute in general war. This requirement has existed and will continue to exist regard­ less of forecasts as to relative probabilities of local aggression requiring United States military intervention. With respect to existing U.S. lim­ ited aggression capabilities, as of 30 June 1957, the Joint Chiefs of Staff concurred in the Department of Defense advice to the National Security Council that “the United States has ready forces capable of responding selectively and flexibly to local aggression in peripheral areas of the Sino-Soviet Bloc and to carry out initial general war tasks.”3 3. It is recommended that the foregoing form the basis of the Department of Defense position on NSC 5810 at the National Security Council meeting on 1 May 1958. 3 NSC 5720, Part 1. [Footnote is in the original.]
