September 18–December 16, 1978 349 would go to the Baghdad summit and I said he would, if it takes place, but that he had emphasized that he will work for a positive outcome in terms of the peace process. I reported that he had stated that he will walk out of the summit if it takes a negative course, although there would obviously be tremendous Arab pressure on him not to follow through with this threat, if the time came. 4. Begin summarized his understanding of Hussein’s position and observed that, until this time, both the pro-PLO and the pro-Hashemite figures in Judea, Samaria and Gaza have adopted attitudes negative toward the CDA. What did I learn of the Saudi view, he asked? I said I had brought two essential conclusions away from my talks in Saudi Arabia. First, they do not believe the CDA is clear and precise enough as regards the ultimate future of the West Bank and Gaza. I said I had explained that the US neither can nor wishes to provide the kind of guarantee of an independent Palestinian state which the Saudis sought. Second, I said I came away convinced that the Saudis had adopted a position that may be described as neutral. They had told Hussein the decision was up to him. I observed that the Saudis, like the Jordanians, were concerned about the forthcoming Baghdad summit and want to maneuver to bring about a moderate outcome, although it is difficult to perceive any reasoned program to accomplish this. 5. Begin asked who I had seen in Saudi Arabia and I told him I had held conversations with the Crown Prince, Prince Saud, Kamal Adham, and Turki Bin Faysal. I said that some of them seemed to understand the process that we were seeking to set in motion and are intrigued by it. Our Embassy in Jidda felt that in the post-summit environment we might expect more support, but I had found the task of selling the CDA difficult, partly because of differences in cultural conditioning. Patience is limited and they want to see what lies at the end of the process now. I said that I had tried, for example, to explain why the US would regard a determination in advance of the eventual status and relationships of the Palestinians living in the West Bank/Gaza contradictory to the concept of allowing these people to participate in determining their future. My success had been limited. 6. Begin turned at this point to the replies4 which the USG had given Hussein in response to the questions posed by Jordan. He said he would like to give his analysis of some individual points but would first like to make a more general statement. He asked first that I express to President Carter his “deep sadness” that these answers were sent without prior consultation, stating that the subject matter affects Israel’s rights, security and its very survival. Israel had, he felt, a pre- 4 See footnote 4, Document 91.
