674
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
267.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, August 16, 1953, 5 p.m.
345. At 11:15 General McClure on Embassy advice had conference
with Chief of Staff Riahi lasting forty minutes.
McClure stated he gravely concerned at reports he received and
radio news broadcast re coup d’e´tat. Stated had information from Em-
bassy and other sources that Shah issued decree dismissing Mosadeq
and appointing new Prime Minister.
He also had information from Mohanna, Deputy Minister of De-
fense, that there was no such decree.
McClure stated his mission was accredited to legal and constitu-
tional government and that two conflicting reports of existence of
Shah’s decree made his official position an uncertain one in relation to
army.
Was army to support Shah and carry out his orders or support an
ousted Prime Minister (granting that decree was authentic)?
Riahi replied that mission relationship remained unchanged; that
few officers and civilians had attempted overthrow Mosadeq and had
not succeeded; that he knew of plot six hours beforehand and had
taken appropriate steps. He denied, without apparent conviction that a
decree had been authentically signed. He stated that Iran and its people
came before Shah or any particular government and that army was of
people. Army would support people. He said Iran had adopted policy
of long range benefit to its people; that Iran wanted and needed sympa-
thetic help of free world particularly US but that she would not deviate
from that policy even though it meant loss of aid and even friendship of
US. He repeated his desire for continued help.
McClure replied he did not know what our government’s policy
would be in support an illegal government if it were determined that
Shah had signed a decree setting up a new government.
Riahi stated cordial personal and official relationship between
them had been based on frank and honest expression of views and that
he hoped that relationship would continue. He added footnote that it
unfortunate that US had been taken in by British propaganda and poor
reporting; while blood ties of Britain and US caused close collaboration,
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London NIACT and to
Beirut for Ambassador Henderson. Sent with an instruction to pass to the Defense De-
partment. Received at 12:10 p.m.
