214
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
50.
Address by Secretary of State Vance1
St. Louis, Missouri, July 1, 1977
The United States and Africa: Building Positive Relations
This is a special occasion for me to meet with you and to discuss
with you such an important subject: American relations with Africa.
Before I turn to our main topic, I would like to add a personal note
about the man who has led this organization and who has been a voice
for justice and freedom for nearly five decades. I speak of Roy Wilkins
[outgoing executive director of the NAACP]—a personal friend, a man
I have admired through the years.
Roy Wilkins has not finished his work. There remains an impor-
tant agenda which he helped fashion—an agenda of human rights and
social justice. I know that President Carter and others in his Adminis-
tration will continue to seek his help, be inspired by his strength, and
strive for what he believes to be just.
While guiding the NAACP, Roy never lost sight of the importance
which Africa has had for our nation. Africa matters very much to the
United States. This is a fact more and more Americans are coming to
understand.
You in the NAACP have recognized this fact since the first days of
your organization, almost 70 years ago—in sponsoring the first Pan Af-
rican Congress in 1919;2 in your calls, during the days of the Marshall
plan, for effective assistance, as well, to Africa, the Caribbean, and
other developing areas.
We in a new Administration hope that we can show similar vision
as we build our policies toward Africa.
We proceed from a basic proposition: that our policies must recog-
nize the unique identity of Africa. We can be neither right, nor effective,
if we treat Africa simply as one part of the Third World, or as a testing
ground of East-West competition.
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, August 8, 1977, pp. 165–170. All brackets are
in the original. Vance delivered his address before the annual convention of the NAACP.
The Department transmitted the text of Vance’s speech to all African diplomatic posts in
telegram 153476, July 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770234–
1039) For the text of the question-and-answer session following Vance’s address, see De-
partment of State Bulletin, August 8, 1977, pp. 170–174.
2 Convening in Paris February 19–21, 1919, the first Pan African Congress brought
together African leaders to address the status of Africa during the postwar period, specif-
ically the former German colonies. Attendees endorsed the right of Africans to partici-
pate in their own governments and charged the League of Nations with upholding this
right.
