North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
923
First, the problem is quite insoluble in terms of present public and
Congressional attitudes on LDCs. This is, of course, a point that I have
been making for the best part of a year.4 Once the President got the
same idea, people started paying attention and slowly but surely we
are starting to work out a public affairs strategy.
Second, we are not organized to negotiate intelligently. We ap-
proach these economic negotiations individually without any grand
strategy. There are possible trade-offs between them; we don’t have to
be forthcoming on every front as long as we are credible on most or
some of them. State was asked by the PRC to provide a strategic over-
view for this year; they have just produced it but it is only a list.5
Guy states it well when he says that we are perceived as being on
the defensive. What we need to do is find some areas where we need
not be defensive. The only way to force Cooper and Company to do this
is to make them show their entire hand on the full range of North-South
negotiations. They have a very good case to make on each individual
point. The poverty of their position seen as a whole, however, will be so
evident that Vance or the President will tell them to do something.
From an economist’s point of view, the best strategy for everybody
concerned is to build up the American economy so that we can buy
more from the LDCs. This, however, is not an acceptable political
strategy any more than it would be domestically to rely solely on a pro-
gram of tax incentives to large companies as the way to combat unem-
ployment. We accept domestically that it is necessary sometimes to
take second-best economic solutions in order to meet a pressing polit-
ical need. The same is true internationally.
Another point that we need to keep in mind is that our ideas of
economic and political rationality are not universally held. Not only do
other countries (and not just LDCs) have different ideas about what a
common fund should look like; many countries (including sympathetic
ones such as India) do not think much of our basic human needs ap-
proach to aid. We have to consider compromise on both political and
economic issues if there is to be a genuine dialogue instead of sermon-
izing on our part.
Again, the way to force these matters out into the open is to make
the bureaucracy produce (or react to) a grand strategy. If State is un-
4 For example, on October 18, 1977, Thornton forwarded to Brzezinski a paper he
had prepared entitled “Public Presentation of a North-South Strategy.” In his cover mem-
orandum, Thornton noted that he had “been flogging for some time the idea that the
President should lay the North-South out before the people.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 7, President, Europe and Asia,
12/29/77–1/6/78: Cables and Memos, 10/14–25/77)
5 Not found.
