Negotiating Channels
483
He responded, “I believe that President Carter is a good man and
well intentioned President who does not understand our history or
our revolution. His sending you here is the first indication we have
had that he wants to understand.”
I then presented our case. I said that President Carter is the first
American President in a generation who understands both the influence
we have in the world, but also understands our country’s limitations.
I said that he was not an “interventionist” in the worst sense of that
word, indeed, that he had resisted intervention and military action
both during the time of the revolution and since the seizure of the
Embassy. I told him that there were many people inside and outside
of government who wanted the President to take unilateral action in
late ’78 and early ’79, ranging from urging the Shah to “crack down” to
direct U.S. military intervention. I told him that you rejected such ideas.
I told him that at the time of the capture of the embassy, public
opinion supported extreme measures, including punitive military
action, but that you had shaped and sustained a mood of restraint.
He acknowledged that these were sound arguments and said that
as counterproductive as the sanctions had been, any type of military
action or blockade would have resulted in the death of our people.
He then said, “Now, let’s talk about the hostages, and I’m in a
better mood to talk about them since you have heard our case.”
He went on to say “President Carter wants the hostages out for
the sake of those people and so that he can be re-elected—I want
them out so that we can turn our full anger and attention toward the
Soviet Union.”
He then made some philosophical comments about the United
States and Soviet Union. “While you have a better country, with certain
values and a democratic system for your people, the Soviet Union does
a much better job of marketing their ideology. I oppose communism
because it is an ideology that lacks a moral basis. But the bottom line
for Iran is that we will not be the pawn of the U.S. or the Soviet Union.
If I am killed fighting for my country, I do not care whether it is a
communist bullet or a capitalist bullet—either way I am dead.” More
on this in person.
We then got into a discussion of the scenario for release of the
hostages.
Point #1. I’ll tell you about in person.3
3 In his account of this meeting, Jordan wrote that one solution posed by Ghotbzadeh
was for the United States to “kill the Shah.” (Jordan, Crisis, pp. 162–168)
