World Hunger and Food Policy 847 storage facilities will amount to $35 million in FY 80. In 1979 we contributed $3 million to the FAO’s Fund for Prevention of Food Losses. c) Agricultural Research. The U.S. provides about 25% of the resources of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). It is a network of 11 agricultural research centers located in developing countries that work on basic LDC food crop production problems. The Summit countries have endorsed greater efforts in agricultural research. d) Multilateral assistance. With U.S. encouragement, the multilateral development banks (MDBs) are increasing financing for rural development projects. About 35% of the lending by the MDBs is now dedicated to agricultural development. In FY 79 the U.S. will contribute approximately $1.6 billion to the MDBs. In addition, the U.S. contributes $450 million to the UN development organizations involved in food and agriculture. We funded 20% of the billion dollar International Fund for Agricultural Development. 2. Food Reserves Until the February adjournment, international efforts to stabilize wheat supplies were tied to the UNCTAD-sponsored negotiations for a new International Wheat Agreement (IWA). The proposed agreement would have established an internationally coordinated system of nationally-held wheat reserves. The International Wheat Council (IWC) agreed in June that in addition to the unresolved issues which prevented conclusion of negotiations, more recent market developments (increased production costs, transportation problems in Australia and Canada, and anticipated crop shortfalls) have introduced new objective conditions which require careful study. At their November 1979 meeting IWC members will review whether the negotiations to achieve a new IWA should be resumed. While it remains our objective to enhance world food security through an international system of wheat reserves, it may require another cycle of short supplies and relatively high prices to persuade other developed and developing countries that the costs of establishing a meaningful system would be worthwhile in terms of their own interest. In the meantime the U.S. will continue to support other international activities aimed at creation of food reserves including: a) FAO Five Point Plan. The plan, developed in response to adjournment of the IWA negotiations, calls for best efforts by nations to: (1) adopt foodgrain stock policies; (2) establish criteria for management and release of national stocks; (3) assist low-income food deficit countries to meet current import requirements and emergency needs;
