World Hunger and Food Policy
847
storage facilities will amount to $35 million in FY 80. In 1979 we con-
tributed $3 million to the FAO’s Fund for Prevention of Food Losses.
c) Agricultural Research. The U.S. provides about 25% of the re-
sources of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Re-
search (CGIAR). It is a network of 11 agricultural research centers lo-
cated in developing countries that work on basic LDC food crop
production problems. The Summit countries have endorsed greater ef-
forts in agricultural research.
d) Multilateral assistance. With U.S. encouragement, the multi-
lateral development banks (MDBs) are increasing financing for rural
development projects. About 35% of the lending by the MDBs is now
dedicated to agricultural development. In FY 79 the U.S. will contribute
approximately $1.6 billion to the MDBs. In addition, the U.S. con-
tributes $450 million to the UN development organizations involved in
food and agriculture. We funded 20% of the billion dollar International
Fund for Agricultural Development.
2. Food Reserves
Until the February adjournment, international efforts to stabilize
wheat supplies were tied to the UNCTAD-sponsored negotiations for a
new International Wheat Agreement (IWA). The proposed agreement
would have established an internationally coordinated system of
nationally-held wheat reserves. The International Wheat Council
(IWC) agreed in June that in addition to the unresolved issues which
prevented conclusion of negotiations, more recent market develop-
ments (increased production costs, transportation problems in Aus-
tralia and Canada, and anticipated crop shortfalls) have introduced
new objective conditions which require careful study. At their No-
vember 1979 meeting IWC members will review whether the negotia-
tions to achieve a new IWA should be resumed.
While it remains our objective to enhance world food security
through an international system of wheat reserves, it may require an-
other cycle of short supplies and relatively high prices to persuade
other developed and developing countries that the costs of establishing
a meaningful system would be worthwhile in terms of their own in-
terest. In the meantime the U.S. will continue to support other interna-
tional activities aimed at creation of food reserves including:
a) FAO Five Point Plan. The plan, developed in response to ad-
journment of the IWA negotiations, calls for best efforts by nations to:
(1) adopt foodgrain stock policies;
(2) establish criteria for management and release of national
stocks;
(3) assist low-income food deficit countries to meet current import
requirements and emergency needs;
