618 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ES–27. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mann) to the Secretary of State1  Washington, October 31, 1960. SUBJECT Coup d’etat in El Salvador In the early hours of October 26 a bloodless coup d’etat occurred in El Salvador which resulted in the sending of strongly pro-U.S. president Jose Maria Lemus and his principal aide and heir apparent, Major Adolfo Rubio Melhado into forced exile in San Jose, Costa Rica, and the assumption of power by the following six-­man combined military civilian Junta. Military Members: Col. César Yanes Urías—Deputy Chief of General Staff under Lemus regime. Recently assigned to special staff responsible for maintaining order in San Salvador during state of siege. Has been in the U.S.; described by former U.S. Military Attaché to El Salvador (Col. Ferguson) as reticent, non-­commital, retiring in personality; not particularly a leader. Lt. Col. Miguel Angel Castillo— Director of the Treasury Police under Lemus regime; former Director General of Telecommunications under President Osorio; described by former USMA as friend of President Osorio, a leader, and very friendly to U.S. (The Auxiliary Bishop of Guatemala, who spent many years in El Salvador, describes both Yanes and Castillo as “high-­calibre anti-Communist officers of the Osorio stripe.”) Major Ruben Alonso Rosales—­former Deputy Chief of key El Zapote Fortress, commanding the capital city of San Salvador; described by former USMA as being very friendly to a former member of U.S. Army mission; close to General Parada, late Minister of Defense, known as friendly to U.S. Civilian Members: Dr. Fabio Castillo—Medical Doctor and Vice Dean of the School of Medicine at the National University; respected and popular with University students; has studied in the U.S. and Europe; a known liberal or leftist, who has been called “Communist”, a charge which has not been substantiated. 1 Source: Department of State, S/S NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, “NSC– 5902 Memoranda.” Secret. Drafted by Gwynn and Higdon, and initialed for Mann by Gwynn.
