Chile  251
of the importance U.S. agencies attach to a country reaching a prior 
agreement with the Fund, he could not say what their attitude would 
be unless there was a full agreement.
As to the Administration’s program generally, Eakens indicated 
it would be helpful if that part concerned with credit were reduced 
to concrete terms. Mentioning that all measures thus far taken by the 
Administration for increasing the availability of local credit had been 
sound and non-­inflationary, he said the President had indicated his 
disagreement with the credit controls which had been in effect during 
the last two and a half years and that this had given rise to concern 
in Washington that the Administration’s actions in this field were 
going to be inflationary. He said the same concern was felt over the 
Administration’s housing program. Vergara said that they were taking 
measures to place the Chilean economy on a dollar basis and to encour-
age the use of dollars to finance imports and exports and relieve the 
pressure on existing local credit. While the results had not been as great 
as he expected, he said this was beginning in a small way to have the 
desired effects.
CH–16.	
Letter from President Alessandri to President 
Eisenhower.1
Santiago, January 30, 1959.
[4 pages not declassified]
The Government has already embarked on a program to reorga-
nize the public administration and state agencies, for the purpose of 
reducing national expenditures to limits consistent with the country’s 
economic capacity. To the [illegible in the original] and studies will be 
completed during 1959 that will permit the introduction of sweeping 
changes in the systems of social security, customs tariffs, and taxation.
The first steps have already been taken to rationalize foreign trade, 
by adopting a policy governing rates of exchange that will effectively 
encourage export activities and reduce the demand for imported prod-
ucts to safe limits. With this purpose in mind, the areas of exchange 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.” Information on the source 
text indicates this is an official translation of the original. Walter Muller Hess presented 
his credentials to President Eisenhower on February 13, 1959.
