January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1077
and freedom, and contribute their full share to the welfare of the inter-
national community.
Based on this common analysis, I remain confident that you will
continue to support our efforts aimed at establishing an era of just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
Dear President Carter,
I do not need to reiterate the friendship and confidence which my
people and I feel towards you personally as well as the great American
people, and our determination to strengthen our relations and our co-
operation in furthering our common aims, while maintaining the tradi-
tion of frankness and candour which has always prevailed between us.
It is in this spirit that I wish to tell you of my disappointment with
regard to the reaction of the administration to our requests concerning
weapons and in particular aircraft.
The importance of Egypt in any real effort to oppose the commu-
nist threat in the Arab world and in Africa is an irrefutable reality.
Despite the apparent success of the Soviet-inspired efforts to iso-
late us, Egypt remains the only power which, if properly helped, can
oppose attempts to destabilize and to impose communist domination
in our region. No other country in the area can assume this responsi-
bility. Especially not Israel, as the lessons of the history of the last
decades clearly show. Everytime the Western world has allied with her
to defend its interests, this alliance has been counterproductive.
Dear Friend,
In the light of all these considerations, which I am sure that you
share, I must ask you to give personally your most serious and urgent
consideration to our demands concerning the acquisition by Egypt of
the F–15; the increase in the number of F–16s which are to be provided
and the speeding up of their delivery; and the spare parts of the F–4’s
which have had to be grounded for lack of spare parts.
In the present circumstances, this is the way to strengthen Egypt’s
position in its determination to fulfill its national obligations which
coincide with those of all peace and freedom loving nations who feel
duty-bound to oppose all attempts to impose Soviet hegemony.
Yours truly,
Mohamed Anwar el Sadat
End text.
Atherton
