January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1245
edly, it was intended to intimidate future Israeli governments and cur-
tail seriously their freedom of action. It has been suggested that such a
move was undertaken by a Knesset member and not by the Israeli Gov-
ernment. However, it is evident that the government acted in parallel
with the member’s move and associated itself with it. Both Premier
Begin and his chief negotiator found it opportune to endorse the move
and state that it was nothing new. Furthermore, the Israeli Government
submitted an additional draft of its own to formalize the annexation of
East Jerusalem and render it irrevocable. One of the arguments Prime
Minister Begin used was that he confronted us both with that at Camp
David. On the other hand, Israeli officials have been making provoca-
tive statements about their settlement policy and their determination to
build 14 new settlements [garble] The content as well as the timing of
such actions came as a negative development to which we could not re-
main passive. It would not be in the interest of the negotiations and, in
fact, the entire peace process to hold the talks in this atmosphere of
rising tension and unilateral actions which run contrary to the spirit of
reconciliation. As you know, the issue of Jerusalem is a sensitive one
that invokes the interest and sentiments of eight hundred million
Muslims. We recognized quite willingly the religious and cultural
rights of sixteen million Jews in the city. By the same token, the rights of
eight hundred million Muslims must be respected and observed.
Thus, it was inevitable for us to move to check such Israeli defiant
attitude which is criticized by many moderate Israelis. We called for a
pause, not a breaking-off of the negotiations. Such pause is intended to
serve Israel notice that its policy of imposing preconditions and cre-
ating fait accompli is counter-productive. It is also meant as a signal to
the Israeli public that their government is undermining the peace
process with these rash and uncalled for actions. In the final analysis,
the pause could, if utilized skillfully, help the peace efforts and boost
the chances for reaching agreement. The Israeli Government must be
brought to understand that it is under an obligation to exercise self-
restraint and refrain from any precipitate action which is likely to affect
adversely the peace process or render the negotiations meaningless.
Afterwards, we will be ready to resume the talks in a more conducive
atmosphere.
May I also suggest that we utilize this interval to discuss and coor-
dinate our views of the major issues of substance which were raised in
the course of the last round of talks. Our aides have started such thor-
ough examination of substantive issues following the Hertzliya talks
and I think that it would be fruitful to pursue this joint study prior to
the resumption of the talks. Of course, you are at liberty to hold consul-
tations with the other side as well. My confidence in you and your
judgment has no limits. As usual, I will be delighted to receive your
thoughts and observations.
