National Security Policy  801
defeat it quickly. Such ready forces must be highly mobile and suitably 
deployed, recognizing that some degree of maldeployment from the 
viewpoint of general war must be accepted. When the use of U.S. forces 
is required to oppose local aggression, force should be promptly and 
resolutely applied in a degree necessary to defeat such local aggression. 
Force should be applied in a manner and on a scale best calculated to 
prevent hostilities broadening into general war. Local aggression as the 
term is used in this paragraph refers to conflicts occurring outside the 
NATO area in which limited U.S. forces participate because U.S. inter­
ests are involved. The possibility of local aggression involving sizable 
forces of the United States and the USSR is ruled out. Incidents in the 
NATO area such as incursions, infiltrations and hostile local actions, 
involving the United States and the USSR, are covered by the NATO 
political directive and strategic concept.
62. [New] Outer Space. The United States should continue actively 
[and with a sense of urgency]4 to pursue programs to develop and 
exploit outer space as needed to achieve scientific, military and politi­
cal purposes.
Objectives should include: (1) a broad-­based scientific and techno­
logical program in space flight and planetary-­interplanetary exploration 
which will extend human knowledge and understanding; (2) a military 
space program designed to extend U.S. military capabilities through 
application of advancing space technology, [only in fields where such 
applications show promise of offering advantages over other possible 
means for achieving required capabilities];5 (3) a civil space program 
designed to promote the peaceful uses of outer space; and (4) as consis­
tent with U.S. security, achievement of international cooperation in the 
uses of and activities related to outer space—for peaceful purposes, and 
with selected allies for military purposes.
4 Treasury-­Budget propose deletion. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 Budget-Treasury proposal. [Footnote is in the original.]
