208
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
PRM–37 response with an executive summary is at Tab C.6 However,
this memorandum is all that you need to read.
Overview
State and ACDA believe that the negotiations have proceeded
about as expected, while the JCS feels that there has been insufficient
progress to warrant a further delay in modernizing and expanding the
U.S. chemical stockpile. The five rounds during the past 15 months con-
firm that on-site verification provisions present the most difficult
issues. Progress will be slow at best and a breakthrough in the near fu-
ture should not be expected.
The U.S. stockpile suffers from two major deficiencies: the number
and type of munitions, and their location. The U.S. has about 30,500
agent tons of which only 7,200 tons are usable. Over the next seven
years, the 7,200 tons will be reduced gradually to 2,400 tons because of
obsolescence and deterioration. Of the 7,200 tons, roughly 450 tons are
stored at one site in Germany. The deployment of additional chemical
munitions to forward positions in Europe has not been possible be-
cause our Allies remain quite negative on this issue. Importantly, De-
fense has not established a requirement for a chemical weapons stock-
pile of a specific size. Since there is no overall concept of how chemical
weapons would be employed, it is not possible to estimate consump-
tion rates and, thus, a requirement. JCS has established a figure of
30,000 agent tons but it has not been validated in DOD.
The politics within the Pentagon on the CW issue are significant.
There are sharp differences between OSD and JCS. The Army Chemical
Corps supported by the JCS is fighting for its very existence, and has
been fanatic in its push for substantial improvement in the U.S. stock-
pile. When this dimension is added to JCS skepticism about the negoti-
ations, the result is a vocal minority dedicated to binary production. In
general, the services do not grant a high priority to CW. It complicates
their planning, increases cost, and is a form of combat which on emo-
tional grounds is distasteful. An important aspect of the meeting will
be to determine just how strongly Harold Brown feels about the binary
facility. We have heard that he fully expects it to be cut by OMB and
only included it to avoid a fight in his building.
Issues
1. Proposed Changes to CW Negotiating Instructions: Based on the ex-
perience of the past 15 months, three changes to the key elements con-
tained in PD–15 have been suggested. These involve technical points
for the most part (e.g., the allowed period for destruction of facilities)
6 Attached but not printed.
