Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egypt. This would preclude Soviets coming in and maneuvering in the Gulf of Aqaba. The President suggested that the parties accept this and the Israelis agreed. The President then showed the Israelis language that we would be prepared to use in a letter dealing with the U.N. force or a multilateral force if the U.N. would not agree to station troops in Sinai. This would be a letter from the United States to Israel. It should be kept secret for now, otherwise the U.N. will not act at all. Dayan said that the Israelis were concerned about the situation in which the United States might do its best to keep the U.N. force intact, but that it would fail. The President said that he would have to talk to Congress about the extent of the American obligation. Dayan said that he would ask the Cabinet not to publish the text of this letter. The President said it would be very embarrassing to him if it were published. He does not want to consult with Congress until we are closer to agreement on the treaty. Dayan agreed to this idea. The President asked what problems would remain if the Egyptians were to accept what had been decided on this evening. Barak pointed to three other problems. One was the linguistic problem on page 1. The Israelis would like to say “upon completion of the interim withdrawal”, rather than “after completion of the interim withdrawal”. This would mean that the Suez Canal would be open immediately. Atherton suggested that specific reference to the passage of Israeli ships in the Suez immediately should be put in Annex III, and Barak agreed. The President said that Egypt wanted to delete the reference to terrorism on page 3. Dayan said that he would have to refer this to the Cabinet, but that he would suggest that no reference be made to terrorism. The President suggested that some other word might be included. Weizman said that he would also recommend the deletion of the word. Barak then turned to Article VII on arbitration. The Prime Minister wants to reopen this issue, and now favors an arbitration commission of four members, two from each party. If each party agrees that a deadlock has been reached in the talks, by agreement they would name a fifth. But it should not be automatic that there would be a fifth member. The President said that the Israelis were going on their agreement to Article VII and that it would be hard for the Egyptians. Dayan said that they could leave it as it is now, and there might be a problem on other points. The Israelis then might want to reopen this one as well. The President asked whether they would agree that there would be a fourperson commission and if both agree there is a deadlock, then they will choose a fifth member. Barak said that this would be okay. The President said that he could agree to language as follows: “If the parties agree
