March–August 1953
713
has been almost non-existing during the past critical hours. Should the
royalists manage to take over, Tudeh will be their strongest and most
violent opponent.
Our sources have confirmed press and radio reports that
pro-royalist forces appear in control of city of Teheran and that Zahedi
has returned to city where he broadcast proclamations to the people
promising a program of economic and social reforms. Our sources re-
port huge crowds in streets of Teheran calling return of the Shah.
C.P. Cabell
296.
Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Tehran, August 21, 1953.
TEHE 765. 1. Tudeh discipline appears to have been broken. This
particularly noticeable between hard-core, rigidly disciplined element
composed of leaders, functionaries, and responsibles, and ordinary
rank and file.
2. It definite that working arrangement obviously dominated by
Tudeh, has been reached among Pan Iran, Third Force, Bazaari loyal to
Mossadeg, and Tudeh.
3. Tudeh’s tactics call for no action in party’s own name, but infil-
tration of pro-Shah groups for purpose of incitement such groups to vi-
olence, arson, etc. in name of Shah. This to blacken reputation new
regime.
4. Tudeh planning no action in own name until there evidence of
organized activity on part Iran army officers loyal to Mossadeg. (Field
comment: Strong implication here, which probably true, that Tudeh
trying organize such officers in conjunction Tudeh-controlled officers.)
5. Cells instructed in early morning to turn in to party all firearms
and ammunition to enable party centralize available weapons. (Field
comment: There several unconfirmed reports re locations centralized
arms stores and issuance arms from these places.)
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. Transcribed specifically for the For-
eign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer
exists. See “Sources” chapter. A typed notation indicates that this telegram was trans-
mitted at 0033Z, August 22.
