International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
203
pressing a desire to meet during the IMF Annual Meeting for “an inten-
sive exchange of opinions and information” (message attached),3 in
order to achieve agreement on a statement of goals and a coordination
of national economic policies. Apel’s message is also addressed to Wit-
teveen, which suggests he will approach Witteveen directly over the
weekend to discuss this.
There is considerable potential for disagreement on this issue. The
German Government, which is a coalition that has a very narrow
margin in the lower house and is a minority in the upper house, will
take the position it has done all it can politically in the way of stimulus
at this time. The Japanese will point to their recent actions as fully
adequate.
The British, on the other hand, are poised for a major assault on the
failure of the major surplus countries to do more to reflate their econ-
omies, and reduce their surpluses, so as to provide for a greater expan-
sion of world trade. This may be a major topic at the Five meetings, and
also has important implications for Summit follow-up and the up-
coming OECD targeting exercise.
Apel’s message is clearly intended to encourage high-level agree-
ment to stop further public criticism of national economic policies as
being counterproductive to the point of being politically harmful from
a domestic point of view. There is merit in Apel’s view. We can’t con-
vince our people that cooperation is working if public slanging matches
a la Callaghan continue.4
Suggested U.S. Position
—Favor reaching understanding among ourselves (Five) on public
posture that policies in effect and recently taken are broadly appro-
priate—even though some of us may privately be urging that more be
done if possible.
—Ask how we can help each other get the public support needed
to implement stronger measures.
—Acknowledge that some of our anticipations at time of London
Summit have not been fulfilled.
—Recognize that economic policy initiatives are not uniformly ca-
pable of fulfillment at same pace in differing economies.
3 Attached but not printed is a September 15 letter from Apel to Boulin, Healey, Blu-
menthal, Bo, and Witteveen.
4 On September 2, Callaghan suggested that the London G–7 Summit had “not suc-
ceeded”; later that day, he said that some G–7 countries, “such as the Federal Republic of
Germany and the United States, have not been able to get the degree of expansion in their
economies that they put their hands to.” (R.W. Apple, Jr., “Summit in London is Termed
a Failure,” The New York Times, September 3, 1977, p. 3)
