Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
807
—President Carter placed the Soviets on notice that we would regard
an attempt to control the Persian Gulf region as an assault on our vital
interests, to be met by any means necessary including military force.
—have worked to strengthen security and stability of nations in re-
gion (e.g. Western aid to Turkey, Pakistan; Camp David peace process).
• Third, we have worked with other nations to strengthen the inter-
national response to this Soviet aggression:
—few nations have been so sharply and broadly condemned (104
nations in the UN; Islamic nations—twice).
—have pressed our friends and allies to support the direct meas-
ures we have taken and to sustain their own sanctions against the So-
viet Union.
4. Search for peaceful, negotiated solutions to potentially explosive regional
disputes.
—President Carter’s leadership was instrumental in achieving the
historic Camp David agreements between Egypt and Israel. For the first
time since its creation, Israel today is at peace with its most powerful
Arab neighbor, Egypt. For the first time, a negotiating process has been
created to address both Israel’s security and Palestinian rights.
—The President’s unwavering support for negotiating in Rhodesia
helped bring an end to a bloody civil war, a majority rule government
and a decent hope for peace and long-term stability.
—Together with the other Western members of the UN Security
Council, we have made substantial progress toward a peaceful transi-
tion to independence and majority rule in Namibia.
—After fourteen years of negotiation, we concluded a new Panama
Canal Treaty which provides a more secure future for the Canal and re-
moves a long-time irritant in our relations with nations throughout the
Hemisphere.
5. Broader cooperation with our allies than ever before.
—Largely as a result of US leadership, NATO has done more in the
past four years to strengthen its collective defense than in any comparable
period in its history.
—Long-Term Defense Program.
—commitment to annual 3% real increases in defense spending.
—theater nuclear weapons modernization.
—NATO allies stood firm against considerable Soviet pressure to
reverse TNF modernization decision.
—unprecedented degree of genuine consultation on defense and
arms control matters (during SALT negotiations, for example).
