760  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
no question there about a special sublimit on the TU–22M. Therefore, 
we consider our agreement here on a ceiling on TU–22M aircraft in 
the context of a START agreement as a good will gesture. From that 
standpoint, we have drafted our proposal, along the lines of the letter 
Secretary Baker sent on Tacit Rainbow.
I would like to single out two issues: The USSR as a good will 
gesture will commit not to give the TU–22M (what you call Backfire) 
intercontinental capability. If you would like to give specific reference 
to refueling, we can discuss that. Our language—“in any manner”—­
covers everything. Second, since there is no question in Vienna 
regarding establishment of limits on those aircraft, we are prepared to 
identify such a number in this context. Therefore I wish you to realize 
that we are making a concession accommodating your position. The 
fact is that we are not dealing with naval armaments in Vienna. If we 
initiate negotiations on naval armaments, all naval aircraft will be sub-
ject to discussion. Therefore there is a shade of difference between this 
discussion and Vienna. If we refer to Vienna, we should stick to the 
Vienna mandate.
Bartholomew: I will not repeat in detail everything that I said 
yesterday. But I must at least touch on the main points, and put some 
underlinings in some of the sentences in the record of yesterday. First, 
set aside any comparason with Tacit Rainbow. Backfire is a 15-­year-­old 
problem of substantive and political importance. What we are talking 
about is reaching a practical solution so that it will not be an obstacle 
to the negotiation and completion and ratification of START. What we 
are proposing now to settle this problem is the same sort of draft dec-
laration, outside the treaty, as we have agreed upon for SLCMs. We are 
asking you to do four things that we designed to meet your concern as 
well as ours to put this to bed quickly.
First, give us this as a politically binding Soviet declaration outside 
the treaty, so that we can say and believe that there has been Soviet reci-
procity and evenhandedness in solving this problem, as we have shown 
on other problems. This is not a question of discounting the value of 
Soviet statements, but a question of political visibility. The form can do 
some work in helping us solve this problem.
Second, to take care of concerns regarding the intercontinental 
potential of this aircraft, we ask you to give us two forms of assurance.
— To deal with concerns about intercontinental capability, we ask 
you to give us a commitment you will not give it intercontinental capa-
bility through in-­flight refueling or in any other manner. This needs to 
be specific in part because it is relevant and in part because of of its par-
ticular visibility. Since you say “in any manner” you should be able to 
specify refueling as well. This does not cost the USSR anything. You are 
not foregoing something you were doing or planning to do. This would
