1060
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
334.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre), the Director of the
Office of Science and Technology Policy (Press), and the
Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to
President Carter1
Washington, August 3, 1979
SUBJECT
S&T Cooperation with Developing Countries (U)
Cy Vance has sent you his recommendations on the US position at
the August 20–31 UN Conference on Science and Technology for De-
velopment.2 On two of his proposals there was agreement in the PRC:
increased and coordinated aid to developing nations in energy devel-
opment and, similarly, in agricultural research; both of these positions
were agreed at the Tokyo Summit. There also is agreement that we
should stress our creation of the Institute for Scientific and Techno-
logical Cooperation (ISTC). (C)
There is disagreement on Cy’s proposal that the US delegation, led
by Father Hesburgh, announce support for creation of a special fund of
up to $250 million in the UN Development Program and commit a US
contribution of up to $25 million annually in FY 1981 and 1982. This
commitment would be subject to a favorable pre-conference canvass of
key members of congressional appropriations committees and assur-
ance that the fund’s program would not duplicate ISTC. (C)
Press, Owen and Tom Ehrlich believe that the industrial countries
should support, in principle, a modest alternative to the developing
countries’ demand for a $2–$4 billion UN S&T fund. They believe, how-
ever, that we should not make a commitment to a specific US contribu-
tion until we can see how the fall budgetary situation stacks up, what
other donors are willing to do, and whether other countries will accept
our condition that the UNDP fund not duplicate our ISTC program.
They would notify other countries of the US position and express a
hope that they will take the same view, but refrain from spending polit-
ical capital in persuading our allies to support the fund. They recom-
mend that, with your approval and, if necessary, after notifying the
chairmen of the two relevant appropriations subcommittees, the US
delegation be authorized to say:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 116, Scientific Matters: 1979. Confidential. Sent for ac-
tion. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
2 See Document 333.
