656
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
There was a change when the two of you exchanged visits. We all
agreed to work for a comprehensive settlement. You are afraid that
Egypt will renege on its treaty commitments, and Egypt fears that you
will not carry out the West Bank/Gaza agreement. Neither of these
fears is warranted. We want to avoid a hardening of positions by either
of you. We cannot lose this opportunity. You expressed my views yes-
terday when you said that talks were in a “deep crisis”. We are all con-
cerned. Where do we go from here. This is very serious. If you show no
flexibility, then Sadat will not accept the agreement. If he shows no flex-
ibility, you won’t accept. I would then see no reason for more negotia-
tions. We hope you will try to maintain the spirit of Camp David and to
search for accommodation. Let us make the final attempt today to put
together some new ideas.
I hope you won’t reject the idea of negotiating on the West Bank
and Gaza, or maybe Gaza alone, rather than dropping everything. You
know Hussein’s views on going to the Security Council. Others favor a
return to Geneva.31 Sadat could withdraw from contacts and go back to
the Arab world where he would have support from the militant Arabs.
I want to avoid this. To be frank, the language differences to me are rel-
atively inconsequential compared to what has been achieved, and they
are in some cases very minor. If you assume that Sadat does not want
peace, they may take on very great significance. If Egypt were to accept
totally your views, Egypt could still allege you broke your word and
then could go to war. That could be suicidal for Egypt, because of Is-
rael’s military capability. It is hard to imagine that happening. But that
possibility can’t be overcome by a mere change in language. I don’t
know how to express my concern more clearly. The whole effort could
be abandoned. We want to avoid this.
Prime Minister Begin: I want to clarify one misunderstanding. I
have never said that Egypt is looking for an excuse to make war against
Israel. I tried to explain that we cannot sign any document which legiti-
mizes a revoking of the peace treaty or making war on Israel. The peace
treaty with Article 6 could be broken. I have read history and I know
that treaties are torn up. I remember about the neutrality of Belgium. I
know that this may happen and we must all take risks. In Sinai, even
with the demilitarized zone, there would be no resistance if Egypt de-
cided to send its army back to our border. Israel needs three days to
mobilize reserves and then Israel can fight everyone. If there is sur-
prise, there would be a high cost. Egypt is building tunnels underneath
the Suez Canal. Why? Israel has taken all of the risks so far. But Israel
will not openly sign a document that would legitimize a war against
her.
31 See footnote 5, Document 24.
