German Democratic Republic
409
steps, we can make some instructive human rights points without
risking loss of any immediate practical benefits. The alternative to a
formal demarche would appear to be informal discussion as opportuni-
ties present themselves in Washington and East Berlin.
Recommendation:
That you and I and our assistants and Embassy Berlin look for
appropriate opportunities in official contacts with representatives of
the GDR Embassy to make the following points informally:
—We have been observing with concern recent developments
involving what appear to be increasing restrictions on the activities of
foreign journalists in East Berlin and on GDR intellectuals.
—Some of these matters were raised more formally when Deputy
Foreign Minister Nier visited the Department in May. As you know,
we consider that we have a legitimate basis to raise these matters
because the ability of American journalists to carry on their profession
appears to be affected and because the Helsinki Final Act commits
both our countries to encourage the freer flow of ideas between East
and West.
—Apart from this, however, I would note to you informally that
these actions have a serious negative impact upon the way in which
the GDR is viewed by important segments of American society. This
makes it much more difficult to gain support for steps to build our
bilateral relationship in a manner that would be in our mutual interest.
—It is disappointing that this backward movement appears to be
taking place in an area—access of GDR citizens to Western media and
of GDR literary figures to their very interested Western readership—
where the GDR had hitherto created a much more favorable impression.
The new criminal code laws in particular appear to be directed at
chilling the type of human and professional contacts and flow of infor-
mation that CSCE aims at. You should be aware of the harm this sort
of thing does the GDR in the United States.
An instruction Telegram for Embassy Berlin is attached for your
approval.6
6 Attached but not printed. Vest approved the draft, which was sent to East Berlin
on July 17 in telegram 184716. In the telegram, the Department authorized the Embassy
to make only an informal approach on human rights to prevent any “confusing signal
as to our motives for holding back on signature of the Cultural Convention and other
bilateral steps.” The Embassy was further instructed to stress that East German actions
in the area of human rights will “have a serious negative impact upon the way in which
the GDR is viewed by important segments of American society.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790324–0505)
