January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1363 Secretary Duncan said we should, as one option, if this would make possible a good meeting today. But he hopes we will not have to do it. Secretary Muskie asked for an explanation of “strong presumption.” Secretary Duncan said that if Israel lost either Egypt or Mexico as a supplier, then there would be a “strong presumption” that the MOA would be triggered. Ambassador Owen said that this is our existing position. Secretary Duncan said that there is another possibility: that Mexican sales to Israel could be expanded. He has had some success here, stressing collective international efforts. On the 90 days, it means that if either Mexico or Egypt fell out, then there would be automatic triggering. After 90 days, then Israel must show that it meets either the 20% on price or the 60% on the spot market. Ambassador Owen said that the word should be “and”: Israel would have to meet both tests. The President said it should be both, since Israel could meet the 60% spot market test by itself. Secretary Duncan said that if the Saudis get OPEC price unity, then there will be a movement towards price unification. If that is achieved, then there will be few market swings, and Israel could hit the 20% price formula easily. Stu Eizenstat said he agreed that we should not enter an agreement that would permit triggering now. But there are advantages in getting an agreement now. If the difference is a 90-day automatic provision, with reversion afterwards to 20/60, then we should do it. There is a history to this: OPEC knows of the MOA. Our provisions are not easy ones to meet. There would be a 90-day grace period for Israel in an emergency. It would be good to get an agreement, and put this behind us, not to extend it. Modai is going on a 12-day speaking tour, and he shouldn’t go without an agreement. Ambassador Owen said that we should not just say we will work up alternatives, but try to close a deal. Stu Eizenstat said that we should do so, even if we can’t get total agreement because of other problems. Secretary Duncan said that there are other issues to be decided, like how long this agreement should last. Stu Eizenstat said that the other problems could be managed. We should be able to announce major decisions, and that we have a conceptual agreement. Deane Hinton said that he has prepared two possible press statements. One says that there has been progress on some issues; the other says that there has been substantial agreement, subject to review. Ambassador Owen said that our decision seems to come down to this: we would go with 20/60, and with “strong presumption.” If that
