1414  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
ways to slow down this armaments race and it is unrealistic to expect 
the early achievement of over-­all disarmament agreements. It will be 
easier to reach agreement on a small problem, like test cessation, than 
on a large one, like prevention of surprise attack. Unless we reach 
agreement on this small problem, we cannot expect to be successful in 
concluding agreements on the larger problems.
The Geneva Conference will probably result in agreement that both 
control posts and the right of rapid, unimpeded inspection are required 
in an effective control system. The Soviets have also agreed to limited 
overflight of the USSR in case there is suspicion of nuclear explosion 
on its territory. Even though these concepts will require clarification in 
a political agreement, they constitute a precedent for the acceptance of 
inspection by the Soviet Union.
5. Nuclear Disarmament
U.S. policy calls for a cut-­off of fissionable material production 
for weapons as a second step in nuclear disarmament. A test cessation 
agreement could be tied to a future agreement on the cut-­off of produc­
tion. It will be our choice whether we wish to proceed further in nuclear 
disarmament.
6. International Relations
a. General—The position of the United States in the society of 
nations will deteriorate if we continue testing. We will increasingly be 
considered as warlike and as obsessed with aggressive military objec­
tives, while the Soviets will seek to gain support as a nation with peace­
ful objectives.
We are now engaged in a technical discussion with the Soviets to 
determine if an agreed-­upon system of effective inspection of nuclear 
explosions can be achieved and the make-­up and capability of such a 
system. If there are agreed-­upon conclusions upon the control of test 
cessation and if the U.S. then fails to seek a test cessation agreement, it 
may well subject us to world-­wide criticism for bad faith, even though 
we carefully stated before the start of the Geneva talks that such talks 
did not commit us to any policy with respect to cessation.
b. Fallout—Even though the actual radiation hazards from fall­
out from nuclear tests may be relatively small, the uncertainties and 
warnings that have been expressed by scientists on radiation hazards 
have caused fear and apprehension throughout the world and a strong 
emotional opposition to testing. We cannot ignore or escape this grow­
ing world apprehension and/or escape damage to our position in the 
world which will result from our disregard of worldwide fears.
7. Peaceful Applications
If peaceful application tests are excluded by the test cessation 
agreement, it may be possible to re-­introduce tests for peaceful appli­
cation, after the issue of tests has lost its present controversial nature. 
Such a delay would be acceptable since these applications are of small 
importance compared with the stopping of the armaments race.
