1140 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement the Department but also the other organizations involved are desirous of helping Uruguay at this time in those fields in which help is possible. This impression I should hope to have reinforced in Montevideo upon the forthcoming arrival of newly-­appointed Ambassador Woodward. Having gone this far, then, and having for the first time in recent years arrived at a point where we can actually come to grips with the Uruguayans over their problems, I believe it to be of the utmost importance that we be in a position to move ahead on one or more specific projects, as noted below, upon receiving some evidence of receptivity from the Uruguayan Government. Wool Tops. When the Uruguayan Embassy presents its figures justifying statistically the removal of the countervailing duty, and when it appears that the Uruguayan exchange is reasonably stable, I would propose preliminary talks between officers of AFA and appropriate Treasury officials. These would pave the way for me to approach Treasury on a higher level to emphasize the utmost importance we attach to the duty’s removal, not only on economic grounds, but as a major factor in the totality of our relations. I would hope for your approval and support in this approach. P.L. 480 Program. A P.L. 480 Program with Uruguay would have the doubly beneficial effect of bolstering the Uruguayan economy and dampening the ardor with which the Uruguayans are accustomed to attack our surplus disposal program. Given the slowness with which the Uruguayan Government moves, however, it may be necessary to do some actual encouraging to move the required legislation through the Uruguayan Congress. If such an effort is successful, I would hope that [illegible in the original] would support my request for a prompt and ample program in Uruguay. Eximbank Credits. In his conversations with Mr. Waugh, Ambassador Lacarte was given some reason to believe that the Bank would look sympathetically upon an arrangement whereby the Bank would announce a line of credit, to be used for exporter credits, with a specific ceiling and for specified purposes. The Ambassador has reported this to his Government, and ARA has alerted the Bank to this, with the request that it be prepared to consider a scheme of this nature. The Bank is disturbed at the present size of Uruguay’s commercial debt, but it is probable that this can be cut sharply when the present Uruguayan wool clip moves to market. If, as seems likely, the Uruguayans follow up the line of credit idea, I should appreciate your support in a recommendation to the Bank that it look expeditiously and with favor on the plan.
