250 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement depend particularly on whether the bombs detonated are “dirty” or “clean”, because the world-­wide effects of the nuclear exchange (as opposed to the effects on the combatant nations) derive from radioac­ tive fallout. Certainly a nuclear exchange involving the detonation of 15,000 megatons would push the people of the world toward the limit of tolerance. Dr. Libby went on to point out that it was extremely difficult to estimate the biological effects of such a detonation on the peoples of the non-­combatant nations, simply because we do not know enough about such biological effects. On the other hand, with respect to the physical effects of such a holocaust, these were easier to establish, on the basis of some experience—­for example, in the field of weather. Dr. Libby stated that the physical effects of such a detonation of nuclear weapons would be quite minor. General Cutler pointed out the Planning Board’s fear that the con­ centrated explosion of 15,000 megatons would have particularly grave effects because of concentration. As a result of Dr. Libby’s statements and the conclusions of the written study, the Planning Board was now less fearful. General Cutler then asked Dr. Killian if he had any com­ ments to make. Dr. Killian stated that he and his people had not participated in the making of this study, but he was inclined to agree that Dr. Libby’s views were certainly conservative and perhaps even pessimistic. At the very least, it was a reasonable statement of the problem. The President inquired as to the assumptions in the study regard­ ing the mix between “clean” and “dirty” bombs. Dr. Libby replied that the assumed mix had been 50–50 between fission and fusion. Secretary Anderson inquired the reason behind the apparent lack of Russian concern about “clean” nuclear weapons. Does this lack of concern derive from the Soviets’ realization of our superior knowledge in the field of making “clean” weapons? Dr. Libby stated that we did not know the reason for the apparent lack of concern, a statement in which Admiral Strauss concurred, adding, however, that the appar­ ent lack of concern in the Soviet Union over the “clean” bomb may reflect merely what is said in Soviet public statements and not what the Soviets are thinking about in their laboratories. The National Security Council: Noted and discussed the report on the subject showing the radi­ ation effects on non-­combatant population of a massive, concen­ trated exchange of nuclear weapons, prepared by the Atomic Energy ­Commission pursuant to NSC Action No. 1882–­b–(1)–(b) and trans­ mitted by the reference memorandum of July 7, 1958; as summarized at the meeting by Dr. Willard F. Libby, Member of the Atomic Energy Commission.
