488 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV I. Levels of Defense Effort In preparing the FY 1980 Defense submission, alternative programs have been addressed at several levels, three of which I shall discuss here. My three top priorities in developing the Defense program and budget have been: maintaining parity with the Soviet Union in strategic forces; increasing NATO’s capability to withstand a “blitzkreig” war with the Pact in Central Europe; and modernizing and increasing the readiness of forces. The basic level program, which would meet your 3% real growth goal, would produce total obligational authority of $138 billion for FY 1980 (124B$ of expenditures) and requires 3% per year growth thereafter. It would provide for a first step toward making those goals. That program, however, would still result in further deterioration of our relative military position vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Union if they continue to increase their capability at the rate of the past decade. Since the pace of Soviet military growth shows no sign of abating, I believe we must be prepared to continue to fund growth at no less than that rate. Though the strategic balance is still generally satisfactory today, it is much less so than five years ago. The Soviets are rapidly overtaking us and we must react strongly to assure essential equivalence. Furthermore, the conventional force balance in Europe today is not satisfactory. To maintain our naval forces near their present size into the 1990s requires action now, and their readiness and survivability need improvement now. In short, we should consider our 1980 defense budget as part of a longer-­term program that will require increased effort, and consequently increased expenditures for defense, on our part as long as the Soviet Union continues on its current path. The military balance resulting from our following the basic level program, even with its 3% growth, would almost certainly be less favorable in 1984 than it is now. In the strategic balance, our lead in almost all measures will have disappeared by the mid-1980s. There could well be a widespread perception that the Soviet Union had achieved at least some sort of marginal superiority in the strategic area by that time. We are uncertain about what, if any, practical effect such an advantage might have on the outcome of a strategic war. But such evidence as there is strongly suggests that many of the Soviet leaders believe otherwise with regard to both military utility and political intimidation. And the area of strategic thermonuclear war is one in which, because there is no experience, perceptions and doctrine are critical. As for the conventional balance in Europe with a basic level program, the Pact would have an advantage in terms of equivalent forces of almost 2:1 over most of the early days of a NATO/Warsaw Pact mobilization. Additional armor and mechanization, together with prepositioning of U.S. equipment, and improvements on the part of our allies,
