310
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
142.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, February 1, 1977, 11:30a.m.–12:30p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Anatoliy Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Affairs Assistant
Strategic Issues
President Carter began by stating he would like to move rapidly—
aggressively—on arms control issues with the Soviet Union. He men-
tioned that he had been encouraged by the messages he received this
summer from Secretary General Brezhnev. He would like to see
Brezhnev’s good wishes translated into positive results. The President
added that his Inaugural Speech2 and his recent letter3 to Secretary
Brezhnev expressed his views on U.S.-Soviet relations.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Comprehensive Test Ban
The President asked about the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB).
Dobrynin raised the issue of French and PRC compliance. The Presi-
dent responded that a CTB might be initialled for a limited time, such
as 2–4 years. It would be subject to renewal. Both the United States and
the Soviet Union would attempt to get France and the PRC to comply
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 47, Chron: 2/77. Top Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Of-
fice. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 3.
2 For Carter’s Inaugural Address and his remarks to other nations on U.S. foreign
policy, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 1–5.
3 On January 26, Carter wrote Brezhnev that he wanted to “improve relations with
the Soviet Union on the basis of reciprocity, mutual respect and benefit.” He mentioned a
number of arms control issues, and said that he hoped “we can promptly conclude an
adequately verified comprehensive ban on all nuclear tests, and also achieve greater
openness about our respective strategic policies.” Brezhnev answered Carter on February
4 and said that he wanted to “strictly observe the fundamental principles of equality, mu-
tual consideration of legitimate interests, mutual benefit and non-interference in the in-
ternal affairs of the other side.” After raising SALT and other arms control issues, he said
“it is also necessary to put into force without delay the Soviet-US treaties on the limitation
of underground nuclear weapon tests and on the explosions for peaceful purposes. At the
same time efforts should be intensified—–and we are ready to cooperate with the United
States in this matter—–for complete and general cessation of nuclear weapon tests and
the prevention of proliferation of such weapons.” The letters are printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents 1 and 4.
