Venezuela  1223
community, the presidency to rotate among them annually. If the other 
parties will not accept any of these alternatives, AD threatens to nominate 
its own party candidate. The other parties have rejected AD’s alternatives 
and called on it to reconsider Vegas as a unity candidate. It is likely that 
AD will continue to maneuver to secure the eventual joint nomination of 
Larrazábal as the only available “compromise” candidate. The outcome 
cannot be predicted. “National unity” could well break down.
45. Even if a coalition presidential candidate can be agreed upon, 
the conduct of a competitive congressional campaign and the subse-
quent selection of a coalition cabinet will subject “national unity” to 
great strain.
46. The Longer Term. Assuming that the electoral problem is resolved 
and that a civil government composed of a generally accepted presi-
dent and a coalition cabinet is duly installed in early 1959, that govern-
ment will continue to be under the constant threat of a military coup. 
That danger will exist as long as the military establishment remains 
independent of the civil government. It will be most acute in the event 
of a breakdown of “national unity” or of a government attempt to gain 
firm control of the military establishment.
47. A securely established constitutional government might take 
action to control Communist activities, although it would be unlikely 
to outlaw the party without serious provocation. As long as the threat 
of a coup remains, however, no effective anti-Communist action by 
the government is likely. The Communists will make the most of the 
opportunity afforded them to increase their political influence through 
the penetration of organized labor, youth groups, political parties, and 
the government. The eventual development of a situation like that 
in Guatemala in 1954 is possible. However, we believe it unlikely in 
Venezuela on account of the greater political experience of the leftist 
party leaders and their view of the Communists as rivals.
THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AND PROSPECTS
48. Venezuelan national production, the highest per capita in Latin 
America, has increased steadily and rapidly in the postwar period. This 
growth reflects a continuous high rate of investment: over 20 percent of 
GNP in 1957. Over the years, the petroleum industry has contributed 
about one-­third of this investment and government resources (derived 
largely from the petroleum industry) another third. The world demand 
for Venezuelan petroleum has ensured the country against the foreign 
exchange shortages, unmanageable budget deficits, and problems of 
inflation which have beset other Latin American countries.
49. Despite these favorable circumstances, the Venezuelan govern-
ment faces serious financial problems inherited from the improvident 
Pérez Jiménez regime. Although that regime expanded over half its bud-
get on spectacular public works, notably highways, it also squandered
