322
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Option 1: Tariff Rate Quota
Labor, Commerce, Interior, and STR recommend that you pro-
claim a three-year tariff rate quota based on 1976 import quantities for
three product categories—nuts, bolts, and large screws (including lag
screws). Imports up to the 1976 level would be dutiable at the present
tariff rate (less than one percent for nuts and bolts; 9.5–12.5 percent for
large screws) while imports in excess of that level would be charged a
30 percent duty on bolts and large screws and a 40 percent duty on nuts
(see Attachment 1 for details).5
These agencies feel that if the domestic industry has not already
been seriously injured, it is certainly threatened with serious injury.
The proposed remedy is not designed to roll back the situation but to
prevent further deterioration. In conjunction with the recommended
national security investigation, this relief would prevent any erosion of
domestic industry production capability that we might find costly to
our national security interests as a result of that investigation. By ap-
plying additional duties only to volumes in excess of the 1976 import
level (which is only slightly less than the 1977 level), the costs to con-
sumers through inflation is minimized. Imposition of this tariff rate
quota system could create some additional jobs although fewer jobs
would be created than under USITC’s proposed remedy. Adjustment
assistance, in the form of income maintenance, has already been made
available to many of the unemployed workers in this industry allevi-
ating pressures on those who would remain out of work. The foreign
policy implications of this proposal are judged to be much less serious
than under the USITC recommendation. The Japanese Government has
in fact informally indicated it would probably not retaliate against a
moderate remedy such as this one.
The proposed tariff rate quota remedy falls far short of the do-
mestic producers’ expectations. However, their criticism would be
much harsher if no relief were given and the receptivity of Congress to
the industry’s case would be much greater in the absence of relief.
I am personally very concerned about the political sensitivity of
this case. To deny relief to the industry on its second attempt while at
the same time substantially increasing its costs through the steel trigger
price system, could be perceived as unfair by many members of
Congress. With the additional element of national security concerns in
the background, the industry might find considerable support in the
Congress for an override. By granting the moderate relief provided by
the tariff rate quota, these pressures would be substantially defused
5 Attachment 1, attached but not printed, is an undated chart entitled “Three-Year
Tariff Rate Quota System.”
