964 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 7. Hussein turned discussion back to peace issues and said goal is to work out with PLO and key Arabs an agreed Arab position on major issues which would, in effect, provide PLO an Arab cushion for steps toward peace which it must take at some point. This would include agreement on what is needed to change SC Resolution 242 to be acceptable on Palestinian rights. Arabs must be agreed before a position can be brought to the world. Sharaf said an Arab consensus is needed to support PLO on such difficult issues as mutual Israel-PLO recognition and language of any new SC resolution. PLO is considering all of this and Hussein said that Arabs need such agreed positions whatever outcome of USG efforts and that USG might need this Arab consensus if its efforts do end in stalemate which is likely in his opinion due to Israel intransigent attitudes and harmful actions. 8. Secretary asked if King had any timetable on these inter-Arab consultations. Hussein said process, which Sharaf interjected are not yet really formal consultations, should be completed in two–three months. Sharaf said that first question other Arabs ask is what would U.S. view on these ideas be. Secretary said that of course depends on how they come out. What we are now working on is arrangements for transition period, which we all agree is needed, and what King is discussing with other Arabs is a vision of what should happen at the end of that period. They are not inconsistent. Saunders interjected that what is needed as we proceed along parallel tracks is mutual acceptance that what the other is doing is sincere and well-intentioned. We need a meeting of the minds and way to reach it is through mutual respect for the other’s concerns. Hussein said there is no doubt of President Carter’s sincerity and commitment but that peace process had gone astray and is headed for stalemate. Saunders said that of course we do not believe this is the case but, even if it is at some future point, there can be ingredients in a stalemate which can be used to move ahead. 9. Under Secretary Newsom wondered if King was confident that inter-Arab discussion would be completed before the issue of a new resolution comes up in the UN. Hussein said that ideally it should be and Sharaf added that Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Syria have heard his Majesty’s ideas. PLO is seeking King’s advice and guidance and has a great interest in a new SC resolution which would put Palestinian issues in truer perspective. PLO needs something major in this regard to justify acceptance of 242 and Israel. PLO also needs Arab support for such a move and this support is his Majesty’s goal. Secretary said that Romanian reports of Arafat’s position, about which he wanted Hussein to be fully informed, was that what Arafat needed is resolution acceptable to U.S. and Israel which would recognize Israel’s right to existence within secure and recognized borders and the Palestinians’ rights to self-determination would not be further defined in the resolution but it
