Yugoslavia that he also understood that such an exchange might be a possibility but did not know whether it would in fact take place. 6. President Tito said “I continue to hope that the United States is ready to put the issue of human rights in its proper perspective and emphasize attempts to resolve the main issues that exist between the US and the USSR. That is the impression I got from President Carter when I visited Washington, and I hope it is still his intention.” Governor Harriman commented that the Shcharanskiy case—a direct Soviet provocation and personal insult to the President—has deeply provoked the American public. Did President Tito have any suggestions on how we might proceed now, given the impact of the Shcharanskiy case? Tito said that the United States must understand that Soviet prestige is intimately involved in the Shcharanskiy and Ginzburg cases.5 The Soviets are intent upon showing the US and the dissidents that the latter cannot be “used” in discussions of other issues. The Soviets are doing this for both internal and international reasons. They have decided to be “more determined” in their opposition to the United States; they intend to show that the Soviets will not, when pushed on the issue of dissidents, retreat. They mean to demonstrate to the United States that it must stay out of the internal affairs of the Soviet Union. 7. Governor Harriman pointed out that despite the differences over human rights the Soviets continue to be ready to negotiate on SALT and have for the first time put forth a constructive MBFR proposal. Moscow is, in other words, indicating its desire to move ahead in the area of arms control, which is of interest to both countries. This is true, said Tito, but Moscow considers US involvement with the dissidents as interference in its internal affairs and will not accept it. Shcharanskiy, Ginzburg, and the other dissidents are, so far as Moscow is concerned, citizens of the Soviet Union, and only they can decide the manner in which they will be judged under their laws. “Personally I feel that the Soviets are not unrealistic in their view that no one can play in their internal affairs. Frankly, the administration’s most serious mistake was to have put such extreme emphasis on human rights at the Belgrade Conference” (CSCE). Every large country, said Tito, will always insist that it has the right to decide its own affairs. So far as US public opinion is concerned, Moscow believes that has always been anti-Soviet and therefore changes in degree are unimportant. The Soviets are not particularly impressed with administration arguments about its public opinion problems. 5 Vitaly Lazarevich Ginzburg, Soviet journalist, author, and human rights activist. He was imprisoned several times in the 1960s and released and expelled from the Soviet Union in 1979.
