World Hunger and Food Policy
805
247.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes) to Secretary
of State Vance1
Washington, March 1, 1978
SUBJECT
Food Corps Proposal
Issue for Decision
Is the Food Corps a viable idea? If so, we should maintain the mo-
mentum accorded it by Ambassador Young’s speech.2 Ambassador
Young has requested that this memorandum be presented to you be-
fore his March 3 departure for Asia.
Essential Factors
Ambassador Young in an address given in his personal capacity to
the FAO Conference on November 14, 1977, proposed the idea, first
suggested by Dr. Ruth Morgenthau, of a Food Corps,3 as one step
toward reducing hunger. The unique features of Food Corps are its em-
phasis on development at the village level, through recruitment and
training of specialized volunteers coming mostly from the less devel-
oped countries, the exchange of volunteers among developing coun-
tries, and management largely by LDC officers themselves.
Though the FAO delegates had no advance notice, many spoke in
favor. The West Africans expressed support, but in private conversa-
tions were concerned about having an effective voice in Food Corps
and not having it tied too closely to the FAO. The Philippine President
of the World Food Council and delegates from several of the industrial-
ized countries also endorsed the proposal. A few were skeptical, partic-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780051–0081. Un-
classified. Drafted by Roy Haverkamp (IO/AGR), Alberto Mora (IO/AGR), and Morgen-
thau on February 28; concurred in draft by Holloway; Butcher; Shear; Handwerger; Luz-
zato; Kriesberg; Boyle; Farrar; and Vernon Johnson. Byrnes initialed for all the officials
with the exception of Morgenthau and Mora. Mora also initialed for Haverkamp.
2 See footnote 9, Document 245.
3 Morgenthau, a Brandeis University political science professor, represented the
United States on the UN Commission for Social Development of the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC). In a September 6, 1977, memorandum to Vance, Morgenthau noted
that she had been “exploring the idea of creating an international Food Corps during the
past few months.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770175–1207)
In telegram 3161 from USUN, September 20, 1977, Young indicated that the Mission had
been analyzing the question of the Food Corps relationship “to existing agencies with an
interest in food and agriculture.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770342–0745)
