1955 491 Peiping radio continued stress need for normalization of Sino-­ Japanese relations, while at same time denouncing Japanese Govern­ ment for detaining Japanese nationals and “forcibly” sending them to Taiwan. NCNA continued to criticize Shigemitsu for dragging out Jap­ anese-Soviet talks London, and placed blame on “US manipulation.” Hoover 354. Telegram 1162 to Geneva1 Washington, November 8, 1955, 8:01 p.m. 1162. For Johnson. Instructions for 25th meeting. 1. Tax Wang severely with violation secrecy agreement represented by Daily Worker article. 2. Department considers your revised draft renunciation of force statement (your 1099) excellent. You should present it this meeting unless Secretary instructs otherwise. 3. By introducing draft renunciation of force statement first fol­ lowed by Daily Worker leak Communists have taken initiative from us on this subject. Their violation agreement on private nature talks makes essential for us to regain initiative and provides opportunity place our case graphically before world. Subject to Secretary’s concurrence you should inform Wang that unilateral release by his side of substance last meeting leaves you no recourse but to set record straight by releasing explanatory statement together with our draft renunciation of force declaration (your 1099) immediately following meeting. While publica­ tion our statement would tend to freeze our negotiating position, in our view there is nothing Wang could seriously object to in paragraphs one through four, and paragraphs six and eight are so tightly drawn, we could not accept change in any case. Explanatory statement mentioned above would be substance of statement Deptel 789 as amended Dep­ tel 805 with minor revisions. Department’s suggested text will follow Wednesday. 4. Implementation Agreed Announcement. You should remind Wang that two months have passed since PRC declared it would 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–855. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Clough; cleared by Robertson and in S/S.
