We could not forget the help that the United States of America gave us during the war and along with this moral debt of gratitude we are fully conscious of the interest which the eventual cooperation of a power like the United States of America presents in view of our present economic development. If we signed at London the arrangement relative to the “relief bonds,” it was not at our request—as it would appear from your note of March 18th. On the contrary, in view of our present difficulties, we would have wished to postpone this arrangement. But we had finally to consent to it on account of its international character. Indeed, these “relief bonds” represented essentially relief debts contracted under the auspices of an international organization with Allied and neutral countries. (Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland.) Nevertheless, we did not accept it until it was established that it did not imply any obligation concerning war debts. For us, hostilities did not, unfortunately, end on November 11, 1918. During the whole year of 1919 we had to defend our frontiers against the Hungarian and Russian Bolshevists. On the other hand, abandoned in the midst of the struggle by Russia, we found ourselves completely isolated from our Allies, so that our real war debts to America were only contracted during the year 1919. Under these conditions we think that these debts should not be assimilated with the “relief bonds,” which were made the object of the London arrangement. Rumania, as she has already declared on many occasions, has no thought of evading her obligations. She asks the Government of the United States of America simply not to demand of her any arrangement entailing the settlement of her debts with all her Allies —which would be, in the present circumstances, beyond her possibilities and forces. Besides, the obligation to settle this question now by premature sacrifices, would hinder to such a point our recovery that the very people who would have to suffer most would be our creditors, whose best guarantee is our general financial and economic consolidation. For this reason we hope that, far from seeing in our attitude a lack of good intentions toward the United States—a lack of good intentions which nothing would justify—the Government of the United States of America will be good enough to see therein simply a necessity imposed by our present situation. With a view to the economic reconstruction of Europe, the United States of America has lately given its help to various countries. We cannot believe that it will refuse to
