Non-Proliferation
949
373.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large and Special
Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to
President Carter1
Washington, July 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Nonproliferation
I.
The Secretary of State’s July 20 Nonproliferation Status Report2 to
you indicates the following:
—The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) will
end in February 1980 with only modest results.
—We face critical decisions by mid-1980: waiver of the deadline
for renegotiation of our agreement with the European Community as
the Europeans will continue to refuse us a reprocessing veto; possible
cut-offs of nuclear exports to India and South Africa; and a major issue
with Japan if we insist on continuance of case-by-case review of pro-
posals for reprocessing of US-origin spent fuel and continued deferral
of the Japanese planned reprocessing program.
—We will in addition face criticism at the NPT Review Conference
in June 1980.
Further, our task of working out acceptable new international ar-
rangements is complicated by the legislative requirement for changes
in existing supply commitments and the shift of the nuclear export li-
censing function to the NRC.
II.
We are now beginning a thorough and systematic exploration of
international nuclear policy in the post-INFCE period. An interagency
group will be getting under way. Other countries are looking for a de-
gree of harmonization of nuclear policies in the aftermath of INFCE. In-
ternational explorations on a more specific basis than in the past are
called for. Unless otherwise directed, I propose to go forward with the
efforts outlined in this memorandum on the basis of the following
observations.
1. Although there is enhanced concern in various industrial coun-
tries and to some extent in developing countries about the nuclear pro-
liferation threat (largely owing to your initiative, but reinforced by de-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 31, Chron: 7/79. Secret.
2 See Document 372.
