1977  33
acted upon by the Special Coordination Committee, the Director, OTP 
will be the Executive Branch’s focal point for all telecommunications 
protection and related programs either recommended or ongoing. New 
initiatives and plans will be submitted to the Director, OTP for consid-
eration as they may affect or interrelate with the objectives of this PRM.
The review and recommendations should be completed by July 
15, 1977.
Jimmy Carter
9.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Our Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options and Regional Nuclear Options
Our investigation of the White House Emergency Procedures for 
short-­warning nuclear attack has thrown up the question of our nuclear 
war doctrine. The SIOP, as you know, offers retaliatory options short of 
a full response, but they remain massive in both direct and collateral 
damage. NSDM 242, issued in January 1974,2 prescribed new guid-
ance for nuclear weapons employment—­limited nuclear targeting—­
and led to considerable controversy over the design of “limited nuclear 
options” (LNOs). In principle, the new doctrine was to provide the Pres-
ident with options short of all-­out nuclear war in crises. In practice it 
produced several problems and no solutions:
—Policy guidance justifying planning for each LNO: The rationale for 
particular LNOs has yet to be satisfactorily developed. Technically, an 
LNO is easy to design, but choosing purposes for specific LNOs is not. 
Progress in this area has apparently been nil although a few LNOs have 
received JCS approval.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 47, Nuclear War Doctrine: Limited Nuclear Options (LNO) and Regional Nuclear 
Options (RNO): 3/77–1/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. Outside the System. Carter initialed 
the top of the memorandum.
2 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976, 
Document 31.
