1979 537 from further study of how to augment the deterrent value of our forces during periods of rising tension. Mobilization and deploying resources do not meet the demand under the most stringent conditions. Under a NIFTY NUGGET scenario the Army cannot meet its demand for trained manpower without reallocating personnel from later deploying units to those deploying early. At present, under this scenario, more Defense strategic lift assets are needed, and our existing prepositioned stockpiles of equipment and ammunition are in many cases significantly short. Deployment transportation planning needs to be better integrated, made more detailed, and made more flexible. War planning was found wanting to a lesser degree. Yet, the exercises revealed that the simultaneous execution of war plans in different geographic areas could not be effective because each used common forces and strategic lift assets. Federal civil agencies were often unaware of and/or unprepared to support defense needs. Substantial work needs to be done in this respect. [Omitted here is the remainder of the report.] 115. National Intelligence Estimate1 NIE 11–10–79 Washington, February 1, 1979 Soviet Military Capabilities To Project Power and Influence in Distant Areas [Omitted here is a cover sheet, preface, and table of contents.] EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Objectives 1. Soviet leaders continue to view the Third World as fertile ground for the expansion of Soviet political, military, and economic influence through an assertive and opportunistic policy. They see political 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files. Top Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of the estimate: the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Energy, and Defense, and the National Security Agency, with the participation of the intelligence organizations of the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.
