Afghanistan
595
increasing numbers. Police too are deserting in droves as the rebels
extend their control into provincial centers and major cities.
Disaffection is reaching into the highest levels. According to clan-
destine reporting, the governor of critical Badakhshan province recently
joined the rebels, and the Minister of Defense, sickened by reports of
intensive Soviet bombing of provincial villages, has retreated into a
military hospital. A high level Afghan intelligence official has stated,
according to a clandestine report, that Afghanistan is “out of control.”
While this is an exaggeration, if the trend continues, the regime might
completely fall apart.
The bitter rivalry between Khalqis and Parchamists, whom the
Soviets have unsuccessfully tried to bring together into a reunited
party, has resulted in at least one shoot-out at the highest levels of
government. Babrak appears to have moved off center stage and talk
of coup plots and successors is rampant.
The Soviets must be even more alarmed now than when they
moved against Amin. Not only is Afghanistan in chaos, but their own
forces have not performed well and have sustained significant losses.
The Soviet dilemma is indicated by the widespread rumors of a
Soviet deal with the former royal family. For the moment, however,
another leftist candidate is probably more likely to be the immediate
successor to Babrak. (Secret/Noforn/Nocontract/Orcon)
216.
Editorial Note
In telegram 2964 from Moscow, February 22, 1980, the Embassy
reported on a speech delivered by Soviet General Secretary Leonid
Brezhnev. With regard to Afghanistan, the Embassy surmised the
speech signaled that the Soviets were possibly “looking for a way out”
of Afghanistan or, on the other hand, perhaps Brezhnev was making
an “attempt to shift the blame to others—especially the U.S.—for a
prolonged Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.” The Embassy went on
to quote Brezhnev: “The United States loudly demands the withdrawal
of Soviet troops, but in fact it is itself doing everything to make this
possibility remote: it is continuing and building up its interference in
the affairs of Afghanistan. I want to state very definitively: we will be
ready to commence the withdrawal of our troops as soon as all forms
of interference from outside directed against the Government and peo-
ple of Afghanistan are fully terminated. Let the United States, together
with the neighbors of Afghanistan, guarantee this. And then the need
