International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 We had four main objectives: 1. Obtain formal Japanese commitment to a high level of economic growth. This, of course, was a unilateral, sovereign decision of their Government but was substantially influenced by your meeting with Minister Ushiba when he was in Washington4 and my continuing negotiations. There is reason for skepticism as to their ability to attain this target but at least it will make them aim higher and increase their expansionary measures if we continue to monitor. 2. To obtain their commitment to reduce their current account balance from the present surplus of $11 million. They agreed to reduce to $6 million during 1978 and to equilibrium the following year, if possible. 3. We obtained a Japanese commitment to achieve parity with us through the implementation of the Geneva trade talks in terms of their market being as open as our own. This to be accomplished over a period of years. 4. To immediately open the Japanese market to certain imports through a series of specific trade acts and measures. While politically the ten-fold increase in beef quotas and the three-fold increase in citrus quotas made headlines here, in terms of meaningful, long-term, substantive trade significance to us, it is more likely that the Japanese pledges to reduce their barriers to parity in the MTN, to liberalize their foreign exchange control system, and to open up their government purchasing to foreign bidders are surely the most significant steps. What we can accomplish here remains to be seen and requires the monitoring to which I referred. Also very important is the work of our Trade Facilitation Committee set up by Juanita Kreps and headed by Frank Weil which has the job of helping individual U.S. companies get their products into Japan.5 Weil understands this problem and what needs to be done. The bottom line, Mr. President, is that we have only set forth what they say they will do and now we need to put the necessary political will into the program or it will revert to what it was after a few “one-shot” purchasing deals. Committee meeting, January 26; Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 88, Trade Policy Committee) 4 Carter met with Ushiba, Togo, Strauss, and Brzezinski in the Oval Office on De-
