3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
175
Reporting on President Carter’s July 21 Charleston speech was vir-
tually free of personal criticism. Almost simultaneously, a New Times
editorial asserted that in the current difficult phase of US-Soviet rela-
tions the correct policy is “not to dramatize this but to display reserve
and patience”;13 New Times was optimistic that Washington would
eventually return to a “constructive” line. Arbatov’s August 3 Pravda
piece, while critical of policies (but not the President), reflected the
same upbeat theme.
Other Bilateral Activities
The decline in the general atmosphere did not have an immedi-
ately measurable impact on day-to-day US-Soviet bilateral contacts,
which in general continued to move along established patterns. On the
whole the Soviets seemed eager to build up further the network of ac-
tivities under the various bilateral agreements, some of which are now
in their fifth year or going into a renewal phase. In response to US de-
mands for greater reciprocity, the Soviets were cooperative in some
areas; in others they pleaded bureaucratic difficulties or continued
their less-than-forthcoming positions.
Since January, agreements have been reached on further coopera-
tion in manned space flight and in the exploration and use of outer
space for peaceful purposes; the bilateral science and technology agree-
ment14 has been renewed for another five-year period; and an accord
reached on correcting certain imbalances favoring the USSR in the mar-
itime shipping field. The Soviets also showed some flexibility on cer-
tain civil air matters long under negotiation, and assigned a top civil air
ministry official as their permanent representative in the US, signifying
interest in solution of other issues. The two sides also reached agree-
ment on beginning construction of the Washington-Moscow embassy
complexes, and several of the working groups established by the
Vance-Gromyko meeting got underway, that on the Indian Ocean com-
pleting its first round successfully in June.
On the long-standing trade/MFN/credits stalemate, the Soviets
have scaled down, if not written off, expectations for any improvement
in the foreseeable future. They had evidently originally anticipated the
Carter administration would bring Congress around to rescinding the
1974 restrictions, but that hope has now been all but abandoned. The
trade issue is no longer a bellwether of the relationship with the US, al-
though the Soviets continue at every opportunity to stress the need for
normalization in this area.
13 Not found.
14 See footnote 2, Document 36.
