1955 197 desire to returnвҖқ because so explicitly stated in succeeding paragraphs that arrangement applied to persons вҖңwho desire to returnвҖқ. He said introductory paragraph intended give general idea of problem, details of which spelled out later. 12. I said I thought we could agree to elimination вҖңwho desire to returnвҖқ from introductory paragraph. 13. I then suggested in paragraph 2, we could use word вҖңinviteвҖқ instead of вҖңentrustвҖқ. Wang agreed to use of вҖңinviteвҖқ in English text and said they would keep original Chinese (wei tвҖҷo) which meant substanВӯ tially same. 14. I said I would consider it. With respect his substitution вҖңexpediВӯ tiouslyвҖқ for our word вҖңpromptlyвҖқ I agreed to consider it although I did not feel вҖңpromptlyвҖқ had the meaning he was giving it. I then repeated that I considered it vital that we have clear understanding what the word will mean with respect to release of Americans. I added I was anxious for anything further he could tell me concerning timing their release. 15. Wang then resorted to prepared statement. He said they had considered text of вҖңagreementвҖқ, as a result it appeared we were funВӯ damentally agreed on wording and expected no further problems in wording. He welcomed fact that as result efforts made, distance now dividing us had been lessened. He said now we seem to be returning to old problem of trying to define вҖңexpeditiouslyвҖқ in exact terms of period of time. He said they had made clear their position on this old probВӯ lem many times, but as I had raised question again, he would repeat their viewpoint. He said in past meetings I had insisted they should release all Americans in a specified time before improvement relations between China and US could be brought about. But it was his opinВӯ ion such a position was devoid of any justification because Americans detained not ordinary Americans but violators of Chinese law and hanВӯ dling their cases was Chinese sovereign right. Chinese had released 4 American prisoners in May and 11 more before commencement these talks, but guilty persons must be treated according to Chinese juridical process and impossible predict time limit for handling their cases. ChiВӯ nese Government would continue reviews and lenient policy would be extended only if agreement reached and relations between the two countries improved. 16. He said at last meeting I had charged him with relating politВӯ ical concessions to release Americans. This accusation surprised him since Americans concerned were law breakers. Showing leniency toward them as result improvement in international relations was not вҖңexploiting themвҖқ for political concessions. On contrary he said we were asking for concessions when we insisted on reaching agreement only after they released all Americans. They hoped agreement would
