1955  197
desire to return” because so explicitly stated in succeeding paragraphs 
that arrangement applied to persons “who desire to return”. He said 
introductory paragraph intended give general idea of problem, details 
of which spelled out later.
12. I said I thought we could agree to elimination “who desire to 
return” from introductory paragraph.
13. I then suggested in paragraph 2, we could use word “invite” 
instead of “entrust”. Wang agreed to use of “invite” in English text and 
said they would keep original Chinese (wei t’o) which meant substan­
tially same.
14. I said I would consider it. With respect his substitution “expedi­
tiously” for our word “promptly” I agreed to consider it although I did 
not feel “promptly” had the meaning he was giving it. I then repeated 
that I considered it vital that we have clear understanding what the 
word will mean with respect to release of Americans. I added I was 
anxious for anything further he could tell me concerning timing their 
release.
15. Wang then resorted to prepared statement. He said they had 
considered text of “agreement”, as a result it appeared we were fun­
damentally agreed on wording and expected no further problems in 
wording. He welcomed fact that as result efforts made, distance now 
dividing us had been lessened. He said now we seem to be returning to 
old problem of trying to define “expeditiously” in exact terms of period 
of time. He said they had made clear their position on this old prob­
lem many times, but as I had raised question again, he would repeat 
their viewpoint. He said in past meetings I had insisted they should 
release all Americans in a specified time before improvement relations 
between China and US could be brought about. But it was his opin­
ion such a position was devoid of any justification because Americans 
detained not ordinary Americans but violators of Chinese law and han­
dling their cases was Chinese sovereign right. Chinese had released 4 
American prisoners in May and 11 more before commencement these 
talks, but guilty persons must be treated according to Chinese juridical 
process and impossible predict time limit for handling their cases. Chi­
nese Government would continue reviews and lenient policy would 
be extended only if agreement reached and relations between the two 
countries improved.
16. He said at last meeting I had charged him with relating polit­
ical concessions to release Americans. This accusation surprised him 
since Americans concerned were law breakers. Showing leniency 
toward them as result improvement in international relations was not 
“exploiting them” for political concessions. On contrary he said we 
were asking for concessions when we insisted on reaching agreement 
only after they released all Americans. They hoped agreement would
