Afghanistan
865
completely annihilating the smaller minority sects. The guerrillas claim
that the Soviets have begun giving aid to the Baluchis who want to
achieve independence from Pakistan. As a consequence, the guerrillas
have begun to encounter hostility from Baluchi tribes in Afghanistan.
The guerrillas believe that the Baluchis are preparing to fight against
the guerrillas and feel that the fighting will spread to Baluchistan. The
guerrillas point out that with the Baluchis as allies, the Soviets would
be able to attain their long sought access to the Indian Ocean through the
Arabian Sea. There are also three sects along the Pakistan-Afghanistan
border that support the current Afghan Government, i.e., Soviet control
(NFI). The Soviets are trying to avoid at all costs a united opposition
from the entire Afghan population and are using their own ethnic
Asian and Arabic minorities as occupation troops in Afghanistan as a
means of appeasing the Afghan populace. In spite of Soviet efforts, the
guerrillas believe that they can counter pacification/rapproachment
activities through high morale and strong anti-Soviet feelings.
(2) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Preparations for a protracted conflict: The Soviets are preparing for a
protracted war by occupying the cities and concentrating their troops
there. They have allowed unrestricted movement of people between
cities and throughout the rural areas. Neither the Soviets nor the guerril-
las attack lines of communication and neither side is seriously disrupt-
ing the supply routes of the other. Both sides are currently engaged
in harassment tactics while trying to win the support of the populace,
particularly the city dwellers. The Soviets do not attack the guerrillas
unless the guerrillas engage Soviet forces first. According to the guerril-
las, the Soviets are not currently undertaking any large scale offensive
actions due to international public opinion. The guerrillas are growing
impatient with the lack of Soviet activity, but are resigned to a war of
at least ten years duration.
(3) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Counter-insurgency tactics: The guerrillas claim the Soviets are using
napalm, but have little actual knowledge of napalm. They also claim
the Soviets are changing troops frequently, replacing “inappropriate”
(NFI) units with other units. The guerrillas deny that the Soviets have
ever used paratroopers in Afghanistan. Although there have not been
any major Soviet efforts to search out and destroy the guerrillas, they
did attempt to surround the guerrillas in the mountains near Kabul
during June of 1980. During this offensive, the Soviet helicopters
dropped bombs, booby traps and mines along the guerrillas’ rear sup-
ply routes near the Pakistan/Afghanistan border. According to the
guerrillas, the approximately 100,000 Soviet troops and less than 30,000
Afghan Government troops are not enough to control all of Afghani-
stan, and for this reason, the Soviets have seized only the cities and
will not attack unless attacked.
