Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 vana was a notable example of Soviet failure, through their puppet Castro regime, to convince the other nonaligned countries to be subservient to the Soviets.6 The United States is eager to work with countries who pride themselves on their independence for the resolution of conflicts and for the promotion of greater global social justice. Third, we’ll continue to work for peace in the Middle East. Such peace is essential to all parties concerned. Israel deserves peace, and Israel needs peace for its long-term survival. The Arab nations require peace in order to satisfy the legitimate rights of the Palestinians and to ensure that their own social development can move forward without disruption and without foreign intrusion. The West, including the United States, must have peace in the Middle East or run grave risks that the radicalization of that area will draw outsiders into its explosive conflicts. The Camp David process has already led to the first peace treaty between Israel and an Arab state. Of course, Egypt is the largest and the most important and the strongest Arab state. We are determined to reach a comprehensive settlement, and we will not be diverted from that goal. Sol Linowitz, our negotiator, is just now returning from the Middle East.7 And I will be meeting with him this weekend to get a full report from him on progress made and to determine the steps that our country will take in the coming weeks to bring a successful conclusion to this very difficult effort. As we continue our efforts in the Middle East, I take pride as well in the contributions that we have also made in other areas, such as the Panama Canal Treaty already mentioned and the achievement of peace and majority rule in Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe. These are major accomplishments, not only of benefit to the people directly involved but to our national interest as well. And it may very well be that in retrospect in years ahead, looking back on this administration and this time, that those particular efforts, making new friends among literally billions of people, as in China and Africa, this will be recognized as the most important achievement of our time. And fourth, and very important: The West must defend its strategic interests wherever they are threatened. Since 1945 the United States has been committed to the defense of our hemisphere and of Western Europe, and then later of the Far East, notably Japan and 6 The sixth conference of the Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
