824 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ment to conform to the requirements of the new law. Ambassador Eilts is concerned that the delays which have already occurred in concluding an agreement are undermining Egyptian confidence in our intentions on an issue which they view as a major bilateral concern, especially when they appear ready to agree with our non-proliferation policies and are willing to concede our requirements. Egypt and Israel already agreed in 1976 to much more stringent controls, excluding safeguards, than exist in our other agreements. In our judgment it is desirable to avoid delays on moving toward concluding an agreement with Egypt. In this context, we need your agreement that we will vigorously support an agreement with Egypt recognizing the possibility that it could become a controversial issue in Congress. No time is an ideal time for this, but the treaty signing seems likely to provide the best atmosphere in which to send this to Congress. If we do not move soon, we will not be able to complete Congressional review this session. If you agree to move forward quickly on the re-negotiations, we would submit to both Israel and Egypt, within a month, identical draft revised agreements for their consideration. We will also indicate our willingness to send a U.S. negotiating team to conclude agreements at an early mutually convenient time. Under our current perceptions, we expect that the agreement with Egypt could be ready for submission to Congress during the current session. We will, however, have some control over the timing of various steps in the progress toward concluding an agreement. We also hope that the issue will be insulated to a large extent from domestic politics since our position on both the Egyptian and Israeli agreements will be based squarely on our non-proliferation policy, the requirement of the law and the energy needs of the two countries. Recommendation: That you agree to move forward quickly with renegotiating the nuclear cooperation agreements with Egypt and Israel, including a provision for equal treatment for both countries, understanding that Egypt will expect us to support our agreement with them even if we do not have a parallel one with the Israelis.3 3 Carter approved the recommendation, adding the handwritten notation: “Don’t let Israel or a few Congressmen get into a position of controlling or vetoing our action. J.”
