Venezuela  1229
Betancourt expressed respect for Caldera7 and said that he would 
expect him to take an important part in the future political affairs of 
Venezuela. He said he is honest, sincere and intelligent. He attributed 
Caldera’s small vote to the facts that the Venezuelan people are non-­
clerical and that the vote in the recent election was polarized between 
Betancourt and Larrazábal. In other words, many people who might 
otherwise have voted for Caldera voted for Betancourt or for Larrazábal 
simply because they felt Caldera had no chance of winning.
With reference to Villalba8 it was obvious that Betancourt has 
little respect for him and his party. He said that if URD had not had 
Larrazábal as a candidate the party would have received very few 
votes. With the elections over, Betancourt obviously expects URD to 
sink into an insignificant position.
Betancourt spoke of his heavy responsibilities in assuming the 
Presidency of Venezuela and made clear that he intends to give every-
thing he can of himself to those responsibilities. As far as his own 
political situation and that of his party is concerned, he demonstrated 
complete confidence. He said with reference to the Armed Forces 
that some of the younger officers represent a problem in that for 10 
years now they have been indoctrinated with the idea that Accion 
Democratic did everything possible before to disrupt the Army and 
that if AD should return to power it would follow the same course 
again. He said that after his inauguration he will give immediate 
attention to this situation and that he feels he can correct it without 
difficulty. Speaking to the situation in Caracas, the large vote against 
him here, and the demonstrations which had already occurred, 
Betancourt said that he did not feel at all hopeless about it, he said 
that the great majority Larrazábal had received in Caracas repre-
sented a pro-Larrazábal vote but not necessarily an anti-AD vote. He 
is very cognizant of the problems in Caracas, particularly of unem-
ployment and poverty, as well as the popular devotion to Larrazábal 
as a democratic symbol, but he said that within the first four or five 
months of his administration he felt that he could correct many of the 
unemployment problems and swing much of the popular sentiment 
toward him and his party.
Ambassador Sparks asked Dr. Betancourt if the young and more 
leftist wing of his party were a cause of concern to him. Betancourt 
replied that with the demonstration of AD organization and support for 
him throughout the country outside the capital, there was no question 
in his mind as to who controlled the party and commanded its respect. 
7 Raphael Caldera, presidential candidate of Venezuela’s Christian Socialist party, 
Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente (COPEI).
8 Jóvito Villalba, presidential candidate of Unión Republicana Democrática (URO).
