718 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Minister stated that some housing projects were a social and political necessity even though economically they did not deserve the same priority as projects designed to increase the general economic income. With regard to agricultural credit, he said the situation in Guatemala could not be compared to that of Costa Rica or Colombia, since such programs of supervised credit would likely prove too expensive to operate in Guatemala. He quoted as an example the loan program for rubber development, where money had been borrowed at 5 3/4 percent and had to be loaned at a maximum of 8 percent. The banks had shown little interest in promoting rubber development loans, since after deducting costs, the banks received only a small return of approximately ½ percent. Ambassador Turkel observed, with reference to the rubber development loan, some consideration might be given by Guatemala to renegotiating this loan on more favorable terms. Ambassador Alejos pointed out that President Ydígoras faced special problems, both financial and fiscal, at this time and he hoped for assistance from the United States. The Ambassador stated that a primary objective was a loan for the Rio Hondo highway project but it appeared that there were still certain problems to be resolved before the loan project could receive further consideration. He pointed out that the Rio Hondo project was of much more significance than the Rio Molino highway project since, in comparison, the Rio Hondo project would give local employment on a much larger scale. Ambassador Turkel assured the Guatemalan visitors that we were ready to give all possible help to the government of President Ydígoras. He emphasized that the Guatemalans should present well-developed projects and that the presentation should show the relation of the specific project to the overall balance of payments situation, both present and future. He also stated we are interested in the Central American plans for economic integration and are prepared to give sympathetic consideration to projects related to this plan. He said he wished to make a special point, however, that we cannot help with budget deficit financing. The Minister thanked Ambassador Turkel for his remarks and stated that he clearly understood our inability to finance budget deficits. With regard to the current fiscal difficulties in Guatemala, the Minister stated he was particularly interested in revising the revenue code and that he hoped we would be able to provide expert technical advice for such revision. While he was not interested in technical assistance with regards to fiscal administration, he indicated that he was interested in advice on administration and organization of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.
