National Security Policy 1099 and the communication of those decisions; and would allow time for evacuation and relocation of the civilian population. c. Moreover, the present policy places predominant emphasis on active defenses as compared with passive defenses for the protection of our retaliatory capability and our population. The PB’s paper suggests that continued predominant emphasis on active over passive defenses is questionable. It is reflected in the Discussion Paper that the improve­ ments visualized in 1958 for our active defense against nuclear attack have not materialized—quite to the contrary, it is reported that our major active defense system against ballistic missiles now under research and development (NIKE-­ZEUS) would not produce an operational system within the next 10 years, barring unforeseen break-­throughs. d. Therefore, the PB has taken a preliminary look at our present Continental Defense Policy in the light of present-­day estimates of an imminent Soviet ICBM capability, and in the light of our actual and potential capabilities and vulnerabilities, and as a result the PB has blocked out the six questions which appear on page 1 of the Discussion Paper and are subsequently discussed at some length in the Paper. I will read the questions as background to a presentation which will be made by the Department of Defense. The Defense presentation will address itself to Questions 1, 2, and 6, and reference will be made to Question 3. After the presentation, I will come back to Questions 4 and 5. 3. CALL ON the Secretary of Defense to introduce the Defense presentation. 4. (After the Defense presentation.) I would like now to refer briefly to Questions 4 and 5 of the Discussion Paper which were not dealt with in the Defense Presentation: Question No. 4. The background of this question is set forth in para­ graphs 49 through 65 of the Discussion Paper, beginning on page 15. The basic consideration is that our “low key” shelter policy was adopted on the premise that improved active defense was attainable—an expecta­ tion which is apparently not to be realized for at least 10 years insofar as an anti-­ICBM system is concerned. The question posed is whether there should be a substantial increase of emphasis on providing fall-­ out shelters for the civilian population, or whether there should be a continuation of the present “low key” approach called for in current national policy on “Measures to Carry Out the Concept of Shelter” (NSC 5807/2). Question No. 5. The background of this question is presented in paragraphs 66 through 69 of the Discussion Paper, beginning on page 20. Involved in this question are the concepts in present policy which call for continuity of wartime Government functions through reloca­ tion to hardened sites by those who survive an initial missile attack, and their continued functioning under circumstances characterized
