National Security Policy  1129
He pointed out that we had had one experience of this sort in con­
nection with an Israeli shipment. We had acted to stop this shipment 
although it was under diplomatic seals. The Israeli Embassy was 
as surprised as we were. This was a shipment which was going out 
from the U.S. to the Ministry of Defense in Israel. It was due to be 
shipped at five p.m. on the day that we caught it. We did stop it but 
it turned out to be nothing but radium dials. At that time we decided 
that we would stop such shipments even if they came in in diplomatic 
pouches. In this connection Secretary Anderson noted that there was 
an agreement between Treasury and State that if neutrons were given 
off by a diplomatic pouch shipment, we would ask the country con­
cerned to open the pouch. If they refused, we would ask them to take 
the pouch out of the country. All of this was now being done on a very 
silent basis.
Mr. Harr asked Mr. Hoover and Mr. Doherty whether they had 
any comments on the status report. Mr. Hoover indicated that he had 
none. The President asked Mr. Hoover whether he was getting enough 
people; whether he got all he wanted. In reply Mr. Hoover said that in 
the last several years Congress had given good cooperation in grant­
ing requests which the FBI had been allowed to make through the 
Bureau of the Budget. The President, turning to Mr. Stans, asked if the 
Administration had been reasonable in dealing with FBI requests. Mr. 
Stans said that there had been no difficulties. Mr. Hoover confirmed 
that there had been complete cooperation during the last two years.
The Attorney General confirmed that Justice had gotten every­
thing it had asked for in this respect. He went on to say that the Martin-­
Mitchell case demonstrated the importance of doing everything we 
could to tighten up all along the line on security. There was a tendency, 
he said, to let down in such matters. The President asked if Martin 
and Mitchell had had to have visas to get out of the country. Attorney 
General Rogers stated that they had not needed passports or visas and 
that the physical situation made it virtually impossible to control move­
ment into Mexico or Canada even if passports were required. The bor­
ders were so long it was very easy to slip over them.
Mr. Hoover pointed out that both Martin and Mitchell had been 
investigated; one by the Office of Special Investigations and the other 
by Navy Intelligence. In one case emotional instability had been uncov­
erd; a former superior of this individual when he was employed by the 
Navy had stated that he wouldn’t want him back. The other had a homo­
sexual background. Yet both were retained. Mr. Hoover expressed the 
view that in evaluating the results of investigations, all doubts should 
be resolved in favor of the Government in sensitive areas. The President 
turned to General Lemnitzer and suggested that those who had cleared 
Martin and Mitchell should be investigated. He said he would like to
