82
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
27.
Personal Note Prepared by President Carter1
Camp David, undated
Notes made at C. David before Begin & Sadat arrived—
Demilitarize West Bank2
Israeli military enclave—5 years +3
No new settlements
Terminate military rule
No independent Palestinian state
No hazy security guarantees4
242 basis of negotiations on all fronts
Leave W Bank sovereignty ? open—5 years5
Give credit to Begin homerule plan (5 years)6
Jerusalem a united (Israeli?) city—borough type7
Sinai—settlements—airstrips—no military threat—normalization8
W B[an]k—withdrawal—security—borders—sovereignty—Pales-
tinians—settlements
Phased implementation—some postponements
Local W B[an]k gov’t control terrorism
Israel monitor open borders
End economic boycott—attempts to isolate Israel
Open waterways, incl Suez
Trade, cultural, student exchange + diplomatic recog[nition]
Agreed number of returning refugees
Long term Israeli security presence on W B[an]k
Who will negotiate w/Israel absent Jordan?
No more war
Renew UN agreement in Oct.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, undated. No classifi-
cation marking. Carter discussed the drafting of this note in Keeping Faith, pp. 325–327.
2 Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand margin pointing to this phrase.
Carter made a checkmark in the right-hand margin adjacent to this phrase.
3 Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand margin adjacent to this and the
next four phrases.
4 Carter drew an arrow in the left-hand margin pointing to this and the next phrase.
5 Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand margin pointing to this phrase.
6 See footnote 2, Document 5. Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand
margin pointing to this phrase.
7 Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand margin pointing to this phrase.
8 Carter drew an arrow in the left-hand margin pointing to this phrase.
