Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 22, 1977 SUBJECT PL–480 and Human Rights The Story Behind the Washington Post Story2 As you know, PL-480 consists primarily of two separate programs—Title I and Title II. Under Title II, food grants are made through private agencies, through the UN/FAO and other multilateral programs, and through friendly governments to help the needy for emergency/disaster relief and other purposes (maternal/child health, school feeding, etc.). Because of the nature of these programs, the Interagency Group decided that no human rights review of recipient countries was necessary. Title I (which is the subject of the article) is a very different story. Title I was originally conceived as a means of disposing of US farm surplus. It primarily provides budget and balance-of-payments support to recipient governments, indirectly subsidizes American farmers, and sometimes promotes the development of free markets in recipient countries. It has often been abused in the past and used for blatantly political foreign policy purposes. For example, in 1975, the government proposed using 85 percent of the Latin American allotment for Chile, and in 1976 proposed that Chile get 93 percent—despite the fact that Chile has the fifth highest per capita income in Latin America, and is not on the UN’s MSA list. Thus there is a valid question of to what extent Title I loans should be subject to a review of the human rights practices of the recipient. This concern was seconded and in fact supervened by the enactment of Harkin language in the FY ’78 Title I legislation. Like all the other Harkin amendments, this stipulates that no Title I support can go to a country which engages in a “consistent and gross pattern of human rights violations”—unless the food itself, or the proceeds from the sale of the food, directly benefit the needy people of that country.3 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
