298
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
88.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 22, 1977
SUBJECT
PL–480 and Human Rights
The Story Behind the Washington Post Story2
As you know, PL-480 consists primarily of two separate pro-
grams—Title I and Title II. Under Title II, food grants are made through
private agencies, through the UN/FAO and other multilateral pro-
grams, and through friendly governments to help the needy for
emergency/disaster relief and other purposes (maternal/child health,
school feeding, etc.). Because of the nature of these programs, the Inter-
agency Group decided that no human rights review of recipient countries
was necessary.
Title I (which is the subject of the article) is a very different story.
Title I was originally conceived as a means of disposing of US farm
surplus. It primarily provides budget and balance-of-payments sup-
port to recipient governments, indirectly subsidizes American farmers,
and sometimes promotes the development of free markets in recipient
countries. It has often been abused in the past and used for blatantly
political foreign policy purposes. For example, in 1975, the government
proposed using 85 percent of the Latin American allotment for Chile,
and in 1976 proposed that Chile get 93 percent—despite the fact that
Chile has the fifth highest per capita income in Latin America, and is
not on the UN’s MSA list. Thus there is a valid question of to what ex-
tent Title I loans should be subject to a review of the human rights prac-
tices of the recipient. This concern was seconded and in fact super-
vened by the enactment of Harkin language in the FY ’78 Title I
legislation. Like all the other Harkin amendments, this stipulates that
no Title I support can go to a country which engages in a “consistent and gross
pattern of human rights violations”—unless the food itself, or the proceeds
from the sale of the food, directly benefit the needy people of that
country.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 49, PL 480: 11/77–1/80. Confidential. Sent for information. A copy was sent to
Schecter.
2 Reference is to Dan Morgan, “U.S. Holds Back Food Aid in Rights Review,” The
Washington Post, November 22, 1977, pp. A–1 and A–7.
3 Brzezinski placed a parallel line next to the portion of this paragraph that begins
with the words “of Harkin language” and ends with the words “of that country.”
