346 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 103. Record of Actions by the NSC1 Washington, October 16, 1958 RECORD OF ACTIONS by the NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL at its THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SECOND MEETING held on October 13, 1958 (Approved by the President on October 16, 1958) The President presided at this meeting. The Acting Director, Bureau of the Budget, and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, participated in the Council actions below. The Service Secretaries and the Joint Chiefs of Staff attended this meeting. ACTION NUMBER

SUBJECT 1994. EVALUATION OF OFFENSIVE AND DEFENSIVE WEAPONS SYSTEMS (NSC Action No. 1733) a. Noted and discussed an oral presentation by the Director, Weap­ ons Systems Evaluation Group, of an evaluation of offensive and defen­ sive weapons systems, prepared by the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group pursuant to request by the Secretary of Defense. b. Noted the President’s remarks that, while he congratulated the Group on an objective and thorough exposition, the evaluation and dis­ cussion also indicates the need for additional investigation to identify those weapons systems which may be obsolescent, antithetical or over­ lapping. The President stated that, unless tough decisions were taken regarding such systems, in view of the fiscal situation, we would find that in the long run we would encounter increasing difficulty in pre­ serving our free way of life if we put unnecessary money and resources into the machinery of war. c. Noted the President’s request that the Joint Chiefs of Staff con­ duct the additional investigation referred to in b above in the light of the evaluation and discussion, and report the resultant identification of obsolescent, antithetical or overlapping weapons systems. d. Noted that although the above presentation contained a brief discussion with respect to limited war capabilities, the Joint Chiefs of 1 Source: NSC Actions No. 1994 and 1995 taken at the 382d (Special) NSC meeting. Top Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council.
