International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
525
rhetoric has not) that we are ready to accept the same temporary
slow-down of growth that they did to reduce inflation. If so, the dollar
should begin to rise.
—The Japanese will be more likely to follow sensible trade policies if
we can make clear to them that this will have an important bearing on
whether your pre-Summit trip to Japan next year is a success. (This
may mean delaying your answer to the Japanese invitation for a while.)
The French and British are more likely to be forthcoming on MTN if they
feel pressure from the Germans, as well as us. Schmidt will be hitting
Callaghan on this point when they meet this week, and we’ve asked
him to hit Giscard too.4
2. Preparations for Tokyo. The Japanese are proposing a Summit,
with a preceding bilateral visit by you, in the last week of June.
The two most promising items for this Summit will be energy, in
which Fukuda has a special interest, and North-South relations, which
the Japanese think is especially appropriate for the first Summit to be
held in Asia.
On energy, the most actionable items seem to be (i) a fund for
aiding LDCs to produce and conserve energy, which may be proposed
by the World Bank as a result of the study they were asked to under-
take by the Bonn Summit, and (ii) multilateralizing the arrangement for
joint energy research and development that is now being negotiated by
the US and Japan. The Summit will also presumably commend the US
for fulfilling its energy commitment—assuming that we follow the
1978 legislation5 by 1979 legislation or administrative action to raise US
prices to world levels, as pledged at Bonn.
On North-South relations, I have asked people in the executive
branch, the World Bank, and Sol Linowitz’s Hunger Commission6 to
4 During an October 5 telephone conversation, Carter urged Schmidt “to work with
Prime Minister Callaghan and President Giscard to ensure a constructive outcome of the
MTN.” Citing the “strong protectionist pressures” under which he labored, Carter said
that should the MTN fail, “it would be very difficult for him to resist these pressures.”
Schmidt replied that he had asked Brzezinski “to send him a paper on the real facts of this
matter and how he (the Chancellor) could be of help.” Carter offered “that Giscard and
Callaghan would listen to” Schmidt. (Memorandum of conversation, October 5; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons:
President: 10/78) For the paper that Brzezinski sent, see Document 169.
5 On October 15, Congress passed five bills that together established the nation’s
energy policy; Carter signed the bills into law on November 9. See Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 164. For Carter’s remarks
on signing the bills, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter,
1978, Book II, pp. 1978–1985.
6 On September 5, Carter established a Presidential Commission on World Hunger;
a week later, on September 12, he named the 14 members of the commission, including
Sol Linowitz as chairman. For Carter’s approval of the creation of the commission, see
Document 298. Documentation on the commission’s work and final report is in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
