December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
795
230.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt1
Washington, March 23, 1979, 2102Z
72667. Subject: Brown-Ali Letter.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Following is text of letter from SecDef Brown to Egyptian
MinDef Ali dated March 23 confirming discussions held between the
two on March 19:
Begin text: Quote: Dear Mr. Minister:
In the context of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, the
United States is prepared to enter into an expanded security relation-
ship with Egypt with regard to the sales of military equipment and
services and the financing of at least a portion of those sales, subject to
such congressional review and approvals as may be required.
With respect to financing, the President is prepared to recommend
to Congress that the United States provide military equipment and
services during the next three years of a value of 1.5 billion dols, with
up to 500 million dols annually in foreign military sales (FMS) credits.
The credits will be made available on the following terms: current in-
terest rates, a ten-year deferment of payments on principal, and twenty
years to repay the loan thereafter.
The United States is prepared in general to supply the items of
equipment we discussed and which are listed in a classified attachment
to this letter. In this connection, the United States agrees to dispatch
teams to Egypt in the very near future to survey and discuss Egyptian
needs for naval forces, air defenses, and ground force armored and
other vehicles. The United States is also pleased to receive an Egyptian
team in Washington in the near future to discuss the needs of the Egyp-
tian Air Force. Signed: Sincerely, Harold Brown. End text.
3. Following is text of attachment to above letter. Begin text: Quote.
The United States is prepared to approve the sale of the following
equipment and services to Egypt:
—Jet training aircraft (e.g., of the T–38 type)
—10 additional C–130 aircraft
—16 CH–53 helicopters
—aircraft ECM pods
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790135–0375. Se-
cret; Immediate. Drafted by Zweifel; cleared for information by Keene, March, Small,
Flaten, and Gaffney; approved by Marthinsen. Sent for information Immediate to Tel
Aviv. Sent for information to the White House and the Secretary of Defense.
