Czechoslovakia The Charter stated that the authorities had the duty to abide by international agreements and Czechoslovak law, and that many basic human rights existed only on paper. It sought to engage the regime in a “constructive dialogue” by drawing attention to specific violations of civil and human rights, suggesting solutions, submitting proposals to further and to guarantee those rights, and acting as a “mediator in conflict situations.” It claimed—correctly—that among the rights consistently violated by the regime were: —the right to work at one’s profession, regardless of political convictions; —the right for children to be educated, regardless of the parents’ political convictions; —freedom of expression; —freedom of religion; —freedom of assembly; —freedom to participate in public affairs; —equality before the law; and —freedom to travel abroad. The Charter accused the Ministry of Interior and its police of illegal wire taps, physical surveillance and harassment, house searches, confiscation of personal property, mail censorship, use of networks of informers, and suborning of courts and employers. Investigative and judicial agencies were said to have repeatedly flouted Czechoslovak law and the Constitution in conducting politically-motivated trials. Original signatories of the Charter numbered 244; at present, the movement claims more than 1,000. The three leading positions, those of designated spokesmen, have thus far been held by nine persons. Although this rapid turnover has been attributed to deliberate annual rotation, regime harassment and intimidation have taken their toll. One of the original spokesmen (Jan Patocka) died following intense police interrogation. Four spokesmen have been arrested. Another has been hospitalized after an assault by police thugs. Since its establishment, the movement has issued 26 documents. The contents range from appeals to cease the harassment of Charter supporters to an analysis of problems of economic consumption and corruption in Czechoslovakia. Charter Accomplishments Despite unremitting harassment and intimidation, the movement has survived—no mean feat considering the overwhelming power posed against it. Charter leaders vow to continue their struggle for human rights, whatever methods the regime uses against them. Charter activities have focused Western attention on the repressive character of the Czechoslovak regime and its violations of human
