First Responses 1. A group of [less than 1 line not declassified] Iranian expatriates [less than 1 line not declassified] have formed a group, in Paris, France, to organize a new, pro-Western government in Iran. The group hopes to shut down oil production in Iran during November 1979 as part of its campaign to remove the current leadership from Iran’s political scene. The group is considering selecting either an Iranian general or former Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar to be the titular leader of the provisional government, which could be confirmed subsequently in a national referendum. A shadow government has been named to the extent of having three choices listed for each of several principal government jobs. Some of those on the list are Iranian expatriates, [1½ lines not declassified]. Bakhtiar [less than 1 line not declassified] is not everyone in the group’s first choice to head the government, but he is the most likely nominee because he already is in France, and previously has served as Iranian Prime Minister. ([less than 1 line not declassified] Comment: [less than 1 line not declassified]2 2. The Paris group has made high-level contacts with at least two Persian Gulf governments in an effort to secure support for the venture. [3 lines not declassified] Major Western governments apparently have not been approached by the Paris group. The expatriates have not received any firm pledges of support from any foreign government; the search for signs of encouragement from such quarters continues. 3. The group’s timetable was dictated in part by [less than 1 line not declassified] the United States Government intended to replace or repair some of Iran’s military equipment commencing in January 1980. The group concluded its best chance of success involved taking action in Iran prior to that time. The expatriates reportedly believe the problem is not so much the ouster of the Ayatollah Khomeini as it is having enough support internally to keep a new government in power.
