796
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
USSR accounted for 16.4 percent of total Yugoslav trade in 1977) and
alarmed by their burgeoning trade deficit with the Common Market (2.4
billion dollars in 1977), the Yugoslavs are clearly receptive to expanded
trade and economic cooperation with the U.S.
8. U.S. trade with Yugoslavia—which, according to U.S. statistics,
amounted to somewhat less than 700 million dollars and was nearly
balanced in 1977—is still in the developing stage but with a clear
potential for future growth. While Yugoslavia has been traditionally
oriented to West European suppliers and, for both political and eco-
nomic reasons, has channeled a substantial part of its trade to the East,
there is widespread interest in U.S. products and equipment because
of their reputation of quality and advanced technology. In the past
several years, U.S. companies have been increasingly active in exploit-
ing market opportunities both through direct sales and joint ventures
with Yugoslav partners. The U.S. is currently second among all coun-
tries in the number of joint ventures (17) and first in total equity partici-
pation (168 million dollars). Recently concluded joint ventures involv-
ing Dow Chemical and General Motors have received considerable
attention and have been cited as the kind of cooperative arrangements
that contribute to Yugoslavia’s economic development. Westinghouse
is the supplier for Yugoslavia’s first nuclear power plant at Krsko, and
is bidding actively on two major hydro and thermal power projects.
General Electric and GM are presently setting up business offices in
Belgrade.
9. Against this background, the current impasse over ExImBank’s
operating procedures in Yugoslavia assumes major significance. The
Bank has been an important source of financing U.S. equipment sales
to Yugoslavia, and its current overall exposure here is close to one
billion dollars. For large industrial projects requiring long-term loans, in
particular, ExIm financing has been a key ingredient. Having informed
ExIm that they could no longer furnish “superguarantees from the
National Bank, the Yugoslavs are currently considering whether they
can accept as a basis for discussion ExIm’s proposals for a solution
based on joint commercial bank guarantees, foreign exchange assur-
ances for loans over five million dollars, and governmental guarantees
in exceptional cases. In the meantime, the Yugoslav authorities have
informed their banks and enterprises that ExIm facilities are not cur-
rently available for financing imports from the U.S. Having reached
the point of confrontation, the issue represents a major irritant in our
bilateral relations on the eve of the Tito visit, and resolution of the
problem will be difficult unless the Yugoslavs are prepared to break
off their intransigent—albeit principled—position and demonstrate the
same willingness to negotiate which ExIm has shown.
10. The bilateral air agreement signed in December 1977 has settled
our major civil aviation difficulties with Yugoslavia, at least for the
