893.00/5901: Telegram [Document 413] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State PEKING, January 2, 1925—3 p.m. [Received 6:50 p.m.] 1. 1. Conditions both military and political are unsettled and obscure. The autumn’s fighting eliminated Tsao Kun, Wu Pei-fu1 and last week also Chi Hsieh-yuan;2 but the Chihli Party which is not a political but a military group is, though disorganized, still a power in the Yangtze Valley and must either be overcome or conciliated by Chang Tsolin3 if he is to unify even North China. I am reliably informed that Chang himself has completed plans to return to Mukden but that Minister of Communications, who as I know positively has gone to Tientsin, was sent there by Chief Executive to persuade Chang to remain, Chang’s forces have been moving through Tsinanfu during the last week and 22 troop trains have continued southwards beyond Houchowfu [Hsüchowfu], destination unknown. 2. Chang flushed with his first victory snubbed and alienated Feng Yu-hsiang4 whose strength he underestimated. Feng is sulking in the Western Hills, sending in repeated resignations to the Chief Executive proclaiming pacific intentions, but remaining a military and political mystery. He controls Peking and has under him 60,000 troops of whom half according to military attaché are well equipped and supplied. Feng and the undefeated Yangtze Tuchuns today share the military power of North China with Chang. 3. If Chang does not support Chief Executive with adequate military forces the Provisional Government cannot long endure. That Government represents the triumph of Japan in Chinese politics, as the Government resulting from coup d’état of October 23 though nominally Kuomintang may be regarded as a triumph for Soviet Russia. If Marshal Tuan5 should be forced out, the next regime would probably be headed by Sun Yat-sen6 and supported by Feng with a platform denouncing “unequal treaties” which would commend it to Karakhan.7 4. Sun Yat-sen after a long delay in Tientsin arrived in Peking December 31st afternoon by special train. He was met at the railway station by officials and by a crowd of his followers. It is agreed by all who saw him that his sickness has been real and not feigned. He issued at the station a short announcement in the dialect of the common people, which the Chinese secretary translates as follows:
