776 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 The President said he was inclined to support the effort, though the hand of the U.S. Government should not show. He suggested that FLAG might also consider getting in touch with Archbishop Capucci, who is close to Khomeini. Mrs. Kennedy said the Vatican had asked them not to publicize its role. The President summarized U.S. efforts presently underway. Secretary General Waldheim had contacted him yesterday and there was a chance that one or two members of the UN Commission might return to Tehran. This had resulted from Waldheim’s conversation with Ghotbzadeh, who is the only one in Iran with any political courage— although he came across on TV as a sleazy character. Bani-Sadr was just nothing, and it had been a serious mistake for us when he was elected. He delayed carrying out his commitments to us and had permitted Beheshti and others to undermine the negotiations. The President said he saw no immediate prospects for the Majlis to release the hostages since they were disorganized. There were four tracks which could go on simultaneously: (1) the UN; (2) Islamic religious leaders who could be in contact in Tehran; (3) the European allies; and (4) the human side with the hostage families. He was pushing the first three, and he would leave the fourth to FLAG. If FLAG needed help with the TV networks, Ray Jenkins, Jody Powell, or Hodding Carter at State would help. He asked that they keep his comments private. Mrs. Keough said they had found it was better that they do it themselves. One problem is that they are accused of being a “front” for the U.S. Government. If they constantly deny that, the President should understand that this does not mean that they do not appreciate everything he is doing. The President wondered how we could assist in getting them an appearance at the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference. Sick said that he would work with Harold Saunders to give them some assistance without evidence of U.S. Government sponsorship.
