800.51 W 89France/112a: Telegram
[Document 90]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 5, 1925—1 p.m.
184. I desire you to take the earliest suitable occasion to take up with the proper French
authorities question of the French debt. You should shape your conversation along
following lines: (1) The Government of the United States believes that negotiations
looking to an agreement on a suitable basis for refunding of France’s debt to the United
States should be undertaken at earliest practicable moment. In latter part of November
1924, the French Ambassador, Mr. Jusserand, called on Secretary of the Treasury
Mellon, chairman of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, and indicated that the
French Government was desirous of an endeavor to arrive at some terms of settlement
which might prove satisfactory to both Governments. Secretary Mellon discussed the
matter with the other members of the Commission and on December 1, 1924, informed
Ambassador Jusserand on behalf of the Commission34 that the Commission were
prepared to recommend to Congress the British terms with such modifications as would
meet the difference in the existing economic situation in France; that it would appear
that payments upon the principal of the debt could be begun at once, and that the
differences referred to should find expression in an examination of the various
questions which relate to payments of interest.
Subsequent to this exchange of communications, certain personal and unofficial
suggestions for dealing with French debt to the United States were submitted to you
privately. These suggestions did not seem to offer a practical basis, however, upon
which negotiations might be begun. In light of present circumstances the Government
of the United States believes that discussions should be continued in more official
manner and should take form of proposals more likely to prove acceptable to World
War Foreign Debt Commission and to Congress. It is believed that the statement
communicated to Mr. Jusserand by Secretary Mellon can appropriately be made basis
for further discussions of the question. The Government of the United States is not
unmindful of financial difficulties of France and appreciates fully that any arrangement
made must take actual economic and financial situation into account. It does not follow,
however, that no steps toward refunding should be taken, as this Government believes
it to be in interest of Governments of both France and the United States that a definite
basis of settlement be found as soon as possible.
