Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1093
reactors. Moreover, the GOC would be forced to cancel plans for
building a 600 mw nuclear electric power plant slated to go on-line in
1987, all due to inability to obtain nuclear fuel to operate the facilities.
Estrada said that CCEN had dispatched Dr. Max Von Brandt to France
in February of this year to attempt to obtain 90 percent enriched ura-
nium for CCEN’s experimental reactors. However, the French in-
formed Von Brandt that due to heavy pressure from the USG, they
would no longer be able to supply Chile with highly enriched uranium.
Chile was now without a nuclear fuel supply, said Estrada, and would
have to find some means of changing this situation. After consideration
of all available facts, the Advisory Board recommended that Estrada in-
vite the U.S. Ambassador to CCEN headquarters for a discussion of the
problem and offer to sign the NPT, accept total safeguards and waive
requirements for entry into force of the Tlatelolco Treaty in exchange
for nuclear assistance from the U.S. Estrada reluctantly agreed to the
recommendation but insisted on the following graduated negotiating
strategy:
A) CCEN would first attempt to arrange for a U.S. nuclear fuel
supply and technical assistance without making concessions toward
NPT.
B) CCEN would secondly attempt to arrange for a U.S. nuclear fuel
supply and technical assistance in return for placing the La Reina re-
actor and facilities under total safeguards but limiting only the fuel
supply to a safeguards agreement at the Lo Aguirre reactor; and
C) Failing the above alternatives, CCEN would finally agree to
sign the NPT, accept total safeguards on all nuclear facilities, and waive
requirements allowing the Treaty of Tlatelolco to enter into force in ex-
change for a firm U.S. commitment to provide CCEN with an assured
supply of reactor fuel and other undefined nuclear technical assistance.
4. Comment: The above represents a possible breakthrough in our
attempts to encourage Chile to sign the NPT. Department guidance on
a proper response to CCEN, if and when Ambassador is summoned,
would be helpful as well as an indication of U.S. willingness to nego-
tiate a nuclear assistance pact with CCEN in exchange for Chile signing
the NPT and accepting total safeguards.2
Landau
2 In telegram 141207 to Santiago, June 3, the Department of State called the news of
Chile’s impending decision “very positive events for overall US non-proliferation efforts
if we can secure them.” The Department remained concerned, however, that its hope for
“a rapid restoration of democratic institutions in Chile” might conflict with the goal of
non-proliferation. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780233–0061)
The Embassy replied on June 9 that “the conflicts between USG human rights and nu-
clear objectives are more apparent than real.” (Telegram 4371 from Santiago; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780244–1349)
