1978 315 impact on stability. Moreover, willingness to act will be influenced by a variety of political and military factors; uncertain estimates of population survival will play a relatively minor role in such a decision. This argument is based on the following assumptions: 1) Given the magnitude of offensive power passive defense will receive little or no consideration in calculating the strategic balance and the absence of ABM defenses further undermines potential effectiveness of passive defenses. 2) Given the massive levels of destruction contemplated, the amount of population protection will be insignificant in an estimation of costs and risks. 3) There is no demonstrable correlation between population survival and national recovery. 4) The ability to protect a population has had little impact in calculating the potential willingness to use a deterrent. In past crises the availability of civil defense has had no influence on crisis decisions or the willingness of US leaders to act. 5) The absence of a US civil defense effort would not pose a threat significant enough to inhibit or coerce policy-­makers. Still a third group argues that civil defense contributes to the instability of the nuclear balance by fostering among policy-­makers the illusion that the destruction resulting from nuclear war can be limited and hence encouraging them to take greater risks of nuclear conflict. This argument rests on the assumption that a major gap will exist between civil defense capabilities in reality and the perceptions of them by policy-­ makers. Carried to the extreme, unrealistic claims for the effectiveness of civil defense could have a more adverse effect on perceptions—­and thus on stability—­than could a civil defense program itself. B. Can civil defense measures make a significant difference in the outcome of a nuclear exchange? There remains considerable uncertainty as to the extent that civil defense measures would make a difference in the outcome of a nuclear exchange. Questions center on each nation’s ability to fully carry out plans in times of crisis and on the longer-­term prospects for recovery and reconstitution. Civil defense measures would not prevent massive damage to each nation’s economic, political, social, and military structure, given the immense nuclear arsenals possessed by the US and USSR and the immovable physical plant associated with each of these areas in a modern industrial society. Civil defense measures designed to improve immediate population, work force and leadership survival through a combination of dispersal and fallout protection would be effective to the extent that plans could actually be implemented (attack timing, availability of transportation, etc., are uncertainties). In-­ place shelters hardened against blast and fallout would provide good
