422
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
pends, in good part, on what actions other countries are prepared to
take on growth, trade, and aid.” (Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign
Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, 1–12/78)
In his June 23 memorandum, Owen also noted Strauss’ recommen-
dation that Carter discuss the trade negotiations with British Prime
Minister James Callaghan, who made a private visit to the United
States on June 26. Earlier that month, on June 5, Carter had sent Calla-
ghan a handwritten note that reads: “Without your active help, pros-
pects for substantive achievement in Multilateral Trade Negotiations
are not good. Can you join us in a more concerted effort?” (Carter Li-
brary, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Great
Britain, 6/77–12/80) Callaghan’s response, which Owen forwarded to
Carter under cover of another June 23 memorandum, noted that he was
“well aware of the importance of” the trade talks and asserted that “ob-
viously there must be a good deal of give and take, not just from Eu-
rope on matters of concern to the United States, but from the United
States on issues to which we attach importance.” In his cover memo-
randum, Owen reported that British Ambassador to the United States
Peter Jay believed that Callaghan’s reply suggested “that the P.M. is
prepared for a deal: He will give on trade if the US gives ‘on issues to
which we attach importance.’” Owen suggested that Carter tell Calla-
ghan that the United States could “make a meaningful pledge on lim-
iting oil imports if other Summit countries can make equally mean-
ingful pledges on growth and trade.”
Owen’s June 23 memorandum also relayed Strauss’ talking points
for Carter’s conversation with Callaghan: “We are missing the essential
elements of a deal. The US is being responsive to your concerns, but
needs help with respect to its needs. We hope that the UK will be able to
support efforts by the Commission to work out acceptable solutions in
each of these areas on a reciprocal basis: meaningful rules on subsidies;
market access for a number of US agricultural products; tariff and
non-tariff barrier reductions for US industrial exports; and allowing ex-
porters to compete for foreign government procurement.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Country Chron File, Box 15, Great Britain: 4–8/78)
Carter and Callaghan held a breakfast meeting on the patio outside
Carter’s private office on June 26 from 7:26 until 8:35 a.m. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No record of the
meeting was found.
