National Security Policy 787 At the bottom of page 33, in the third line of b, the PB agreed that “pub­ lic capital” should be deleted and “such assistance” substituted. If there is no objection, this change will be made. Paragraphs 43 and 44 (beginning on p. 34) are old 27 extensively reor­ ganized, rewritten, and enlarged. There was a split in 43–­d which has since been resolved by changing the first sentence. 43–­d now reads as follows: “Utilize and support the efforts of Free World international financial institutions to the maximum extent possible to promote economic devel­ opment and to bring about economic reforms in less developed nations.” There was also a split in f which has also been resolved by rewriting the subparagraph. It now reads: “Make U.S. public capital available in adequate amounts on a long-­term basis for the purpose of supplementing the capital available from other sources for sound economic development in less developed areas. U.S. lending agencies should be assured of continuity in order to contribute to this purpose.” Turning to par 44, subparagraph a is new, and I would like to read it. (Read 44–­a) In 44–­b there was a split, but State has withdrawn its objection to the bracketed language. The last sentence in 44–­b was agreed to by the PB, but I would like to read it because it is new and because it was the result of considerable debate. (Read last sentence of 44–­b) Par 45 (p. 42), is new, and incorporates what is already in the approved economic defense policy (NSC 5704/3). Par 51 (p. 44) on the conduct of negotiations with the USSR, is largely an updating of old 39, I would, however, call your attention to the last sentence, which has been added for unmistakable clarity: “Agreements affecting strength and deployment of military forces should include pro­ visions for effective safeguards against violations and evasions.” Par 52 (p. 45) is the general paragraph on disarmament contained in existing policy, with a slight clarification at the beginning. The old language reads: “Safeguarded arms control should be sought with particular urgency, in an effort to reduce the risk of war, etc.” There was a feeling in the P/B that the phrase “particular urgency” might be misinterpreted as applying to the urgency of entering into negotiations, rather than to the urgency of developing arms control measures first and then negotiating. The opening sentence has there­ fore been revised to read: “Efforts to develop safeguarded arms control measures should be continued with particular urgency, and agreement thereon sought, in an effort to reduce the risk of war, etc.”
