1977 121 7. The US will maintain a secure reserve force. This force will be taken from those acquired for other purposes pending an analysis by the Secretary of Defense. IV. General Purpose Forces A. General 1. The US will maintain a level of general purpose forces, in conjunction with those of its allies, sufficient to wage a major conventional war with the USSR and its allies. Planning will focus on Europe, but also will provide for the defense of major US and allied interests outside of Europe, including the protection of lines of communication and access to critical raw materials vital to the economies of the US and its allies. 2a. In addition to the capability to prosecute a NATO/ Warsaw Pact war, the US will maintain a light intervention force with a forcible entry capability (i.e., logistical support, moderate naval and tactical air forces, and limited land combat forces) for use anywhere in the world. These specific forces will be designed for use against both local forces and forces projected by the USSR and based on analyses of requirements in the Middle East, Persian Gulf and Korea. Forces needed beyond those maintained for such contingencies will be drawn from forces in CONUS that are oriented primarily toward the NATO/Warsaw Pact war but have flexibility for use elsewhere. 2b. The US will maintain a light intervention force with a forcible entry capability (i.e., logistical support, moderate naval and tactical air forces, and limited land combat forces) for use anywhere in the world. These specific forces will be designed for use against both local forces and forces projected by the USSR and based on an analysis of requirements in the Middle East, Persian Gulf and Korea. Forces needed for these contingencies will be drawn from forces in CONUS that are oriented primarily toward the NATO/Warsaw Pact war but have flexibility for use elsewhere. Within these forces the US will maintain whatever special capability is required for intervention contingencies.
