North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
971
306.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Panama City, June 17, 1978, 8:45–9:35 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of Second Multilateral Meeting in Panama
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Andrew Young, U.S. Representative to the U.N.
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Terence Todman, Assistant Secretary of State
Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member (note taker)
President Carlos Andres Perez, Venezuela
Simon Consalvi Bottaro, Minister of Foreign Affairs for Venezuela
President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen, Colombia
Virgilio Barco, Colombian Ambassador to the U.S.
Prime Minister Michael Manley, Jamaica
P.J. Patterson, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Tourism for
Jamaica
Omar Torrijos, Chief of Government, Panama
Nicolas Gonzalez Revilla, Minister of Foreign Relations for Panama
Rafael Angel Calderon Fournier, Minister of Foreign Relations for Costa Rica
(Other members of other governments’ delegations attended but are not
identified.)
Prime Minister Manley opened the second session by referring to
the frustration he felt on the primordial issue of the North-South dia-
logue. There has been no practical results yet from the Paris meeting.2
In trying to understand the causes of the failure, he said that he attrib-
uted it to the interaction of two groups—the industrialized countries
and the oil-producing countries—who saw the North-South dialogue
as merely a way to bargain with each other. The industrialized coun-
tries were saying that if they could receive fair prices for oil, then they
could consider large transfers of resources. The oil-producing countries
said that if international institutions could be reformed, then they
would consider transfer of resources, provided also that there were
greater resources transferred from the industrialized countries.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President: 6–7/78. Confidential. The meeting took place in the El
Panama Hotel. Carter was in Panama City June 16–17 to sign the protocol confirming the
exchange of documents ratifying the Panama Canal Treaties. The memorandum of con-
versation of the first multilateral meeting, held the evening of June 16, is ibid.
2 See Document 265.
