802 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV and SLBMs or established high alert rates for such systems. It would be difficult, however, for the Soviets between now and the late 1980s to change their force mix sufficiently to reverse these trends. 51. Figure 5 compares the composition by major force element of the residual lethal area potentials and hard-­target potentials of US and Soviet SALT-­limited forces after a surprise attack by the other side: —The composition of the surviving Soviet potentials reinforces the impression that it is the continued heavy Soviet reliance on silo-­based ICBMs that causes the adverse effects on Soviet residuals in the late 1980s if the United States deploys the MX. —The composition of surviving US forces shows that, despite increasing US ICBM silo vulnerability, US residuals decline only slightly in the early 1980s because ICBMs make up a relatively small portion of US prestrike potentials. Deployment of MX with 4,600 shelters would not significantly increase the surviving US potentials if, as assumed in this analysis, the Soviets were willing to expend large numbers of their ICBMs to attack all MX shelters. The charts show that bombers and ALCM carriers, which must be launched to survive attack and are subject to air defense attrition, would account for a large and increasing fraction of the surviving US potentials. 52. To provide an indication of the urban and industrial destruction that could be achieved by the surviving lethal area potentials of these SALT-­limited forces, we have compared them with US and Soviet urban areas. We find that: —Throughout the 1980s, the area over which surviving US forces could theoretically create overpressures sufficient to destroy reinforced concrete buildings would be equivalent to the [less than 1 line not declassified] square kilometers. Even the relatively few surviving US ICBM RVs would have the potential to destroy a large share of Soviet economic value. —In the early and middle 1980s, the Soviet surviving lethal area potential would be equivalent to [less than 1 line not declassified] kilometers. By the late 1980s, the surviving Soviet potential would have been reduced to less than one-­half of this amount. Even then, however, the Soviet potential would exceed that required to destroy most of the US economic value. 53. We have also examined the surviving hard-­target potential of each of these forces in relationship to the missile silos, shelters, and hardened command and control bunkers of the other. We find that: —Surviving US ICBM warheads would have the potential to destroy only a small number of Soviet ICBM silos, but a large proportion of the Soviet nationaland intermediate-­level command and control bunkers. Surviving US bomber weapons would have the potential to destroy a substantial portion of Soviet ICBM silos, although they have relatively long flight times and would be subject to air defense attrition.
