Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 3. BOP statement covers both current account and growth policy. Statement on growth has all the elements we suggested and seems satisfactory. 4. We pointed out to Ushiba that statement in paper on achieving current account deficit did not appear to be as forthcoming as U.S. paper of Dec. 20 had envisioned. Ushiba did not make direct reply but Motono, who was not present at meeting, called EC Min at midnight to assure us that GOJ statement represented maximum possible at this stage and had been hard won over hesitations of many in GOJ. Motono raised possibility that Amb. Strauss would be free to put more favorable cast on GOJ undertaking in public statements he might make following visit here. 5. Much of para. 1 of Japanese statement, read carefully, is close to our desiderata. It recognizes that accumulation of large surplus is not appropriate and that Japan’s persistent surplus is undesirable. It later spells out what looks to us like a reasonable current account projection for 1978 and 1979 insofar as results are susceptible to policy management. Given GOJ’s by now understandable reluctance to have its projections portrayed as commitments, it will be hard to get language that smacks more of a policy commitment to reach a deficit. However, sentence, that reads “If current account deficit occurs in such a process, GOJ is prepared to accept it,” is particularly unfelicitous. We would hope a Washington wordsmith could find a more satisfactory formulation. 6. Regarding tariffs and MTN, when we asked Ushiba about possible use of words “deeper than formula cuts,”4 he referred to last sentence in para. 3 which he said is responsive to U.S. concerns. We believe Japanese bureaucracy is also still working along lines discussed with Lande and that some further private statement may be forthcoming. 7. Para. 5 of Japanese paper on import financing can be described as indication of positive Japanese reaction to world situation. Since we are not aware of any complaints that exports to Japan are being hampered by shortage of credit, there is not much we can ask. 8. Government procurement statement is probably also as much as we can expect. Announcement of JNR award to IBM with substantial U.S. input is hopeful sign that Cabinet decision will produce tangible results. 9. Export credit paragraph does not say much but can be described as helpful recognition of Japan’s need to slow rate of increase in export credits.
