Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 163. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, July 11, 1977 SUBJECT Instructions for Trilateral CTB Negotiations Following our bilateral CTB discussions with the British and Soviets, the SCC has reviewed remaining issues in preparation for trilateral CTB discussions, which begin next Wednesday2 in Geneva. This session is expected to last about two weeks, and there is general agreement that we should continue the exploratory approach you authorized for our bilateral talks,3 deferring firm decisions on verification and moratorium questions pending further exploration of Soviet flexibility on these issues. This is particularly important in the verification area since we believe we should determine essential verification objectives and insist on accomplishing them, rather than using verification as a bargaining chip. If we establish excessive verification goals which would be relaxed in subsequent negotiation, we run the risk of generating criticism as to the adequacy of the agreement in a crucial area. We have prepared a proposed letter from you to Paul Warnke at Tab A which is consistent with this approach and with your marginal comments on Warnke’s recent CTB report.4 You may wish to give it to him at your meeting on Monday.5 In addition, Harold Brown would like to add the proviso that we should reach agreement with the Soviets on verification before we would agree to a moratorium or a suspension of tests. State, Paul Warnke and I believe that in this exploratory stage when we do not yet have an official Soviet reaction on the question of a moratorium, it is premature to begin imposing conditions. We have not even decided we want one. We believe you should keep your options open and reach a judgment on this question in the context of deciding on our overall position. Accordingly, the letter to Paul would have him stress the importance of 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 20, PRM/NSC–38. Secret. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner an unknown hand wrote “All actions (Presidential annotations) completed per D.A.” 2 July 13. 3 Not found. 4 Not found. 5 July 18.
