International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1143 Horbal, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Social Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Sarah Goddard Power. The full 37-member delegation also included advisers drawn from Congress, other government agencies, women’s organizations, and labor unions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Unfiled Files, Box 153, Women: World Conference Report: 1/81) Prior to the conference, the Department provided background information and objectives in telegram 166222 to all diplomatic and consular posts, June 24, 1980. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800305–0146) The telegram explained the dual purpose of the conference: “(A) To review and assess progress and obstacles in implementing the World Plan of Action; and (B) to revise the World Plan as necessary by designing a program of action for the second half of the decade.” As a result of earlier preparatory meetings and UN General Assembly action, employment, health, and education had been selected as conference subthemes and three political issues—women and apartheid, the effects of Israeli occupation on Palestinian women inside and outside the Occupied Territories, and women and refugees—had been added to the agenda. Although Department officials did not oppose the “women and apartheid,” and “women as refugees” agenda items, they did object to the Palestinian item as it would have an isolating effect on the Israeli delegation. The telegram listed nine conference objectives: “—Keep the focus on the central themes of the conference rather than on divisive political issues. We hope this can be achieved in part by adhering strictly to the established organization of work for the conference. It is contrary to the interests of all women that the work of this unique U.N. conference be undermined by politicization; “—Develop a strong program of action for the second half of the decade that refines the World Plan of Action by outlining concrete targets and measurable objectives; “—Identify and support specific measures of assistance to women in South Africa and Namibia without, however, creating any new funding mechanisms in addition to those to which the U.S. already contributes (UNDP, Institute for Namibia, the Trust Fund for South Africa, U.N. Educational and Training Program for South Africa); “—Develop and upgrade specific programs of assistance to women refugees; “—Oppose efforts to use the conference as a forum for unfairly criticizing Israel, and oppose inflammatory resolutions on the Palestinian women’s issue; “—Provide the conference with an accurate and balanced picture of U.S. progress in implementing the World Plan of Action;
