from Canton Foreign Office to the effect that an investigation had been
ordered, but he felt quite certain nothing further would be done in the
matter in the present circumstances. The despatch concluded with the
statement that the incident was indicative of insults to which American
citizens must now submit in Canton, with practically no assurance of
redress.
3. I received telegrams, September 2nd and 3rd, from the consuls general at
Hongkong and Canton, respectively, giving me substantially the same
information contained in Department’s 182, September 2, 5 p.m. Jenkins, in
discussing with the British consul general at Canton latter’s instructions to
endeavor to secure American naval cooperation in checking activities of
pickets, told Brennan that he disapproved of Banbury and other Americans
engaging in the business of carrying Chinese passengers to the Hongkong
steamers, that as Banbury had been released no forcible measures were
necessary on our part, that he therefore opposed cooperation, in this
instance at least, but would refer the matter to the Legation.
[Paraphrase]
4. I disagree with Jenkin’s disapproval of the business in which Banbury
and other Americans engage as affecting the policy which we ought to
adopt as a result of such incidents. I feel that the business is entirely
legitimate. It is a general transportation and ferry service between the shore
and the Hongkong–Canton river boats; it is not limited to Chinese. The only
objection to it is that it meets with the violent antagonism of a lawless,
independent organization of Canton strike pickets, whose blackmailing
operations have been outrageously in opposition to our treaty rights for
more than a year and whose renewed activity at the present time should be
made, in my opinion, to cease without any delay whatever. I have
concluded after most careful consideration that, whenever feasible in
respect of attacks such as described above on American citizens, we should
adopt a firm attitude and inform the regime at Canton that if it cannot
protect American citizens in accord with treaty requirements and general
international obligations, the United States Government will be compelled
with regret to take on its own account measures necessary to that end. I urge
that instructions be given to the commander of the South China Patrol that
