December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 675 196. Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, March 5, 1979 To President Sadat: In recent months we have been through a lot together—both in times of success and times of impatience. As you know, we have always worked in harmony, and I have done my best to protect the interests of Egypt throughout the peace negotiations. During the most recent discussions with Israel we have, of course, continued this effort. In my opinion, we have succeeded. The language may not be exactly what you want, but the target date issue and the “priority of obligations” issue are such that you can accept them and legitimately claim a victory. You may or may not completely agree with me on the nuances of the exact words but, in any case, the differences are minimal when compared to the overall strategic considerations which you and I must address together. It is important that Dr. Brzezinski inform you, for instance, of our plans concerning the Yemen dispute,2 and to have him relay to me immediately your assessment and advice on what else might be done by the United States, Egypt and others. Both bilateral and multilateral long range security interrelationships must be discussed when I arrive in Cairo. I look forward to seeing you, my friend, and to a visit which will be one of the great events of my life. Jimmy Carter 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 66, Middle East: President Carter’s Trip to Jerusalem and Cairo: 2–4/79. No classification marking. Carter wrote in his memoirs that he gave Brzezinski this handwritten letter to deliver to Sadat. It was “designed to encourage his [Sadat’s] generosity on some of the treaty language.” Carter also provided Brzezinski with copies of the treaty texts for Sadat so that Brzezinski could “explain some of the more difficult parts and to review the strategic considerations which might help to ease Sadat’s anticipated objections to the wording itself.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 417) 2 On March 5, the NSC held a special meeting to discuss the U.S. response to the situation in Yemen. The summary of this meeting is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula.
