728 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX involving Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territory and had not provided a solution for the problem of the Palestinians. Romania believes an international conference should be called under UN auspices with the US and USSR as co-chairmen and bring together all parties to the conflict, including the PLO. As envisioned, the conference would not deal with problems solved by the Camp David process but only outstanding issues. A comprehensive solution should not be restricted by the guidelines of UN Resolution 242. Problems in the region must not be allowed to get out of hand in the wake of the raging conflict in Lebanon, conservative Islamic resurgence in IGCN and other disturbing developments. Israel must stop using the PLO excuse to resist solutions. Andrei said he recognized that the US could not look for solutions outside the Camp David process at least until after the elections in November, but did respond in that session to Ridgway’s question whether Romania contemplated any initiative now that the May 26th deadline had passed. 7. Afghanistan. Ridgway provided Andrei with current information on Afghanistan situation and reviewed US position. She expressed appreciation for Romania’s stand against Soviet invasion and hoped Romania would support efforts to find a solution. Andrei then reviewed deterioration in international relations and increasing world tension because of continuance of some problems and struggle for domination of one country over another. He said Romania considers Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as climax of this entire process. He reiterated Romania’s position that invasion was not justified on any grounds. “You can’t make a country happy by military force.” Noting the difference between Ceausescu’s and Gromyko’s recent statements on Afghanistan, he emphasized again that Romania remained categorically against the invasion since military action of any type endangered international cooperation. This applied to the doctrine of “limited sovereignty” and intervention by one Socialist country in another. The struggle for independence is a major aspect in international affairs and it must be accommodated. He said a quick solution in Afghanistan must be found by negotiation of Soviet troop withdrawal together with international guarantees of non-interference by outside states in Afghanistan. Romania thus welcomes formation of the special committee by the Islamic Conference as it could lead to a political solution. Pakistan Foreign Minister Agha Shahi told him during his visit to Bucharest June 9, that the committee had already tried to contact Soviets, Babrak government and the insurgents. In this respect, Shahi emphasized that contacting Babrak regime did not imply recognition of it. Shahi said the COEE hopes to arrange a cease-fire between government and anti-government forces based on condition of withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Next step, in committee’s view, would be formation of a provi-
