Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 217 To help our aid reach rural villages, we will emphasize support for the development and sharing of appropriate technology and techniques. I have in mind such devices as small farm machinery now being manufactured in Senegal, Upper Volta, Mali, and elsewhere; handhydraulic palm oil presses in Nigeria; and basic agricultural extension methods that have succeeded in one nation and could be applied in another. We will also expand support for agricultural research in Africa and try to assure that our own technical assistance is appropriate to African requirements. We also acknowledge the needs of African states for advanced techniques that will enable them to develop and process more of their own natural resources. Our Agency for International Development, headed by Governor [John J.] Gilligan, is determined to cut down on red tape in approving assistance projects, so it can respond quickly and effectively. Greater attention will be given to projects which can be started quickly and require minimal outside technical assistance or expensive equipment. Men and women are more important than machines. Africa’s natural resources will be developed by Africa’s people. Human development is thus the key to Africa’s future. While we will provide additional opportunities for Africans to study here, emphasis will be on programs of training and education in Africa. We must also remember the importance of Africa’s infrastructure. It is a vast continent, and improved transport and communications are essential to its welfare. I am aware, as I indicate these directions for our programs, how tempting, but mistaken, it would be to design blueprints for another continent’s development. We can only work effectively if we work cooperatively with African governments in behalf of their development priorities. Accordingly, we will seek to increase our contribution to the African Development Fund. And we are requesting from the Congress $200 million for the Sahel, to be managed in coordination with the Club du Sahel. The long drought in the Sahel devastated the economies of some of the poorest countries in the world. Now these countries are working together to become self-sufficient in food production and to develop the ability to withstand future droughts. In the Club du Sahel, the African states plan together for the region. The donor nations participate in the planning and determine how each can assist most effectively. They then commit the resources necessary to meet their goals. In this process, we are discovering the great value of encouraging coordination among African states; of planning with them and with other donors; and of concentrating on regional
