714
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
tons—in 1980 and may be dangling offers of increased future deliveries
before the Romanians. We have no evidence to date, however, that
Moscow has made a concerted effort to apply the economic levers at
its command.
Romania’s growing dependence on foreign oil—it now imports
about half its crude oil needs—may be forcing a change in Bucharest’s
Middle East policy. Ceausescu has traditionally pursued an “even-
handed” approach toward the major disputants in the region. Through
his efforts to mediate their differences he has earned a reputation as
an effective behind-the-scenes arbitrator of international disputes—a
role he clearly relishes. Ceausescu helped arrange the historic Sadat-
Begin meeting in 1977 and is now seeking to bridge differences between
Egypt and the other Arab states. There are signs, however, that Romania
may be tilting slightly—at least in its rhetoric—toward the more mili-
tant forces in the region, possibly out of concern to retain access to
Middle Eastern oil.
Bucharest has actively courted Third World countries in order
to gain political and economic support for its independent policies.
Romania is particularly interested in playing a role in the Nonaligned
Movement—with which it now has guest status—but is unlikely to
increase its influence substantially as long as it is a member of the
Warsaw Pact.
Ceausescu has also sought closer relations with the West to buttress
Romania’s defense against Soviet domination. He clearly believes that
the “special relationship” he has sought to develop with Washington
is especially valuable—both politically and economically—in this effort.
Economic cooperation protocols signed in March with the Occidental
Petroleum Corporation illustrate the benefits Romania hopes to derive
from this relationship.
Domestic Policies
Ceausescu’s independent and nationalistic foreign policies strike
a responsive chord at home, where anti-Russian feeling runs high.
Indeed, domestic political considerations have probably been a major
motivating factor in many of Ceausescu’s anti-Soviet actions. Ceauses-
cu’s domestic policies of rapid industrialization and authoritarian inter-
nal controls, however, have been decidedly unpopular.
As a result of the regime’s emphasis over the past decade on capital
accumulation and investment, the standard of living has remained the
lowest among Warsaw Pact states while the economy’s growth rates
are the highest. As domestic reserves of energy and other key raw
materials have become depleted, however, even the rate of economic
growth has begun to falter.
In the face of mounting economic difficulties, the regime has initi-
ated a number of belt-tightening measures. Prices have been increased
