1977  199
The “NATO-­related portion” definition has some serious drawbacks:
—The NATO Ministerial Guidance has historically been inter-
preted in terms of a longstanding NATO definition of defense spend-
ing, which includes all defense spending. Further, Secretary Brown has 
publicly implied that the commitment applies to the entire budget, not 
a portion of it.
—There is no clearly defined “NATO-­related portion” of the DOD 
budget. OMB’s 40% figure is taken from an analysis that OSD has 
provided annually to Congress since the early ’70s.8 It includes those 
general purpose forces that we would anticipate employing in Europe 
in a worldwide war. It does not include strategic nuclear forces, con-
ventional strategic reserve forces, forces for Asia, all R&D and fixed 
installation costs, certain central support costs such as headquarters 
and personnel support. Many of these items or some fraction of them 
should be considered as NATO-­related, especially strategic nuclear 
forces, given their role in the NATO Triad and the defense of Europe. 
In fact, we would encounter political difficulties were we to argue that 
strategic forces are not part of our NATO contribution.
—Attempting the 40% argument could hurt our credibility with 
the Allies and invite them to take the same approach, which would 
undermine the intent of the 3% goal.
—A growth definition that explicitly excluded forces for Asia 
would increase Asian concerns about the US willingness to defend our 
allies in that area.
Other Considerations
NATO considerations aside, and as I have indicated, there are 
important reasons for pursuing 3% real growth for the entire budget in 
the next fiscal year:
—Continued robust modernization of our forces is needed, as 
stated by PD–18, “to maintain an overall balance of military power 
at least as favorable as now exists” because Soviet military strength 
continues its steady growth of 3–4% per year in all aspects of defense 
spending. If we do not, we may have to cut back our new initiatives on 
broad programs (e.g., 0+M, procurement, R&D) that would adversely 
affect readiness and/or our future capabilities.
—It answers any domestic and international political need to 
demonstrate that this Administration is taking steps to meet the Soviet 
“buildup.” SALT, CTB, and budget issues such as the M–X, AWACS, 
Navy shipbuilding, and the like, may require serious expenditure of 
political capital. An improved perception that you are in favor of a 
strong defense will strengthen your hand with Congress on these issues.
—We are not wedded to 3% real growth forever: success of your 
arms control initiatives or other positive changes in the international 
8 The OSD analysis provides a range of costs, in part to illustrate the difficulty of 
identifying NATO-­related expenditures. [Footnote is in the original.]
