pass which was their protection, or after they had in one way or another
ceased to be protected. The chairman said that this view would be taken into
consideration in later offering a concrete definition of likin. After discussing
the question of compensation, or bonus, for dismissed officers and
employees of the likin offices which would be abolished the sub-committee
adjourned.
Technical Committee on Other Purposes, First Meeting, November 21,
1925.
At the first meeting of the Technical Committee on Other Purposes held on
November 21, Mr. Tseng, the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, was elected
chairman. Mr. Tseng called upon Mr. Yih, who laid before the sub-
committee Tables of Inadequately Secured Foreign Loans under the charge
of the Ministry of Finance, compiled by the Commission for the
Readjustment of Finance. A statement explaining the Tables was read by
Mr. Yih and may be found on page 2, et seq. of the Minutes of the Technical
Committee Meeting of November 21, 1925, and the Tables may be found
on page 10, et seq. of the same Minutes. Discussion developed that it was
expected that the Tables would be revised and added to before any attempt
at consolidation should be undertaken. Mr. Yih mentioned particularly the
inadequately secured foreign loans under the charge of the Ministry of
Communications. He endeavored to make it plain that under his instructions
he could give information only and that he was not in a position to propose
any concrete plan of consolidation; that he would be glad to receive
information from any of the foreign Delegations concerning items owing
their nationals which were not included in the schedules submitted. Colonel
Peel, on behalf of the British Delegation, expressed a willingness to submit
his list of unsecured debts and said that he wished to arrive at an exact
figure, not an estimate of the total indebtedness of the Chinese Government.
Dr. Tsur, at this point, said that the Commission for the Readjustment of
Finance had gone into the question of debts very thoroughly and that it was
his understanding that it was the intention of the Chinese Government to
appoint the Commission for the Readjustment of Finance to undertake the
consolidation of debts and suggested that the foreign creditors communicate
directly with the Commission, since it would not seem to be a question
connected with the Conference. Colonel Peel dissented from that view,
