Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 485 sources of this region and to the economic health of the nations processing these resources. The political issues of South Africa, Namibia, and Southern Rhodesia can cloud our dialogue with African states on other issues, even when our position on such matters as trade, development assistance, commodity policy, and debt rescheduling is clear and positive. The danger of political instability in key areas threatening our national security is ever present. One needs only to look at events in Iran and consider the effects of a change in the orientation of that country on our strategic and economic interests in the area, or to look at Nicaragua and think about the implications of spreading unrest in Central America, our doorstep, to understand the political-economic interrelationship. Finally, there are a whole series of foreign policy issues of prime importance to us—nuclear nonproliferation, human rights, arms control—which cannot be moved forward in a meaningful fashion without the cooperation of the Third World countries. Ultimately, in our national interest, we wish to do what we can to see that Third World societies evolve in ways which are compatible with the kind of world we wish to live in and leave to our children. If we ignore these countries, their needs, and their aspirations, we will forfeit our ability to exert this influence which can be so important to our own future. So, the issues that we face in dealing with the Third World have implications not just for our daily lives, but also for our national security now and our future in the society of men. Thus, the fostering and strengthening of the dialogue between the North and the South is extremely important to all of us. Fostering a Positive Dialogue The coming year will see a large number of international conferences devoted to fundamental questions of relations between developed and developing countries. Negotiations have recently begun under UNCTAD auspices on a new international wheat agreement; in April the law of the sea conference will resume consideration of who controls the vast mineral resources of the deep seabeds; in June UNCTAD 5 convenes in Manila; in August the U.N. Conference on Science and Technology for Development begins in Vienna; and in 1980 we expect a U.N. General Assembly special session on development. Moreover, progress is being made in developing a positive dialogue with the Third World. One can point to the Association of the South East Asian Nations. These five nations—Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Malaysia, and Thailand—are important friends and trading partners particularly
