702 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III of the delegations separately before the conference started, and thus was able to take account of their concerns in the phrasing of our proposals.5 I’ve tried to do the same in Summit preparations, and will call my opposite numbers before going to the final preparatory meeting in Paris next week, to tell them that you hope they will be able at that meeting to report any Summit economic concerns their heads of government want you to be aware of before you leave for Venice. (C) —Deep US-European political disagreements and criticism of US foreign policy, which was evident in side talks, did not unduly shadow our economic discussions. There is considerable allied respect for US domestic economic policies, which the allies hope we will maintain. Ditto for our trade policies; your recent decisions on shoes, leatherware, and Japanese automobile imports are admired. There is, however, deep concern over what is happening in the Congress to the US appropriations needed to fulfill our commitments to multilateral banks; these concerns were somewhat mitigated by what I was able to tell my colleagues about your efforts to back these requests. (C) —To get allied agreement for US economic proposals we need German support. After the US, Germany is clearly the most influential country in this area: Schmidt is admired for his economic performance and respected for his recent election successes. We got what we wanted at the IEA because we cut a deal with the Germans beforehand. On the Summit, the Germans are o.k. on the macro-economic section, reluctantly committed to the energy section, and firm on North-South issues, except for worrying about our record. They are attracted by the Brandt idea of a North-South Summit in 1981. All this could change between now and Venice; I can’t be sure how much German colleague’s assent reflected Schmidt’s views. That is one reason I want to phone him and the others to make sure that they have checked with heads of government. (C) 5 Duncan reported to Carter on the IEA meeting and his subsequent bilateral discussions in a May 23 memorandum; see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 273.
