World Hunger and Food Policy
735
Cabinet Level Committee on Food and Agricultural Policy, chaired by
the Secretary of Agriculture.2
The Working Group consists of Executive Office Organizations—
National Security Council (NSC), Domestic Council (DC), White House
Intergovernmental Relations Office (WHIGA), Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP), Council of Economic Advisors (CEA), Of-
fice of Management and Budget (OMB), Office of the Special Assistant
for Consumer Affairs (OSACA), Council of Environmental Quality
(CEQ), and Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
(STR)—as well as representation from the U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture (USDA), State, Agency for International Development (AID),
Treasury, and Commerce.
The purpose of the Working Group is to prepare a list of options to
combat world hunger and malnutrition with the full participation of
several departments and agencies. This analysis will be the basis for a
Presidential statement outlining the following goals:
—to provide more equitable access to available food and to im-
prove nutritional well-being;
—to increase the supply of food relative to need;
—to offer food assistance to those unable to purchase enough food
for adequate nutrition;
—to assure a decision-making process, management, and re-
sources adequate to implement these policies.
Departments and agencies affected by this memorandum should
submit to the chairman of the Working Group their recommendations
by close of business on October 21st.3
The Working Group will review the recommendations and de-
velop a set of U.S. government policy options designed to make a sig-
nificant impact on world hunger. Departments and agencies will have
an opportunity to comment on the Working Group’s list of options be-
fore it is submitted to me.
2 In a separate September 30 memorandum to the Heads of Executive Departments
and Agencies, the President charged Bergland with establishing a Working Group on
Food and Agricultural Policy. The Working Group’s membership would consist of as-
sistant secretary-level representation from the Departments of State, Treasury, and Agri-
culture; the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations; AID; CEA; OMB;
and the NSC. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770172–2419;
printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1695–1696) In an October 20 memo-
randum to Vance, Blumenthal, Califano, Strauss, Gilligan, Schultze, McIntyre, Brzez-
inski, Daft, and Bourne, Bergland indicated that Deputy Secretary of Agriculture John
White would chair the Group and that Hjort and Daft would share secretariat duties.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770181–0569)
3 See Document 231.
