Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1139
not equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs. Further, since such arma-
ment attachment joints are installed on airplanes belonging to the 
United States of America other than heavy bombers, their presence is 
not sufficient to consider an airplane to be a heavy bomber.
Soviet Statement Concerning the Purposes of Inclusion in the 
Memorandum of Understanding of Data on the Distance Between 
Joints for Attaching Long-Range Nuclear ALCMs
The Soviet side makes the following statement concerning the pur-
poses of inclusion in the memorandum of understanding of data on the 
distance between joints for attaching long-range nuclear ALCMs.
Noting the importance of verification of the provisions of the treaty 
relating to counting the number of warheads attributed to heavy bomb-
ers, the Soviet side states that the technical data “distance between 
joints for attaching long-range nuclear ALCMs to pylon, measured on 
pylon” and “distance between joints for attaching long-range nuclear 
ALCM to launcher” are included in annexes G and H to the memoran-
dum of understanding in order to confirm the number of long-range 
nuclear ALCMs for which a heavy bomber of a type, category, and, if 
applicable, variant, is equipped.
The Soviet side agrees that, since the design of attachment joints 
used on heavy bombers of the United States of America is such that it 
permits the suspension of a variety of nuclear and non-nuclear arms, 
joints for attaching weapons shall be considered as a non-manda-
tory distinguishing feature for categories of heavy bombers listed in 
Sections (II) and (III) of Annex G to the memorandum of understanding.
C. Unilateral statements by the U.S. side:
Unilateral Statement by the United States of America  
Concerning the B–2 Heavy Bomber
The United States of America makes the following statement con-
cerning its plans with respect to the B–2 heavy bomber. This statement 
will remain in force for the duration of the Treaty on the Reduction and 
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and will be politically binding.
The United States of America has no plans to equip deployed B–2 
heavy bombers for long-range nuclear ALCMs until such an ALCM has 
been flight-tested from a B–2 heavy bomber.
The United States of America recognizes that the first flight test of 
a long-range nuclear ALCM from a B–2 heavy bomber will require that: 
B–2 heavy bombers be exhibited pursuant to paragraph 12 of Article XI 
of the treaty; B–2 heavy bombers be subject to inspection pursuant to 
the provisions of the treaty; and all other provisions of the treaty that 
pertain to heavy bombers of a type from any of which a long-range 
nuclear ALCM has been flight-tested apply to B–2 heavy bombers.
