necessary to have a basis of discussion—a program which appeared to
cover all the proposals made in the three plans already submitted—and he
considered the British supplemental agenda a suitable vehicle for that
purpose, since it afforded an opportunity to proceed to a point beyond that
authorized by the agenda previously adopted. He wished a detailed and
concrete agenda under which to work and the British program met that
requirement. Mr. Bianchi also favored the British programme. Dr. Yen then
discussed in a general way the procedure of the Committee and suggested
that the Chinese Delegation, in an effort to present a harmonious whole,
might make a further study of the three schemes that had been submitted.
Mr. Strawn said that, in his opinion, the proposal of the British Delegation
did not conflict in any way with the main agenda, since it arrived at no
conclusion and asserted no personal viewpoints. He felt that the Conference
had dealt in generalities long enough and that it was time to deal with
concrete facts and arrive at definite results. After further discussion,
participated in by several Delegates, Mr. Strawn suggested that it was the
obvious duty of the Delegates, if they wanted to proceed in an orderly way
with the work of the Conference, to discuss whether they wanted to
effectuate the Washington Treaty as soon as possible, and that this question
came within the scope of Proposal No. 1 of the British supplemental
Agenda. Colonel Peel gave his views on this phase of the Committee work
and suggested, on behalf of the British Delegation, that a Drafting
Committee be authorized to draw up a diplomatic protocol with a view to
making possible the collection of the Washington Treaty surtaxes at once.
Mr. MacMurray concurred with this view and submitted for the
consideration of the Drafting Committee a concrete proposal for such an
Agreement. (See p. 50 of the Minutes of November 13, 1925.) Colonel Peel
stated that the American proposal was acceptable, although it might require
some alteration by the Drafting Committee, and Dr. Yen said that it was
well worded but he mentioned the question of the uniform rates on
maritime and land frontiers, stating that this question had not been
discussed at all and was not sure whether the Delegates were in accord on
the subject. Mr. Strawn then suggested that the question be discussed, but
Dr. Wang remarked that this would be bringing up a question which had not
yet been presented by the Chinese Delegation. Although Mr. Strawn urged
that the question be discussed at once, since it was within the scope of the
Washington Treaty and so admitted by Dr. Wang, the latter said that the
