940 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI ICBMs or SLBMs with new and unconventional front end designs, different from those in use at the time of treaty signature, the question of whether the 40 percent rule would be waived would be subject to consultation and agreement in the JCIC. 5. During ministerial discussions the Soviets proposed using the SALT II definition for new types (i.e. five percent change in length, diameter, launch weight or throw-­weight). Negotiating group should reject inclusion of throw-­weight in new types definition. The U.S. opposed adding throw-­weight on the grounds that it would lead to ambiguities and compliance concerns similar to those in SALT II. Negotiating group should continue to firmly oppose adding throw-­weight to the definition and should continue to urge the Soviets to accept the U.S. definition in its entirety. FYI. The Soviets proposed informally a possible compromise using a five percent change in length. We told the Soviets it is unacceptable and are awaiting a Soviet response. End FYI. Early Exhibitions 6. The Soviets agreed to a side agreement providing for the conduct of technical exhibitions under Article XI, Paragraphs 11 and 12 prior to entry into force, provided that these early exhibitions were a substitute for (and not a duplication of) exhibitions after entry into force. Negotiating group should confirm that we only intend to conduct a single exhibition. Data Denial 7. The United States handed over the following paper on a new approach to data denial: Begin text of U.S. draft elements of common ground on data denial Information Exchange 1. After each flight test of an ICBM or SLBM, the sides will exchange tapes of the telemetry broadcast. The exact procedures will be worked out in Geneva, either in the treaty or by the Joint Compliance Inspection Commission. 2. After each flight test, the sides will exchange: A. Information sufficient to derive the numerical values and engineering units of the telemetry data recorded on those tapes which were exchanged. This information will include (1) a description of the telemetry frame, including the length of such frame and the length of the words therein, (2) the designation of the technical parameters included in each telemetry frame and the location of each parameter within the frame, and (3) encoding algorithims used. Re-­entry vehicle data would be excluded from these requirements. In this connection, the term ‘‘re-­ entry vehicle data” refers only to measurements made from within a re-­entry vehicle.
