940  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
ICBMs or SLBMs with new and unconventional front end designs, dif-
ferent from those in use at the time of treaty signature, the question of 
whether the 40 percent rule would be waived would be subject to con-
sultation and agreement in the JCIC.
5. During ministerial discussions the Soviets proposed using the 
SALT II definition for new types (i.e. five percent change in length, diam-
eter, launch weight or throw-­weight). Negotiating group should reject 
inclusion of throw-­weight in new types definition. The U.S. opposed 
adding throw-­weight on the grounds that it would lead to ambiguities 
and compliance concerns similar to those in SALT II. Negotiating group 
should continue to firmly oppose adding throw-­weight to the defini-
tion and should continue to urge the Soviets to accept the U.S. defi-
nition in its entirety. FYI. The Soviets proposed informally a possible 
compromise using a five percent change in length. We told the Soviets 
it is unacceptable and are awaiting a Soviet response. End FYI.
Early Exhibitions
6. The Soviets agreed to a side agreement providing for the con-
duct of technical exhibitions under Article XI, Paragraphs 11 and 12 
prior to entry into force, provided that these early exhibitions were 
a substitute for (and not a duplication of) exhibitions after entry into 
force. Negotiating group should confirm that we only intend to con-
duct a single exhibition.
Data Denial
7. The United States handed over the following paper on a new 
approach to data denial:
Begin text of U.S. draft elements of common ground on data denial
Information Exchange
1. After each flight test of an ICBM or SLBM, the sides will exchange 
tapes of the telemetry broadcast. The exact procedures will be worked 
out in Geneva, either in the treaty or by the Joint Compliance Inspection 
Commission.
2. After each flight test, the sides will exchange:
A. Information sufficient to derive the numerical values and engi-
neering units of the telemetry data recorded on those tapes which were 
exchanged. This information will include (1) a description of the telem-
etry frame, including the length of such frame and the length of the 
words therein, (2) the designation of the technical parameters included 
in each telemetry frame and the location of each parameter within the 
frame, and (3) encoding algorithims used. Re-­entry vehicle data would 
be excluded from these requirements. In this connection, the term ‘‘re-­
entry vehicle data” refers only to measurements made from within a 
re-­entry vehicle.
