Non-Proliferation
835
cert with these other nations to promote the objective of developing ef-
fective international arrangements to meet global energy needs and
minimize the risk of proliferation.
(E) The United States would like to discuss a wide range of interna-
tional approaches and frameworks, that will permit all nations to
achieve their energy objectives while reducing the likelihood of a fur-
ther spread of nuclear weapons. Among other things, it wishes to ex-
plore the possibilities of an international nuclear fuel-cycle evaluation
program, aimed at exploring (I) alternative, non-sensitive fuel cycles;
(II) a variety of international and U.S. measures to assure access by all
nations to nuclear fuel supplies and spent fuel storage.
(F)
The
United
States
is
committed
to
strengthening
the
non-proliferation regime: by encouraging the widest possible adher-
ence to the NPT and to comprehensive international safeguards; by
strengthening and improving the IAEA; and by enforcing sanctions
against the violation of nuclear agreements with the U.S.
(G) The United States seeks comments and suggestions on this ap-
proach, as part of developing a multilateral framework to resolve
issues raised above. Initial comments and questions would be welcome
in advance of announcement of U.S. domestic nuclear policies and pro-
grams. These comments and questions may be given to the U.S. Am-
bassador for referral to Washington, or directly to the State Department
through embassies in Washington. We would welcome receiving initial
comments and questions by April 1.
(H) Following announcement of U.S. domestic programs, the
United States will continue the closest possible consultations with other
governments, seeking ways to meet in an international framework the
various problems and issues involved. End text.
4. For Brasilia and Islamabad. On an urgent basis the Department
would value advice you may have to offer in connection with briefing
host government. Christopher. Unquote.
Christopher
