Human Rights If Patt Derian leaves (Hodding already has),6 much will depend on her replacement. Her number one Deputy Mark Schneider was a very bright activist. After he went over the side he was replaced by Steve Palmer, who is much calmer and introduces a more conservative note stylistically, although he is quite committed to the cause.7 Chris himself is also a strong advocate of the President’s human rights policy, but so judicious in temperament that he creates the illusion that a fairly jumpy policy is in fact purring along like a well-tuned Mercedes. Clearly the policy is not agony-free. The case of Argentina is a prime example of pulling and hauling between those pressing for letting up on the pressures on policy grounds of wheat sales, fencing off from the Soviets, hemispheric defense, et al, versus those who feel that Argentina is still an egregious human rights violator. The NGO community is much exercised about this, as is US Representative to the Human Rights Commission Jerome Shestack. (Tom Thornton and I recently recommended that State prepare a public clarification prior to Bill Bowdler’s late July visit to Buenos Aires, in order to correct distorted news stories based on leak and rumor, and also to stiffen everyone’s spine when Bill goes to Argentina so the human rights component of our policy doesn’t get lost in the shuffle. ZB and DA vetoed the idea, and doubtless Bill will make it all plain to the Argentines when he visits.) The UN Human Rights Commission is backstopped by IO and HA in State, but Jerry Shestak has made a practice of staying in touch with me. He has a big ego, and also a long track record as an outside human rights activist. This makes his role slightly ambiguous, particularly since it has never been clear that the US Rep to the UN Human Rights Commission is an instructed representative. As for the NGO’s, they can be an important source of support for the administration. I was astonished at their pleasure when I went over to State this spring to participate, albeit briefly, in a daylong conference of NGO leaders arranged by Patt and her staff.8 Any display of White House interest, however symbolic, is of value. When we still had some leverage with Moscow, there was a fairly steady flow of Soviet dissident or refusenik cases of special concern to 6 Reference is to Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs and Department of State Spokesman Hodding Carter. Carter announced on May 23 that he would resign from the Department on July 1. (“Hodding Carter Resigning on July 1,” The Washington
