384
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
well as horses, agriculture, etc. would be enjoyable topics for the King
and the President.
I thanked the Crown Prince as profusely as I could and assured
him that I knew the President would be most happy and reassured at
my report of the evening’s meeting.
Fahd then requested again that we keep the matters discussed
completely confidential, as much of the Saudi strategy depended for its
success on there being no leaks.
Isa and I took our leave shortly before midnight.
Ambassador’s Comment
Had we attempted to write Fahd’s script for the meeting, I doubt
that we could have improved upon it. He gave back to us as the SAG
position the rationale and argument which all of us including Secretary
Vance and Assistant Secretary Saunders have been advancing for the
last month with only limited apparent success.
His actions including the messages to Sadat and Hussein are basic-
ally what we have wanted and asked him to do. His solution to the
problem posed by the Baghdad Summit is in my opinion (and his as
well!) a near genius political stroke. If he is as firm with Arafat as he in-
dicates, it should at least defuse the opposition of the PLO. (Fahd recog-
nizes and does not hesitate to use the leverage which money provides,
and he knows as well as we do that Arafat’s sustaining power comes
from the Saudis annual contribution of $40–50 million to him.)
In reviewing and trying to assess in realistic terms the meaning
and future results which should be forthcoming following this meet-
ing with Fahd, I would like to offer the following precautionary
observations:
Fahd was in a good, relaxed, even exuberant mood; he had no staff
or aides with him. From past experience, we know that he is far less re-
strained under those circumstances especially when talking only to Isa
or me, or the two of us. His enthusiasm for his subject noticeably
warmed as the evening progressed. As evidence of this, he asked at the
outset how much time we needed and I told him 30 to 45 minutes. He
said that would be fine as he did have some other visitors coming. The
meeting actually consumed over two hours and I had to take the initia-
tive to break it up.
Therefore, it is possible that he stated the Saudi support in stronger
terms than he might have done in a different setting. The ultimate test
now is how Sadat and Hussein are reacting to the message Fahd sent
them and if they interpret it as Fahd explained it to us. Of equal interest
and importance will be to observe the effect of Fahd’s moves on Arafat
and the Baghdad Summit.
