March 27–December 31, 1979 817 you will give instructions to your man in charge; we want to have a tent with three flags, and armies of the three nations form the honor guards. Secondly, on May 26, President Sadat will receive, in person, El Arish. On the 27th I will arrive and we will make two announcements: We will open the direct corridor between Cairo and the Ben Gurion airport, and will then have a 40 minute flight of what would take 1½ hours. We will also declare the borders between Egypt and Israel open for all citizens. We also reached agreement on the committees. We will have five Ministers from each country; we will have five Ministers and Egypt will have five Ministers. We will meet first in Beer Sheba, then El Arish—(after Egypt resumes sovereignty the second in El Arish.) The chairmanship will rotate; first the Israeli will be chairman, and then the Egyptian will be chairman—each on his own soil. (MB) The same will apply to the military committee; Ezer will be chairman, and General Ali will be chairman. President Sadat asked for the return of Santa Catarina on November 19 of this year. I said I will do my best and will recommend this to the Cabinet. We reached agreement in 50 minutes what would take others 6 months. We wanted to call you together, but didn’t want to wake you up. We decided that I would call from Jerusalem and President Sadat from Cairo, instead of calling at 5:00 in the morning. JC: Thank you. Let me respond. I am not surprised the people opened their hearts to you because of the great courage you have shown and the great generosity of the Israeli people you exemplify. We were thrilled to see the news reports about the compatibility which exists between you and President Sadat, his Ministers, and the Egyptian people. I think one of the most significant things you did was to leave your car and let the people touch you. We are very gratified at the generosity shown by both sides in expediting the exchange of territory and the agreement to meet again. El Arish has a special place in President Sadat’s heart. He served there as a young man. Your sensitivity about this will pay rich dividends. I am also pleased at the direct air corridor—and the opening of borders is a tremendous event. I will immediately instruct our people to prepare for the exchange of the ratified documents. Do you know when? MB: Next Monday or next Tuesday.
