have voluntarily reduced to a minimum. It is fortunate that our
situation has permitted this reduction but we are not disposed to
overlook the fact that other countries are differently placed and
that their problems are not susceptible of such simple solution.
7. With respect to naval armament it may be noted that, while a
substantial part of the program presented to the Washington
Conference by the American Government was realized, no
agreement was reached as to the limitation of competitive
building of naval craft other than capital ships and aircraft
carriers. The American Government would welcome any steps
which might tend to the further limitation of competitive naval
construction.
8. The scope of the work of the Preparatory Commission includes
a consideration of all types of armament and of many related
problems. For the ultimate success of our effort toward the
limitation of armaments, it seems important not only to consider
general abstract principles, but also to endeavor so far as possible
to isolate from the general problem as many concrete questions as
possible and then deal with these definite questions in a direct and
practical way.
9. One of the most practicable approaches to the subject lies in an
effort to put an end to international competition in armaments.
Agreements of this character should constitute helpful guarantees
of that national security which in turn would facilitate future
efforts for the further reduction of armaments.
10. The task before us is beset with obstacles and difficulties. One
attempt after another has been made to overcome them in the past
—and in spite of intelligence and industry and good will the end
sought has not yet been attained. It is imperative as never before
to destroy the spectres of suspicion and of distrust which rise
from competition in armaments and thus lay a foundation for
lasting peace. No one of us can accomplish this alone but together
we can go far along the road if we approach our task with a single
purpose—with a readiness to understand each other’s problems
