Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
47
order to attract world attention to the denial of freedom. These bodies
are limited in power, but they can serve as the conscience of the world
community, and they deserve far more support than our government
has given them in recent years.
Insofar as they comply with our own Constitution and laws, we
should move toward Senate ratification of several important treaties
drafted in the United Nations for the protection of human rights. These
include the Genocide Convention that was prepared more than 25
years ago,7 the convention against racial discrimination that was signed
during the Johnson Administration,8 and the covenants on political and
civil rights, and on economic and social rights.9 Until we ratify these
covenants we cannot participate with other nations in international dis-
cussions of specific cases involving freedom and human rights.
We should quit being timid and join Israel and other nations in
moving to stamp out international terrorism!
These are some of the things our nation can do for a change to pro-
mote human rights in our imperfect world. The basic question is one of
leadership. We have not had that kind of leadership in recent years. In
foreign affairs, as in domestic affairs we need leaders who are not only
concerned with the interests of the powerful, but who are especially
concerned with the powerless, with the weak, with the disenfran-
chised, and with other victims of oppression. We have not had that
kind of leadership in recent years.
If I am elected President, I intend to provide it.
Thank you.
7 Reference is to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1948, and entered into
force on January 12, 1951. Truman submitted the Convention to the Senate in 1949. Al-
though the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had favorably reported the treaty, the
Senate had not approved it at the time of Carter’s address.
8 Reference is to the International Covenant on the Elimination of All Forms of Ra-
cial Discrimination, adopted and opened for signature by the UN General Assembly on
December 21, 1965. U.S. officials signed the Covenant on September 28, 1966. It entered
into force on December 4, 1969.
9 The United Nations adopted the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) and International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR), which were both first presented to the General Assembly in 1954, on De-
cember 16, 1966, and opened both covenants for signature on December 19. The first
covenant commits signatories to respecting the civil and political rights of individuals, in-
cluding the right to life; freedoms of speech, religion, and assembly; and right to due
process and fair trial. The second covenant upholds an individual’s economic, social, and
cultural rights, including self-determination, participation in cultural life, and the right to
work. Carter would later sign both covenants at the United Nations on October 5, 1977;
for Carter’s remarks at the signing ceremony, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II,
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 79.
