18
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
proaches best serve the national interest. Arms control is not a substi-
tute for survivability measures, although it could affect long-term
requirements. Even a comprehensive agreement will not affect ground-
station vulnerabilities, nor prohibit passive deception measures. In ad-
dition, it probably would not require the Soviets to dismantle their
ABM systems with ASAT capability. [2 lines not declassified] With these
considerations in mind, three approaches to ASAT arms control have
been defined and compared with the baseline case of no agreement. A
summary comparison of the approaches is provided in Table Three.
(S) The three approaches would include [6 lines not declassified]
A. Approach One: No Agreement
(S) The Soviets may not be willing to agree to any substantive and
equitable ASAT limitations. They may feel that the U.S. is merely at-
tempting to impede Soviet activities in a realm where the Soviets cur-
rently have advantages. They could respond to U.S. proposals with
counter-proposals which would not be acceptable to us.
(S) In the absence of an ASAT agreement, it would still be possible
for the U.S. to pursue some ASAT arms control initiatives. For example,
we could propose under the “Measures Agreement” that the sides
show restraint in ASAT testing, especially during crises. [2½ lines not
declassified] we could reaffirm the principal of noninterference with Na-
tional Technical Means by emphasizing that SALT obligation public-
ally and privately. DoD believes that the no agreement case should not
include these measures.
Pros and Cons for the No-Agreement Approach
Pros
Cons
—U.S. would be free to develop
—An ASAT arms competition
ASATs to counter the Soviets
could develop, or the U.S. might
threat.
not develop its ASAT; then the
asymmetries between the U.S.
—If ASAT capabilities cannot be
and USSR could widen.
controlled in a symmetric [less
than 1 line not declassified] way, it
—[4 lines not declassified]
may be preferable to pursue
other objectives [1 line not
—[8 lines not declassified]
declassified] without creating a
new negotiating forum.
—Would not reinforce the
President’s public position.
—Agreeing to a cosmetic
agreement could impede later
—Maintaining satellite
attempts to seek substantive
survivability against advanced
controls.
threats would be more difficult.
