than that of a friendly adviser to both parties, anxious to do what
it can to enable them to escape from the unfortunate situation in
which they find themselves. This spirit, combined with an abiding
faith in the sincerity of the contestants, has guided every step
taken by my Government. I have at all times endeavored
conscientiously to observe the strictest neutrality, and have, I
think, been able to arrive at a sympathetic appreciation of the
respective points of view which have been presented.
In the present state of the controversy I am persuaded that it may
be helpful to the parties if I outline candidly certain observations
and conclusions which I have formed as the result of my
experience with the matter during the past year and a half.
1. The numerous efforts which have been made since the Treaty
of Ancon to effect a solution within the scope and intent of the
treaty itself, whether by direct negotiations between Chile and
Peru, or as contemplated by arbitration and plebiscite, have been
thus far unproductive.
2. The recent negotiations for settlement outside the treaty with
the aid of the good offices of the United States have
unquestionably served to explore the possibilities of adjustment,
and define the positions of the principals. Representatives of the
two Governments have explained their respective attitudes to me
with the utmost frankness, and I am convinced that there is a
sincere desire on both sides to arrive at a final and constructive
adjustment.
3. We are obviously dealing with a question which turns upon a
point of national honor. Now national honor is a very real thing,
and in this particular case, it is perfectly clear that national
susceptibilities in this regard are peculiarly sensitive in both
countries and must be fully protected. I see no reason why this
cannot be done. It is my conviction that this problem should be,
and can be, definitively solved without the slightest sacrifice of
national honor and dignity, or injury to national susceptibilities on
either side. On the contrary, nothing could possibly redound so
