Sir Ronald Macleay appeared not to be entirely satisfied with this
statement, since he feared that the Delegates might be debarred from
discussing any of the questions raised in the Nine-Power Treaty, such as the
steps to be taken for the abolition of likin, the levying of the 2½% surtax on
ordinary articles, the 5% surtax on luxuries and the purposes, time and
conditions of the surtax. At the suggestion of Sir Ronald Macleay, Mr.
MacMurray’s statement was amended so as to read as follows:
“It is understood that the question of the disposal of the proceeds
from the surtaxes as provided in Items 1 and 2 under B
(Provisional Measures to be Taken During the Interim Period) as
well as the questions of the date of enforcement and of the
conditions subject to which they are imposed, will be dealt with
by the Committee on Section B.”
This amended statement was adopted and made a part of the Minutes.
At this point Mr. MacMurray suggested that the Agenda under which the
Conference would work contained no reference to the so-called Board of
Reference authorized by one of the Washington Conference Resolutions,87
and he proposed that provision should be made for discussing and dealing
with that matter. Dr. Wang, after stating that the matter was not embraced in
any treaty signed at the Washington Conference, but was merely a
resolution, said quite frankly that the Chinese people seriously objected to
the Board of Reference and requested Mr. MacMurray to withdraw the
suggestion, as he did not consider it advisable to bring up matters which
might seriously delay or hinder the successful conclusion of the
Conference. Mr. MacMurray replied that while he would not insist upon an
immediate discussion, he wished to make it clear that the American
Delegation, first of all, was under instructions to fulfill its duties under the
Washington Conference provisions and that the Delegation would reserve
the right at any time that was appropriate during the Conference to discuss
and dispose of all the questions which by the treaty or resolution were
imposed upon them at this Conference. Sir Ronald Macleay made a similar
reservation and the general debate that ensued divulged the fact that the
Delegates wished it to be understood that the Agenda covered all points
