March–August 1953
555
200.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, May 4, 1953, 6 p.m.
4311. 1. I have met Amini, new Acting Minister Court twice briefly
since his appointment. First April 30 at reception Embassy and second
afternoon May 2 Iraqi Embassy. On latter occasion I congratulated him
on and wished him success in new difficult position. He replied task ex-
ceedingly difficult. He found himself in most awkward situation. I said
I could understand. I personally had highest regard for Ala, his prede-
cessor, who had been my friend for many years. I had deep respect and
affection for Shah and I exceedingly fond Mosadeq whom I considered
one of great men Middle East. Amini said he in same position. I told
him I would be pleased call on him at his convenience. He replied he
would welcome opportunity talk with me and would be glad see me
even though there was no (repeat no) protocol requirement that chiefs
of diplomatic missions call on Minister Court. I took hint and said
perhaps he and his wife would like have tea some afternoon with wife
and self. He indicated that would be preferable but I did not (repeat
not) set date.
2. May 3, Chief CAS informed me Khosro Qashqai had told him he
understood Chief would like have chat with Amini and he had ar-
ranged for him see Amini discreetly same evening. Chief had replied
he had not (repeat not) indicated desire see Amini but would be glad
meet him. I approved meeting.
3. Chief informs me during discussion in presence Qashqai Amini
stated differences between Shah and Mosadeq should be settled
soonest. Present situation of suspense weakens court, excites opposi-
tion and benefits only Tudeh. Basis of settlement of differences will
have important bearing on future Iran. If this settlement is to benefit
Iran and be permanent it should be in harmony with US policies. It im-
possible Iran remain neutral. Iran must be committed to West and only
logical association is with US. Said before advising Shah regarding
terms settlement he must know (question A) what US policy is re-
garding Iran particularly regarding Mosadeq? Amini continued that as
soon as differences between Shah and Mosadeq settled Amini will sug-
gest Shah visit Caspian. Afterwards he wishes arrange Shah go abroad.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/5–453. Top Se-
cret; Security Information; Priority. Received at 9:39 p.m. At the top of the page is a hand-
written note that reads: “Tehran given instructions Deptel 2823 5/5. Brit Emb informed.
Emb London informed by airgram.” Telegram 2823 to Tehran is ibid., 788.00/5–553.
