1955 67 60. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy1 Geneva, August 10, 1955 Dear Walter: This is just a very brief note to let you know that after I arrived here I discovered there is only one pouch a week. For this reason I have covered things more fully than I otherwise would by telegram. It is also undoubt­ edly for this reason I have as yet received nothing from you. It therefore appears that our plan to keep in close touch by informal correspondence is not of much use as far as short range matters are concerned. I realize my volume of telegraphic correspondence is very heavy, particularly the record of the meetings. However, I felt it important that all of you know exactly what is being said and pouch service is too slow to be of any practical use. I have followed the practice of attempting to give you the highlights by priority message as soon as we come back from each meeting and then sending the more complete record by fol­ lowing message. I know that during the Korean armistice I found this most helpful. However, if you have any other suggestions or would pre­ fer we further condense the record of the meetings, please let me know. As I have indicated in my messages, I feel very satisfied with the situation and feel my instructions have enabled me to keep on top of it. Ed Martin has been of tremendous help and has greatly added to whatever effectiveness I have had. I greatly appreciate the sacrifice he has so cheerfully made as well as you and Walter making him available. I have sent a message on my need for a junior officer when he leaves. In addition to the record of the meetings I receive a quite heavy volume of correspond­ ence which requires replies and there are many other such chores. Due to the Atomic Conference we are in very crowded quarters although the Consulate General has done its very best. They were suc­ cessful in getting me a sitting room which has been very useful for meeting people and doing some of our work. They supplied me with a most excellent secretary who the three of us have very badly over­ loaded but I am hoping our volume of secretarial work will not remain at its present level. I was sorry not to be able to comply with the suggestion that I go back to Prague last weekend, but it appeared to me here unthinkable at this time. However, I have that part of my instructions [illegible in the 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; Official–­Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note on the letter indicates it was received on August 15.
