Special Session on Disarmament
1191
countries—Canada and the UK—are planning to propose formulas
providing such assurances at the Special Session.
Most UN member states want to have a greater voice in disarma-
ment decisions. While we want to be responsive to this desire, we in-
tend to protect the negotiating effectiveness of bodies such as the CCD.
We are fully conscious of these considerations as we move forward
in our planning.
Obviously, a six-week conference of 140 nations is not an effective
context within which specific arms control agreements can be negoti-
ated, and thus major breakthroughs cannot be expected. At best, we
can hope to start a process which may lead to significant progress in
subsequent negotiations. While offering constructive initiatives our-
selves, therefore, we will also seek to moderate or reduce unrealisti-
cally high expectations on the part of the LDC’s and non-governmental
organizations.
All of our work is now being carried out in the Interagency Back-
stopping Committee, chaired by ACDA, which the NSC recently estab-
lished. We recognize that if we are to achieve our goals, we must accel-
erate our preparations. We will have to be able to respond to others’
initiatives as well as to field our own. It’s clear that key SSOD policy
issues will have to be addressed very soon by all interested agencies at
high levels.
On the two specific issues which you raised in your memorandum
we have the following observations:
Arms Sales. At the several PrepCom meetings that have been held
and in ongoing bilateral and multilateral consultations, we have sought
support for universal adherence to conventional arms transfer re-
straint. There is substantial resistance among the LDC’s to endorsing
arms transfer restraints. We (and the other arms suppliers) must expect
to take some flak at New York on this issue, unless we can succeed in
making the case that all nations would profit from restraints that re-
duce risks and costs while permitting legitimate defense needs to be
met.
ER Weapons. We have proposed to our Allies that we link ER
weapons and arms control in a way that would offset anticipated Soviet
propaganda at the SSOD.3 Our proposal would focus attention on the
modernization of the Soviet theater nuclear system and would involve
a ER Weapon/SS–20 tradeoff. While there was general agreement at
the last NAC (February 24) that an arms control strategy for ER
3 Not found.
