International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 399 1. Introduction. Whether Schmidt decides to take the decisions that we believe are needed for a successful Summit will depend partly on the impressions that he forms in his meeting with you Tuesday. Schmidt’s German colleagues have told us that he was puzzled in past bilateral meetings as to whether you agreed with him or not; in some cases, they say, he mistook your courtesy for assent, and was upset afterwards if he concluded that this had not been the case. They urge that you make clear any disagreements with him; he respects people who do. You may want to start by thanking Schmidt for the statements that he has made, in answer to your telephone request, about the energy bill.5 He spoke about this in his interview with the Washington Post,6 in his BBC interview with Callaghan, and in a speech at Hamburg (which was misinterpreted in the US media as an attack on your policy).7 The German Ambassador has been told how grateful we were, and that we hope Schmidt will speak further about this question while he is in Washington—to the press and to any members of Congress whom he may meet. 2. Schmidt’s Views. Schmidt wants to preside over a successful Summit. He wants the US to contribute to that success by curtailing inflation and limiting oil imports;8 he wants the UK and France to contribute by adopting sensible trade policies; and he indicated to Prime Minister Callaghan that he is prepared to contribute by taking addi- 5 During an April 13 telephone call, Carter said to Schmidt: “Any time you have the chance to speak out on the importance of our action on energy, please do so. Your words are closely monitored in this country.” Schmidt replied: “I use the words ‘assistance to the President’s energy conception.’” (Memorandum of conversation, April 13; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons: President: 4/78) 6 On April 20, The Washington Post published a report by Michael Getler on his “lengthy and wide-ranging interview” with Schmidt on April 19. (“Bonn Anxious on Dollar’s Fate,” The Washington Post, April 20, 1978, p. A17) 7 A New York Times report on Schmidt’s April 28 speech in Hamburg bears the headline “Schmidt Attacks U.S. Attitudes on Oil and Economics,” while a Washington Post report is entitled “Schmidt Assails U.S. On Economic Policy.” (The New York Times, April 29, 1978, p. 29; The Washington Post, April 29, 1978, p. A6) 8 Earlier in May, Blumenthal and Owen urged Carter to press Congress to pass the energy bill; should Congress fail to act, they suggested that he take executive action to curb oil imports before the Bonn G–7 Summit. Eizenstat and Schirmer opposed this recommendation, while Schultze and McIntyre offered alternative ways of strengthening the U.S. Summit position. (Memorandum from Blumenthal to Carter, May 8; memorandum from Owen to Carter, May 11; memorandum from Eizenstat and Schirmer to Carter, May 11; memorandum from Schultze to Carter, May 11; and memorandum from McIntyre to Carter, May 11; all in the Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 85, 5/15/78 [2]) Owen’s May 11 memorandum to Carter is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 149.
