North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
945
—Section 208 of the Humphrey Bill reflects some Congressional
support for adjustment.
—By restricting use of retroactive adjustment to a case-by-case
basis, U.S. opposition to generalized debt relief is not compromised.
—Aid distribution, economic conditions in LDCs, and their devel-
opment commitment are taken into account.
—The cost to the U.S. is small.
CONS:
—It would not be additional if Congress responded by making
off-setting cuts elsewhere. It would not be additional for other donors
that provide debt relief within aid budget ceilings.
—It is unlikely to be of any real interest to the LDCs and thus may
buy little in the debt negotiations.
—We have been told that the French and the Germans may not be
able to support this initiative due to both statutory and political
constraints.
—It removes the main argument that the U.S. has used to resist use
of debt relief as an aid instrument—i.e., that the Executive Branch
cannot support it because of Congressional restraints. Thus it may give
rise to pressures to widen the list of countries eligible for retroactive ad-
justment or to provide other forms of debt relief.
—It would require both authorizing and appropriations legislation
from the Congress.
If the PRC decides that the U.S. should support a retroactive ad-
justment initiative, the U.S. delegation at the UNCTAD meeting would
only be able to support the principle and to express the intention of the
Administration to support legislation for it.
D. THE US/EEC PROPOSAL AND AN INITIATIVE ON
RETROACTIVE TERMS ADJUSTMENT
U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal plus support for an
initiative on retroactive terms adjustment would combine the advan-
tages and disadvantages of each component.
SECTION III: OTHER ISSUES
A. ADDING BISQUE CLAUSES TO ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
LOANS
A bisque clause allows a debtor, at its option, to skip a few pay-
ments of principal on a loan containing such a clause if it faces
debt-servicing problems. These principal payments can be added onto
the end of repayment schedule or stretched out over the remaining life
of the loan. Interest on the remaining payments can be increased so that
