International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 59 21. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, April 15, 1977 SUBJECT Summit Preparations—A Progress Report I gather from what you said to me after the Fukuda dinner2 that you wanted informal progress reports from time to time. I am sending you this report while preparations are still in mid-stream, so that if you do not feel I am on the right track, you can let me know. To make a success of the Seven Nation and NATO Summits, we need (1) a clear view of their purpose; (2) allied agreement on specific actions to achieve this purpose; (3) means of sharing both these actions and the purposes to which they are directed with public opinion; (4) effective follow-through. This memorandum discusses means of meeting all four needs. I. Purpose The economic and political progress achieved by the industrial world since World War II is threatened by two inter-related problems: —Economic. The world economy has the potential for healthy growth; present trends in Germany, Japan, and the U.S. are favorable. But in the UK, France, and Italy, steps to curb inflation and the eroding effects of inflation itself have slowed economic growth or brought it to a halt. International indebtedness is mounting, partly as a result of high energy costs. In France and Italy, these economic and political problems have weakened moderate forces and threaten a shift to the Left, which could endanger confidence and stability in neighboring Germany. Parochial and protectionist pressures in the industrial world, triggered by these economic problems, also hinder joint action by rich nations to help developing countries. —Security. U.S. and German forces are in good shape, and there is no prospect of early East-West conflict. But NATO is not keeping pace 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 1, President, Europe, 5/5–10/77: Memos and Cables, 4/15–28/77. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page and wrote “good.” The memorandum was sent to Carter under cover of an undated note from Brzezinski that reads: “The enclosed is only for scanning. It will be in your briefing book.” (Ibid.) 2 Apparently a reference to a March 21 working dinner held at the White House during Fukuda’s March 20–23 official visit to the United States. A memorandum of conversation is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 34, Memcons: President: 3/77.
