1336 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the religious holidays, Roy may not be able to see Sadat until the end of this week (August 15–16). 2. Concurrent with the approach to Sadat, we would ask Sam Lewis to see Begin and explore whether there is any flexibility for an Israeli gesture that would make it easier for Sadat to resume the negotiations. (We would take care in our contacts with Sadat not to imply we are promising to deliver something from the Israelis.) At present the possibilities strike us as being: (a) some gesture on the Palestinian front, e.g. an expression of willingness to meet with moderate Palestinians and allow them to articulate their objectives; (b) an Israeli concession that could enable us to show real progress on the Heads of Agreement; and, (c) the remote possibility that Begin might be willing to postpone the transfer of his office to East Jerusalem. 3. After we have had a chance to assess the results of these contacts, Atherton would deliver a pre-positioned letter from you along the lines of the attached draft on or about August 25–26. The letter would pave the way for a trip by Sol to the area in the first week of September. 4. Sol would go with the purpose of clinching an understanding with Sadat about resuming formal trilateral negotiations. If he is successful, Sol could report to you by telephone7 during his visit and an announcement of a resumption of talks could be made in Washington, Cairo and Jerusalem simultaneously. 5. If all of this works out, a further possibility might be to try to arrange a summit meeting between Begin and Sadat shortly thereafter, with Sol or possibly Ed attending for the U.S. A number of general considerations led us to think that the above sequence of steps made the most sense: —Sadat will be easier to bring around if we have given him a bit of time to maintain his present posture in terms of domestic Egyptian and Arab public opinion, and if he does not appear to be bowing immediately to U.S. pressure. With the passage of some time, he will be better able to blur the fact that he has gotten little or nothing from the Israelis. —As long as we have Begin’s office move to East Jerusalem hanging over our heads, it will be an added obstacle in persuading Sadat to agree to a resumption of the negotiations. The timing of the steps suggested above gives us time to explore with Begin what the possibilities are for dealing with this problem. If we can’t get Begin to agree to postpone this step for a significant period of time, the next best thing would be for him to get it over with quickly (although we would of course not make that suggestion to Begin). 7 See Document 402.
