1956 685 there for mainland invasion. Said Foreign Ministers conference must be held to settle question relaxation tension, realize principle non-­use force. Demanded withdrawal US forces from Taiwan. I reiterated facts on restraint of US and UN action Korea, refuted his charge of US “occupation” Taiwan by statement purely defensive and limited character our collective defense arrangements with GRC, which UN member and recognized by majority of world governments. Again assured Wang we not asking they accept our views, contrast­ ing this with his attempt force US capitulate to views PRC regarding ­Taiwan controversy. I made this statement as pointed as possible and reiterated it in give and take in order test whether Wang would deny they attempting demand US capitulation. He refused all openings to deny it, reaffirmed that “liberation” Taiwan is exercise of Chinese peo­ ples’ inherent right self-­defense, finally stated flatly “it not sufficient merely to state that either side may not accept views of other. Some views must be opposed”. On implementation I took initiative with my most forceful refu­ tation to date their attempt claim distinction between “ordinary” and “law-­breaking” Americans, referring to PRC Vice Minister’s letter to O’Neill (Deptel 1530). Wang reaffirmed their position supporting dis­ tinction, reiterated standard charges, demanded revocation alleged ­Taiwan entry permit requirement and other pressures on Chinese in US, demanded “accounting” persons on his previous lists. Handed me new list 4 unheard from Chinese in US. In give and take I stressed lack representations from Indians to which Wang had no rebuttal. At close, Wang suggested instead of postponing next meeting to February 3 it be moved to January 28. I declined, saying had made arrangements for February 3 meeting accordance his proposal last meeting, but said I willing meet on February 2 as per regular schedule. Wang shifted back to February 3 date to which I agreed. Leaving for Prague Thursday. Returning Tuesday. Gowen
