222  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
provided by recent events,2 remains a source of potential conflict. 
United States and European security cannot be separated from the 
security of other critical parts of the world. Soviet control of the vital 
oil-­producing regions of the Persian Gulf, in particular, could destroy 
the cohesion of NATO and perhaps NATO’s ability to defend itself.
In this area, or indeed in the Far East, rival local forces might 
become engaged initially without external involvement. However, the 
Soviets could intervene in all three regions, although in some instances 
their forces could only be airlifted light infantry or naval and perhaps 
air units. Whatever the developments, and however they might occur, 
such clashes not only might require the dispatch of appropriate U.S. 
forces to the scene in support of friends; they could precede and even 
set off a crisis or conflagration in Europe.
Accordingly, we must continue to maintain a defense posture that 
permits us to respond effectively and simultaneously to a relatively 
minor as well as to a major contingency. We currently estimate the 
needs of such a posture—­over and above the forces we program for 
a major war with the Soviet Union—­as a limited number of land com-
bat forces, in large part relatively light (though their actual configura-
tion will depend on the nature of the forces, they might be expected 
to encounter), consisting of both Marine and Army combat divisions 
with their support; naval, amphibious lift, and tactical air forces; and 
strategic mobility forces with the range and payload to minimize our 
dependence on overseas staging and logistical support bases.
This by no means completes our defense needs. The United States 
is a maritime nation. Much more than the Soviet Union, we depend on 
access to major air and sea lanes not only to acquire critical raw mate-
rials and engage in other peaceful pursuits, but also to protect our vital 
interests, forces, and allies overseas in wartime.
The Soviets have developed a long-­range force of aircraft, surface 
combatants, and submarines capable of challenging our maritime inter-
ests. We must maintain the air and naval forces necessary to deal with 
the challenge and project U.S. power where and as required.
Most of these various requirements can be satisfied with exist-
ing programs and forces. But in an era when wars could be short and 
intense, appropriate elements of our forces in the continental United 
States (CONUS) must be rapidly deployable to Asia and the Middle 
East as well as to Europe.
2 Presumably a reference to Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem 
in November 1977, and the beginning of direct Egyptian-Israeli peace negotiations.
