United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 107 of programs adequate to meet demonstrated needs. If such programs are not initiated promptly, unrest with violent political consequences is likely in a number of Latin American countries. Substantial United States assistance is required to give reasonable hope of success. Such United States assistance should go primarily to those countries that are willing and able to undertake satisfactory programs of self help. In this way United States assistance can promote the fiscal and tax reform in Latin America which is a necessary prerequisite for successful development. c) Administration: The program should be so administered as directly to facilitate the achievement of our foreign policy objectives in Latin America. The responsibility and authority for directing the program should rest in the Department of State. In determining the amounts and terms of financial assistance under this program the Department of State shall consult with the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems. The funds should be made available to the President as a Special Fund to be used exclusively in Latin America and under flexible and nonrestrictive provisions. These funds would be available in either grant or loan form and would be used through such agencies as the President may designate including the Inter-American Development Bank. Loans rather than grants would be made to the maximum extent practicable. It is expected that the principal lending instrument will become the Inter-American Development Bank which has an inter-American character and will be in the best position to encourage recipient countries to increase their own efforts to achieve maximum economic growth and social progress. United States financial and technical assistance to Latin America can only achieve their purpose if they are used to stimulate Latin American governments to mobilize their latent resources and to utilize them to achieve more rapid and balanced economic growth. d) Terms: Repayments of loans would ordinarily be required in the currency of the borrowing country in order to minimize the burden on countries’ resources available to service external debt. Aid funds should be available to meet local as well as external costs. Rehabilitation of Chile It is planned that of the total package of $600 million, $100 million will be used to assist the government and the people of Chile in their present task of rehabilitation. This task is the result of the recent series of disastrous earthquakes which left great destruction over wide areas of the most populous regions of Chile. Homeless people are counted in hundreds of thousands. Total damage has been estimated to be almost $500 million leaving a massive burden of reconstruction on the Chilean people. Congressional Action We would obviously be in the strongest position in Bogotá if Congress were to pass a $600 million authorization bill when it reconvenes in August. The Latin Americans hope for and expect concrete
