To the task of these conferences, which in the first instance was consultative
and recommendatory only, has been added that of approval. The programs
of the various conferences, which dealt primarily with political, commercial
and social matters included subjects concerning which an element of
controversy was notably absent. Only those topics were inserted about
which the American States held similar opinions and where a complete
accord might be looked for through a friendly and frank exchange of views.
In this connection, and as stated in the instructions to the American
delegates to the Fifth Pan American Conference:8 “It should be borne in
mind that the function of these Pan American Conferences is to deal so far
as possible with non-controversial subjects of general interest, upon which
free and full discussion may be had with the purpose and probability of
arriving at agreement and cooperation. International questions which cause
prolonged, and even bitter and controversial debate, are not infrequently, in
their important aspects, of actual interest only to a small group of nations. It
is believed that in this Conference the most fruitful results will be obtained
if discussion is confined to those aspects of the various topics which are of
interest to all the Republics. In this connection, you will bear in mind that
the present Conference has not been called to sit in judgment on the conduct
of any nation, or to attempt to redress alleged wrongs.”
It nevertheless is possible that attempts may be made to introduce for
discussion subjects not incorporated in the program. For your guidance in
such a contingency, there have been prepared a brief analysis of the political
affairs of the several American Republics and an analysis of economic
affairs, which are attached hereto as appendices Nos. 1 and 2.
As to results accomplished by the past Conferences, I am happy to state that
projects have been endorsed and recommendations made on matters
political, commercial and sanitary which have had a profound and far
reaching influence on the course of events in this Hemisphere. Since the
first International Conference of American States it is noteworthy that there
has not been a declaration of war between any of the American States,
although armed disturbances have occurred. The coming together of men
typical of the best feeling and thought of all the republics brings about a
gradual growth of mutual understanding upon which it is possible to build
solid international friendships founded in justice, respect, good-will, and
