Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 293 unresolved issues in this area it might be possible—­through skillful horse-­trading—­to reach an overall solution acceptable to both sides. — On unit of account (an essentially technical issue that is the cause of an inordinate number of brackets), to reach an agreement based on the work on this subject now underway in Washington. — On mobile ICBM verification, Nazarkin appears to want to build on the existing Moscow elements of common ground, although he has not been specific. This appears to be a worthwhile exercise. The outlook for a productive discussion on SLCMs is, of course, poor. Nazarkin appears to share this assessment, but the Soviets have worked up a considerable head of steam on this issue, so they are likely to spend a good deal of time pressing their views. One question we will have to face is how to respond to Soviet entreaties to engage in a discussion of SLCM verification procedures. Looking Ahead to Round Twelve 7. While this has been a productive round, thanks in part to excellent backstopping in Washington, we cannot automatically assume a smooth exercise next time around. We will soon run out of significant brackets not related to major issues or to gaps in the U.S. position. There is nothing intrinsically wrong with an “unproductive” round, of course, and we obviously should not alter sound positions simply for the sake of “movement”. At the same time, we should try to take advantage of the current workman-like Soviet attitude. We also need to get as many routine items out of the way as possible. In the end game, our interests will be best served if we can concentrate on few major issues. 8. All this suggests that in round XII we will need some real work to do in order to (A) keep the exercise from degenerating into a sterile exchange, (B) get the underbrush cleared away, and (C) avoid the public perception that we have put start on the back burner. This need will be partially dealt with by verification and stability—­if the Soviets are willing to engage. In addition, if we do alter our position on mobiles, or if the ministerial results in movement in other areas, a substantial amount of implementation work will be required which could serve as a focus for the round. 9. However, we should not depend on such outcomes. We have said that verification and stability won’t slow down the overall pace of the negotiations. Nor should we rely on moves on mobiles which the United States may not elect to make before round XII (or ever). Thus, I believe that we should be prepared to deal with some of the major second-­tier issues. Unit of account, definition of a warhead, and review of the MOU (all in the draft NSC work program) are a good start. Other possibilities would be to provide or amplify U.S. positions in areas where the JDT now has only placeholder language, such as ASBMs, intercontinental
