National Security Policy  117
33.	
Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, March 20, 1958, 4 p.m.
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary McElroy
Secretary Quarles
General Twining
Mr. Stans
Dr. Killian
General Persons
General Goodpaster
Secretary McElroy gave the President a sheet showing proposed 
augmentations to the military budget.
Before discussing the details, the President asked what the Pacific 
missile range is, and why it should be assigned to the Navy. Mr. Quarles 
indicated that it is to be a national missile range, and said the Navy will 
be serving as the executive agent, adding that the range will be available 
to the Services and that it will permit launching satellites on Polar orbits.
The President said he saw several groups engaged in solid propel­
lant work—­the Air Force, the Navy, and ARPA. He thought it should all 
be given to ARPA. Mr. Quarles said that ARPA is intended to pull together 
the development of solid propellants; it is not intended, however, to be 
the manager of the missile development aspects (i.e. the hardware).
Referring to the MINUTEMAN project, the President said it looks 
as though the Air Force is getting into long-­range solid rockets, and he 
questioned whether the second generation should be approached in 
this way. Mr. Quarles confirmed that the intention was to start a solid 
ICBM development in the Air Force. The President said that he thought 
that this should not be assigned to any of the Services, but Mr. McElroy 
reported that he had assigned the development and operational use of all 
ICBMs and IRBMs to the Air Force. Dr. Killian said he understood that 
the $75 million assigned to the Air Force for the MINUTEMAN project 
would not include any hardware, but would be purely for development 
activities for the missile itself, as distinguished from its propellant. One 
of the Defense representatives confirmed that this is correct.
The President said he thought there is duplication between the 
POLARIS and the MINUTEMAN programs. Mr. Quarles said the 
MINUTEMAN is based on a more advanced warhead, more advanced 
guidance and propellant, and more stages. The President indicated he 
1 Source: Defense budget and missile development. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on March 21.
