416 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV More generally, Cuban military personnel in Africa approximately doubled during this period. Overall Soviet arms flows to Third World countries in 1977 were one-­third more than in 1976. Soviet support for the Ethiopians and the transport to Ethiopia of both equipment and Cuban troops demonstrated the effectiveness of Soviet power projection capabilities in a benign environment and the ability of the Soviets to secure the necessary overflight rights in the Middle East. The Soviets and Cubans also increased their involvement in the black nationalist struggles in southern Africa. Soviet-Cuban actions in the Horn, the invasion of Shaba, and the coup in Afghanistan, all generated responses on the part of both affected local countries and of concerned outside powers. They contributed to a decline in Soviet diplomatic relations with many African countries (particularly Francophone ones), stimulated criticism of Soviet intervention at the OAU, and encouraged opposition to Cuba by key states in the Non-Aligned Movement. III. General Cause of These Changes In Afghanistan and in Africa, the Soviets and Cubans promptly took advantage of opportunities to expand their presence and influence. Virtually all the other major changes in the global balances in 1977 and 1978 did not, however, derive from Soviet initiatives. Overall Soviet policy, particularly with respect to its military programs, was characterized by substantial continuity. In general, both positive and negative changes in the global balance during the last 18 months have been due less to what the Soviets have done than to what we and others have done. The intensification of the adverse trends in the strategic balance was, in part, a result of changed perceptions stemming from new intelligence on the accuracy of Soviet missiles. In much larger degree, however, it was the result of U.S. decisions to cancel the B–1 bomber, to delay full-­scale development of the M–X, and to push development of the cruise missiles. The improvement in the trends in the NATO-­ Warsaw Pact military balance in Europe was the result of the U.S. pushing, at the London Summit in 1977 and subsequently, for a three percent increase in real defense spending among the NATO countries, taking some immediate short-­term measures to increase early combat capability, and securing approval of the Long-Term Defense Program at the ­Washington Summit in 1978. The improvements in U.S. diplomatic relations, particularly with Third World countries and Eastern Europe, were the result of the changed priorities, new initiatives, and “new broom” effect of the Carter Administration (paid for, in part, by some deterioration in U.S. relations with more conservative military regimes). The deterioration in Soviet diplomatic relations, on the other hand, reflected in large part the reaction of African states to Soviet-­Cuban intervention in the Horn. The upswing in U.S. popularity
