Chile  257
CH–18.	
Letter from President Eisenhower to President 
Alessandri1
Washington, February 28, 1959.
Dear Mr. President:
Ambassador Muller has handed me your letter of January 
­thirtieth,2 which I have read with great interest and sympathy.
I appreciate the seriousness and extent of the economic and fiscal 
problems confronting you. It is gratifying to note that in facing up to 
these problems you attach great importance to a free enterprise system 
and monetary stability in your plans for Chile’s future. Surely these 
concepts must be the basis of any economic program which holds 
promise of realizing the better life, in freedom, that we earnestly desire 
for our peoples. In particular, I am convinced that in Chile, as in many 
other developing countries, a successful attack on the causes of infla-
tion is essential to steady economic growth.
It is not surprising that the Communists are seeking to create diffi-
culties for your program. Since these men abhor freedom, they will surely 
endeavor to thwart the efforts of the Chilean people to achieve that full 
spiritual and material life which can only be realized in a free society.
You are to be congratulated, Mr. President, on the effective steps 
you have taken to inform the people of Chile of the high purposes of 
your program. I am confident the Chilean people, whose fine qualities 
and dedication to democracy are so rightly admired, will support your 
enlightened and courageous efforts in their behalf.
I am sure that you are fully aware of the economic assistance 
extended to Chile by the United States in the past. I am taking steps to 
see that the economic problems you outline in your letter are brought 
to the attention of the appropriate officials of this government who will 
be glad to discuss sympathetically with your officials mutual problems 
of economic and financial interest.
I deeply appreciate the confidence you have demonstrated in 
providing me with the full and candid exposition of Chile’s problems 
which your letter contains. Please be assured, Mr. President, that I will 
follow closely your efforts to bring stability and prosperity to Chile, for 
these objectives are important to the people of the United States.
With expression of my high esteem,
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.”
2 See Document CH–16.
