338 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX told Sadat that he could not agree with this.7 He would not be able to go on with the negotiations if Sadat were to insist. The President feels that the line should be around the settlement. If Sadat does agree to this, he will not allow the settlers to go into Egyptian territory from the settlement. The President said that he had also informed the Egyptians that they could only have SAM-7 missiles across the Canal. Weizman said that this would be no problem. The President said that all other missiles would have to be west of the Canal. The Egyptians have referred this to Cairo and they will provide an answer soon. They understand that they can move their other missiles up to the Canal. The President said that he had also discussed the question of the timing of normalization. The Egyptians have talked of a seven-month period for normalization and the exchange of ambassadors. This was not specified at Camp David. The President’s first suggestion had been full normalization at the time of signing the peace treaty. Sadat had objected. He said that normalization could take place at the time of the interim withdrawal. The President said that he understood the Israelis wanted the exchange of ambassadors to be within one month of the interim withdrawal. The President had recommended to the Egyptians that they accept this one-month provision, and that it would be to their advantage. Israel is withdrawing faster than required, and will be out of al-Arish within two months. Israel has also offered open transportation between al-Arish and Gaza. The President asked if that was correct. Dayan said yes, although there might be some check posts along the way. The President said the Egyptian delegation would ask Sadat’s views on the settlement issue and the exchange of ambassadors. On Gaza, the President said he thought the Israelis understood the problem and asked if they had found a solution. Barak replied that something along the lines of the “question of Gaza will be solved according to the framework agreement” might be adequate. The President [asked?] if Israel could accept the language in the text as it now stands. Barak said that he had called the Prime Minister who had said the language was unacceptable. This is not a legal problem, but it is one of public opinion. It could imply that Israel accepted the status of Gaza as it was previously and that Israel had given up its claims. Barak had suggested “the issue of the status of Gaza”. Begin gave no answer to this. Barak had also suggested this language to al-Baz and had not gotten any reaction. The President noted that Sadat does not want to acknowledge that Gaza is a part of Israel. Dayan said that we might refer to the Camp 7 No record of this exchange has been found.
