386
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
4. Politically we shall remain engaged in all regions of the world. We
shall preserve our strategic and economic presence in the Asian-Pacific
area by widening our cooperation with Japan and expanding our rela-
tionship with China. We shall enhance our collaboration with the mod-
erate states of Africa in the cause of African emancipation. In Latin
America, we are no longer tied to a regional approach. We shall
strengthen bilateral ties with the nations of Latin America while coop-
erating more fully with them in their global concerns. In the Middle
East, we continue to pursue a genuine peace settlement. Our commit-
ment to Israel remains unshakeable while we expand our relationships
with moderate Arab countries.
5. Constructive and cooperative solutions to emerging global prob-
lems. We are committed to head off any drift toward nuclear non-
proliferation and the reduction of conventional arms sales.
6. Sustaining support for our policies by rooting them firmly in moral
values. Our devotion to human rights is responsive to man’s yearning
everywhere for greater social justice. We seek a revival of America’s
optimism, a reawakening of America’s idealism, and commitment to
reform.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
79.
Editorial Note
On May 5, 1978, President Jimmy Carter delivered remarks at a
town hall meeting at the Convention Center in Spokane, Washington.
Carter visited Spokane as part of a 3-day trip, May 3–5, to Colorado,
California, Washington, and Oregon. After an introduction by Repre-
sentative Thomas Foley (D-Washington) and Senator Warren Mag-
nuson (D-Washington), the President discussed several domestic
issues, including inflation and the administration’s energy program,
conceding that there were “no easy answers” to these problems facing
the United States. Foreign policy, he continued, failed to yield easy an-
swers as well:
“I know that in the past we’ve made some very serious mistakes.
The Vietnam war, Watergate, the CIA revelations have kind of torn the
fabric of our society, because the American people were not involved in
making those decisions. We were faced with mistakes for the first time
after they were revealed to us. And we create, sometimes, in the minds
