Paraguay 1011 accommodate intermediate—and long-­term development loans of a modest size, and it could serve as a vehicle through which future loans could be channeled and most effectively applied in Paraguay; (2) Premised upon the elimination of the existing restrictive controls in cattle raising and meat processing, that a line of credit be extended to the larger cattle raisers whose needs would outrun the near-­term loan capabilities of a development bank; (3) That an objective but generous attitude be applied to loan applications to assist in feasible industrialization of forest products, milk processing, fruit packing, sugar-­mill renovation, cement plant and fiber development and utilization, and electric power facilities; (4) In the event the Government’s electric generation and distribution facility (Administración Nacional de Electricidad) is sold to an outside capable and experienced utility operator, that a loan for its renovation and expansion be seriously considered, if needed. b. To the Public Sector Géneral: (1) A basic need of any economy is transportation and communications. In this we must, of course, deal directly with the government. Under the present telecommunications program of Paraguay, ­completion will give the adequate communications facilities for the foreseeable future, but Paraguay needs roads and more roads to open up the country. This need, which is natural, is made all the more acute with the breakdown of the present antiquated railway system. In this regard we have been negotiating an engineering unit arrangement between the Paraguayan government, ICA and the United States Army, which will be most helpful but not enough. Paraguay will need loans for new roads and for the improvement of old roads. (2) The airport, because of its 9,000 ft. runway, is a suitable “Jet” station and Asunción is coming in for more and more air travel. Within two years a new hotel in down-­town Asunción should be completed. Then Asunción will definitely become a tourist attraction as the original “colonial city” (still colonial) and a most suitable location from which to visit Falls Iguazú. Apron and parking facilities at the airport should be given attention. (3) Loans to the public sector should be extended in harmony with the general philosophy, conditions and cautions set out in the Report of the Survey Team of the IBRD dated March 17, 1959,8 which lays 8 A summary of the report is contained in a memorandum from Carson to Rubottom, March 25, 1959, not printed; ARA/EST Files, Lot 62 D 354, “IBRD.”
