914 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI longer decision memorandum (Tab A)5 submitted by the Group which you need not read. In general, the recommendations have the support of all members of the Group (State, ERDA, DOD, ACDA, NRC, CIA, CEQ, FEA, EPA, OSTP, Schlesinger, Eizenstat, OMB and NSC) except where important differences are noted. Assured access to nuclear fuel has two distinct components: —access to uranium ore —access to enrichment services To be fully satisfactory to recipients, a program must provide access to both of these on a timely basis, in adequate quantity, and in a fully reliable manner. Your decisions on the following measures will be provided as guidance to the agencies: 1. Parity pricing and non-discriminatory terms in US fuel supply contracts for nations meeting non-proliferation standards. The Group recommends that you approve a policy under which nations that meet our higher standards—as embodied in new or amended Agreements for Cooperation—would receive nuclear fuel at the same price and under the same conditions as domestic customers. Such parity pricing and non-discriminatory terms will assure foreign customers of the importance we attach both to non-proliferation and to ensuring that legitimate energy needs are met. The Group believes that a standard of pricing that differentiates between domestic and foreign customers would undermine our efforts to achieve parallel policies among all fuel supplier nations.6 2. Contribution to International Uranium Resource Exploration. Perhaps the most critical issue in the plutonium/breeder debate is whether there is enough uranium to supply the world’s needs through the fission age without the necessity of recourse to the breeder. The US has recently stepped up its own uranium resource evaluation program, and has encouraged the international community to do likewise. The International Energy Agency (IEA) is currently doing paper studies preparatory to actual field exploration of international uranium reserves. The Group recommends that you authorize it to prepare options to provide increased US technical and financial assistance in support of the IEA’s activities.7 3. Explore the Possibilities of Foreign Investment in US Enrichment Plants. Even under the most attractive terms, foreign countries hesitate to place their reliance in a fuel supply contract, since the supplier has 5 Attached but not printed. 6 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “Prices should equal costs. Do they? J” 7 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “J.”
