Covert and Overt Operations
897
40,000, and they were all good fighters with weapons. He said that for
all practical purposes, southern Iran is in their control should they
choose to exact [attack?] it, but they would need ammunition and anti-
tank weapons to hold the area. He said that he was prepared to detail
the names and groups of the military in Iran who would be involved.
He said that the main contact for military matters outside of Iran is
the present Khomeini military attaché in Iran, an Air Force colonel
named Reziani (phonetic). He had a list of names which he wanted to
give me but I did not take it. He said that he was prepared to arrange
for contact with all of these groups.2
2 Shahpar also met with Sick on August 26. Sick, who found Shahpar “interesting,”
noted that Shahpar’s plan was to use the Crown Prince as a figurehead around whom
the people could rally based on his assessment that Bakhtiar was “getting nowhere and
Oveissi was hopeless (‘He wants to make a coup through the newspapers.’)” [text not
declassified] (Memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, August 26; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 42, Subject File, Iran Papers 8/80–
12/80)
337.
Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Marshall Brement of
the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the
President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Aaron)1
Washington, August 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Exploiting the Soviet Threat to Iran
We believe it would be useful to launch a concerted political-
diplomatic campaign aimed at heightening attention to the Soviet threat
to Iran. Such an effort was made in the Spring with NATO allies. This
time a broader effort, perhaps at some point including pointed warning
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
65, Outside the System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 4/80–11/80. Secret; Out-
side the System. Sent for information. A stamped notation in the upper right corner of
the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
