3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 434 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Christian forces had been pulled back somewhat. A serious problem remained, however, in the lack of leadership at the top of the Lebanese Government. It was unclear to us if Sarkis would resign, but contingency arrangements were being considered for rapid election of a successor to avoid a vacuum. The Secretary noted we had asked the Israelis to urge restraint on the Christians. We had also cautioned the Israelis over the danger of introducing their own armed forces again. He pointed to the particularly dangerous situation posed by the 20 UN forces troops captured by the Palestinians. At this point, the Secretary urged Gromyko to use Soviet good offices with the Palestinians through Arafat to seek his influence in working toward resolution of the situation. 5. Gromyko asked two questions: first, what would happen to the Sinai Territory in the event of an Israeli-Egyptian settlement? Secondly, he asked what voice the Syrians would have and, in particular, what would be done about the Golan Heights. The Secretary said that the Syrians had indicated they did not want to be involved as long as only Israel and Egypt were taking part. Sadat’s view was that, if the Declaration of Principles could be established as a framework for a comprehensive settlement, then Jordan and Syria would join in the negotiations. As for the Sinai, the Secretary said Sadat would not commit himself to withdrawal until the questions of the West Bank, Gaza, and the Declaration of Principles were solved. He noted, however, that Israeli and Egyptian Defense Ministers had discussed the situation in the Sinai and had a preliminary agreement on a number of questions which would be involved in a peace treaty. 6. Gromyko said he had listened attentively and would give only a brief reply. He said the Soviets did not have much hope for the Israeli and Egyptian talks since the two countries involved were only a small part of the Middle East. He added the Soviets strongly favored a complete, general and radical settlement with the participation of all parties, including the Palestinians. The most appropriate path to such a settlement was another Geneva Conference. He reviewed the difficulty in organizing a second Geneva Conference, but said he believed it could be realized. He recalled the U.S.-Soviet joint statement on the Middle East4 and complained that it had not been implemented, alleging that we knew the reasons why. 7. At this point, Gromyko said that the Secretary had not mentioned the Geneva Conference in his remarks. The Secretary rebutted this, calling Gromyko’s attention to his earlier statement that the results of the London meetings could produce a Declaration of Principles, 4 See footnote 2, Document 52.
