1156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX word “tackled” should be changed to something else. On point three,6 there is a problem: there is a difference between listing powers and responsibilities to be transferred, and providing for transfer of authority. He thought we could skirt this by simply outlining the powers transferred. On point four,7 Israel objects to “legislative” authority. Begin says that the SGA can do what has to be done. He said to Begin that you can call what it does a regulation, a rule, a law, or whatever: but the SGA needs authority. Begin did not deny this point; but he is troubled by the idea of legislative authority that could lead to a Palestinian state. Begin wants to avoid that. Mr. el-Baz said that Egypt had avoided the word in this point of the draft, but not the concept. They need something like this point for afterwards. Secretary Vance asked Mr. el-Baz to clarify the word “afterwards.” Mr. el-Baz said that this would be during the negotiations, but it formed a concept in a manner to give the SGA legislative authority. If a different term is used, that is all right; but the concept must be clear. Egypt will not abandon the concept. We can decide to take the Israeli argument into consideration, and defer the question of “legislative authority” now, but then talk about certain forms. Ambassador Linowitz said that [he] was troubled by the question of “afterwards.” When would this be? Mr. el-Baz said after the 27th of April. Secretary Vance asked whether Mr. el-Baz were saying that on the 27th, in the intensive negotiations, the question should be faced regarding words about laws, legislation, etc. Mr. el-Baz said: yes. Ambassador Linowitz said that we are kidding ourselves if we think that we could get that from the Israelis. Mr. el-Baz said that they will try. Ambassador Linowitz said that he had tried to find words (in the U.S. draft8 yesterday) that would not create problems for Begin. This is a prickly subject, and will provoke a strong reaction. Without a categorical change in Begin, it will get a violent reaction on “law” or “legis- 6 The text of point three in the Egyptian paper reads: “The Heads of Agreement document will provide for the transfer of authority to the SGA. Accordingly, a list will be drawn of the areas which fall under the jurisdiction of the SGA.” 7 The text of point four in the Egyptian paper reads: “The SGA will have all powers which are necessary for the discharge of its responsibilities. “The SGA will not have the power to alter the terms of the Heads of Agreement. Nor will it have the power of conducting diplomatic or consular affairs or establishing armed forces during the transitional period.”
