786 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Iranian involvement with the insurgents seems certain to increase. Domestic pressures will incline the government toward more active support of the rebels. For their part, the insurgents will probably continue to find Iran an attractive base of operations, especially given the small number of Soviet forces located in the border area. ([classification marking not declassified]) Since early June the Soviets have become increasingly alarmed by Iran’s role in Afghanistan. They have taken a tougher line toward Iranians who have taken outspoken public positions favoring the insurgents. Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh has, for example, been characterized as an agent of the United States and China, and local authorities in Mashhad have been accused of cooperating with the CIA. But Moscow has avoided direct criticism of the Khomeini government. ([classification marking not declassified]) The tougher Soviet posture is not likely to dissuade Tehran, and the Soviets may be forced to step up their pressure. They could do so—but only at the cost of a significant deterioration in ties with Tehran. ([classification marking not declassified]) [Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.] 296. Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated Chinese Aid to the Afghan Insurgents: Why So Little There are a number of reasons why Beijing, despite its claims to the contrary, might not now be willing to make a serious effort to aid the insurgents: —Beijing may be disinclined to make a major effort in the absence of a greater effort on the part of the West. China confronts the Soviets directly along its own border and indirectly in Southeast Asia and may not wish to lead the effort in Afghanistan and risk yet another confrontation with Moscow in Southwest Asia. Heavy involvement 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Insurgents. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed is a note [text not declassified] to Turner, July 2, which identified the author of the paper as [text not declassified] a China analyst in the Office of Political Analysis.
