North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 Recommendation: That the substance of the Tokyo Declaration be reaffirmed at the Summit,14 while we try to make significant progress in the multilateral trade negotiations (MTN) on issues of interest to LDCs. LDC Position: LDCs want DCs to remove restrictions on imports of LDC goods with no or very limited reciprocity on their part. Industrial Countries Position: These countries generally favor a moderate and preferential liberalization of tariffs affecting LDCs, although with sufficient U.S. effort they might support a substantial but non-preferential reduction in tariffs. Summit Action: The Summit declaration would reaffirm the general principles of the Tokyo declaration regarding LDCs. CIEC Action: The industrial countries should commit themselves to make reductions in the MTN to barriers to LDC trade with a view to enabling LDCs to increase their share in world trade over time. LDCs would be expected to reciprocate in ways consistent with their development. 4. Should the United States support international grain reserves that emphasize price stabilization? Recommendation: There should be speedily negotiated an international grain reserves system within the context of a general agreement on grains. Leave open the possibility of simultaneous inter-related bargaining in Geneva and London and the issue of whether to use a quantity or price trigger mechanism in the reserve. LDC Position: Developed countries should bear the major burden of financing an international system of nationally-held grain reserves to provide food security in times of world crop shortfalls. These reserves should be made available to LDC’s at concessional prices. Industrialized Countries Position: Most other countries support the concept of price stabilization scheme for grains. They oppose further concessions for LDCs on prices of grain during periods of shortage. Summit Action: Seek support in the Summit declaration for the concept of an international system of nationally-held reserves, without explicit agreement on details and endorse negotiations to this end, without prejudging the relation to the MTN. CIEC Action: Seek G–8 agreement for a unified announcement that there should be negotiated an international grains reserve within the context of a general agreement on grains. Options Considered and Rejected: United States has proposed a grain reserves system based on solely quantity triggers; other countries have suggested a price-trigger system. 14 For the text of the Tokyo Declaration, issued at the end of the September 1973 GATT Ministerial meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1973,
