Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
47
would lack the performance, and would be more costly than the ap-
proach we are now taking. While a single-shot demonstration may pro-
vide an incentive to the Soviets to accept our proposals, however, it
may also divert resources away from our present program that could
provide an effective system, if needed. I therefore do not recommend it.
Harold Brown
20.
Informal Notes on a Meeting Between Secretary of State
Vance and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin1
February 28, 1978
1. Dobrynin came in at his request for the purpose of delivering a
letter from Brezhnev to the President. He presented the Russian text
and an unofficial translation prepared in the Soviet Embassy. (He com-
mented as he did so that he was doing our work for us, and that we did
not generally prepare a Russian translation of our letters to Brezhnev.)
2. The Brezhnev letter is a reply to the President’s letter of January,2
and matches the President’s letter in its blunt tone, and round-up cov-
erage of a number of issues. However, it is in line with recent Brezhnev
speeches that express concern about the state of US-Soviet relations and
a desire to seek an improvement. It probably was written before the
Brezhnev speeches of last week, and lacks the upbeat suggestion of
steps to infuse a new dynamism in the relationship.3
The letter expresses disappointment at the lack of progress in the
SALT negotiations since the Gromyko visit to Washington last Sep-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 3, CV-Dobrynin 2/28/78. Secret. Drafted by Shulman on March 1. The informal
notes are printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document
85.
2 Omission in the original. Carter’s January 25 letter is printed in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 77.
3 Reference presumably to remarks Brezhnev made during a “high level” meeting
in the Kremlin on February 24. He stated that improved U.S.-Soviet relations were
“blocked by all kinds of obstacles,” including slow progress on talks to limit strategic
arms, the neutron bomb, and trade. (“Brezhnev Claims U.S. is Blocking Improved Ties,”
New York Times, February 25, 1978)
