Human Rights 377 OPIC OPIC is established by title IV of chapter 2 of part I of the FAA as an agency of the United States under the policy guidance of the Secretary of State. According to the authorizing legislation, the Corporation is governed by a board of directors appointed by the President, with Senate advice and consent, and chaired by the Administrator of AID. Section 231 of the FAA provides that the purpose of OPIC is to complement the development assistance objectives of the United States by mobilizing and facilitating the participation of United States private capital and skills in the economic and social development of less developed friendly countries and areas. The Corporation provides financing, insurance and guaranties to private U.S. investors in less developed countries with which the United States has agreements covering such programs. The government-to-government agreements (required by section 237(a) of the FAA) normally provide that projects and activities are subject to approval by the government in whose territory the project or activity will take place. (See, e.g., U.S.-Brazil Investment Guaranty Agreement at Tab 2,4 18 U.S.T. 1807, TIAS 6327.) OPIC does not program the issuance of loans, insurance or guaranties in specific countries on an annual basis. The guaranteed and insured projects are selected, developed and financed in the first instance by private investors. The Corporation provides coverage for eligible and acceptable investments, upon application by investors and payment of a premium, on a case-by-case basis. OPIC loans are also considered on a case-by-case basis. OPIC has maintained that its activities do not constitute assistance to foreign governments and, therefore, are not governed by section 116 of the FAA (except when a foreign government is directly involved in a project). Since section 116 of the FAA was originally enacted in 19755 OPIC has initiated steps to take human rights considerations into account in its programs. Arrangements have been made to keep OPIC apprised of actions taken in furtherance of United States human rights policy objectives. Pursuant to recommendations by the Interagency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance, the Corporation suspended negotiations last year on program agreements with Uruguay and Chile. 4 Not found attached. 5 Public Law 94–161 amended the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and added Section 116. For additional information regarding P.L. 94–161; see footnote 4, Document 1.
