1124 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 690. Memorandum of Conversation, Bunker and Robertson1 Washington, August 1, 1956 SUBJECT Visits to Chinese Criminals in American Prisons PARTICIPANTS Mr. Ellsworth Bunker, President of American Red Cross Mr. Elsy, American Red Cross Mr. Robertson, Assistant Secretary, FE Mr. McConaughy, Director, CA Mr. Robertson reviewed for Mr. Bunker in some detail the history of the negotiations with the Chinese Communists at Geneva for the return of American citizens. He pointed out the breach by the ­Chinese ­Communists of their undertaking of September 10, 1955, to take meas­ ures to enable Americans expeditiously to exercise their right to return to the U. S. He explained why the American ­Government had decided at the end of May to extend the provisions of the Agreed Announcement to Chinese criminals in American prisons, although such criminals had not been discussed in the negotiations leading up to the Agreed ­Announcement and in our view were not necessarily covered by it. Mr. ­Robertson then described the devious course of the ­Chinese ­Communist position on ­Chinese criminals in ­American prisons. He mentioned the abrupt ­Chinese Communist loss of interest in the prisoners after we announced our intention to give the Chinese criminals the option of taking advantage of the Agreed ­Announcement. Mr. ­Robertson explained that the Indian ­Government, as a result of the reversal of the Chinese ­Communist position on the prisoners, felt unable to comply with our request that its representatives visit the Chinese prisoners and ascertain their wishes as to return to Mainland China or to Taiwan. Mr. Robertson then explained why it would be desirable for the American Red Cross to undertake to interview the prisoners. He stated that the American Red Cross as a respected non-­political orga­ nization with humanitarian objectives would be everywhere recog­ nized as impartial and its word would be accepted. If the Red Cross interviewed the prisoners and attested to the fact that they had all been given a free choice between return to the Mainland, return to Tai­ wan, and remaining in prison to complete their sentence, no one could 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–156. Confidential. Drafted by McConaughy.
