Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 795 between his country and Israel—acknowledgement of the right to exist, direct negotiations, open borders, diplomatic recognition, ambassadorial exchange, and mutual trade.3 He told me that he too longed for that day, but it would never happen in his lifetime. Prime Minister Begin shared his dream and his skepticism. Now that dream has come to pass, in their lifetime and in yours and mine. We have much more work to do. But we have fundamentally changed the situation in the Middle East. The question is no longer Israel’s right to exist. The question now is the terms of a broader peace between a strong and secure Israel and her neighbors. A bitter war is now going on in the Persian Gulf, complicating even further our efforts to obtain the release of our hostages in Iran.4 Think how much more dangerous that new war would be if we did not have peace between Israel and Egypt, by far the most significant military powers in the region. We will continue to consult closely with Israel and with Egypt on strategic matters of mutual interest in our common effort to preserve the peace. In southern Africa 4 years ago, it was clear that time was running out for regimes based on the doctrine of racial supremacy. I’m proud that because we’ve recognized this fact, we could help with the peaceful settlement that this year brought a democratically elected government to power in Zimbabwe. We’ve developed excellent relations with Nigeria and other independent nations on the African Continent. There, as elsewhere, we’ve placed America’s influence on the side of human forces that inevitably shape the future. In Central America, a new and more just social order is emerging. We approve that struggle for justice, and at the same time we affirm our faith that economic reform can best be achieved when human rights are respected. I’m convinced that the people of Central America can find their way forward, leaving old injustices, without submitting to new tyrannies. As Americans, we all have reason to be proud of our new relationship with Panama, a relationship that has turned an isthmus of discord into a zone of peace. I’ve sought to guide us in the spirit of liberty and peace. When we lose touch with that spirit, when we begin to think of our power as an end in itself, when we begin to think that the only source of respect is the threat of force, then we lose the best that is within us. We seek a world in which the rule of law, not the threat of force, is the language of statecraft. We seek a world in which nations put aside the madness of war and nuclear arms races and turn their energies in- 3 See footnote 5, Document 44. 4 Reference is to the Iran-Iraq war which began in September.
