Negotiating Channels
479
with Barzani, half-brother of President Saddam and Chief of the Iraq
Civilian Secret Service.
183.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1
Washington, February 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Conversation of 14 February 1980 [portion marking not declassified]
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
5. We then discussed the Iran finding.2 I showed the list of the
people we were building contacts with and described the idea of a
substitute national front. I pointed out that this clearly did have some
risk for the hostage negotiations but that was the nature of political
action. We had to deal covertly with people who were unacceptable
to the establishment which the government was dealing with overtly.
We can’t turn these people on and off like a spigot. There was recogni-
tion of this. I pointed out we were slowing things down. Though there
was some risk that Bakhtiar was dealing with the Iraqis, we didn’t
think he was ready to move nor would any of them be ready to move
without our energizing it. I pointed out that we needed to keep the
overall effort going, however, because of the danger that a power
vacuum would develop if Bani Sadr could not take hold.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 95M01183R: Policy Files (1977–1981), Box 1, Folder 3: DCI Turner—Eyes Only Files—
Memos and Meetings with Various Officials and Subjects. Secret; Eyes Only. Also sent
to McMahon and Cogan and a copy was sent to the National Intelligence Officer for
Near East and South Asia. The memorandum recounts Turner’s meeting with Carter
that day. According to the President’s Daily Diary, they met from 11:01 until 11:35 a.m.
(Carter Library) In another February 14 memorandum to Carlucci, McMahon, and Cogan,
Turner reported that he had conveyed to Brzezinski on February 13 that his general
purpose in meeting with Carter was “to get a better understanding of the President’s
concept of the covert actions we are presently undertaking and how committed he is
to them.” While discussing specifics, Brzezinski also told Turner that he thought the
chances of the Twin Otter operation gaining approval was very slim but told Turner to
raise the issue with Carter during their meeting. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of
the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 95M01183R: Policy Files (1977–1981), Box 1,
Folder 3: DCI Turner—Eyes Only Files—Memos and Meetings with Various Officials
and Subjects)
2 See Document 110.
