292 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 4. Unfortunately, the minuses are equally real: — While showing flexibility on routine language, the Soviets (not surprisingly) have shown none at all on the major issues. Nazarkin claims to have had new material, but it has proven to be either warmed over past Soviet positions (e.g. ALCMs), or minor amplifications and clarifications of previous Soviet approaches (e.g. mobile ICBM and heavy bomber verification). — A second, more surprising, minus has been Soviet unwillingness to engage on the President’s verification and stability initiative, despite Nazarkin’s apparent personal interest in it and press reports indicating Karpov’s endorsement. Although the Soviets agreed late in the round to discuss the subject in a preliminary way, they confined themselves to asking simple, almost pro forma questions. Some of this reluctance may stem from our inability to say anything about data exchange or early PPM, although I believe it represents another factor—­while they have heard our arguments that the initiative is not meant to delay the negotiations, Nazarkin’s frequent complaints that there is nothing “new” in the U.S. position on mobiles and other issues reflects continuing Soviet suspicion about our motives in proposing the V/S initiative. Lack of Soviet engagement in this area for most of the round is a disappointment. The Impending Ministerial 5. The September meeting between Secretary Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze will be the first full-­blown ministerial since we completed our review. It should thus give us an opportunity to make progress in a number of areas. I have discussed possible topics with Nazarkin (who appears less well informed on ministerial preparations than we are). Together, we have outlined a short-­list of START-­related issues for discussion: verification and stability, ALCM/heavy bomber issues, units of account (i.e. missiles versus launchers), mobile ICBM verification and SLCMs. The first three are U.S. ideas; the last two are Soviet ones. 6. My sense of what we should aim for during the ministerial in each of these areas is: — On verification and stability, to gain Soviet agreement that they will engage on these issues during round XII, with the object of reaching agreement on as many of the measures as possible. Beyond this, it might be possible, at the ministerial, to reach agreements “in principle” with the Soviets on achieving early accords on one or more of the President’s seven measures. — On ALCM/heavy bomber issues, to continue to try to resolve the remaining disagreements. Because there are a number of
