894
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
339.
Message From the Ambassador to Pakistan (Hummel) to the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs
(Coon)1
Islamabad, December 11, 1980, 1025Z
[message number not declassified]. For CIA and State NEA–Coon
From Amb Hummel. Subject: Ambassador’s Conversation With PRC
and Egyptian Ambs Re Arms for Mujahideen.
When I saw Egyptian Amb Scharaff Dec 10 for a return courtesy
call, I raised subject of foreign inputs to Afghan Mujahideen, asking
what he knew of the matter. First elliptically, and then more directly,
he acknowledged that he knew of Egypt’s own assistance and also
something of USG and Saudi activities. He did not talk about the
content or magnitude of the inputs.
He said that in his Mission only he and his MilAtt (whom Scharaff
personally chose, the MilAtt having been a lieutenant under Scharaff
in the army) knew of the inputs. The MilAtt deals directly with Gen
Akhtar on these matters. Scharaff had a favorable impression of Gen
Akhtar. I said on my side only a very few of my officers knew of the
program not including my military attachés. I said that the Egyptian
DCM (Scharaff said this officer was also one of his own choosing
“because personal loyalty is very important”) had been discussing with
foreign diplomats the subject of arms to Mujahideen. I said I proposed
that in our Embassy only the Amb and I should have such discussions.
Scharaff agreed, and indicated he would pass the word for those not
witting on his staff (he said that “some of them may have a general
idea”) not to ask questions or discuss the subject. Comment: My pur-
pose in raising the subject was to make Scharaff aware that his DCM
has been making statements about arms input and probing for
information).
He asked how the U.S. Embassy deals with this subject with the
Pakistanis. I said I have an “Intelligence Liaison Officer” (whom I did
not name) who deals only with Gen Akhtar.
We both agreed that the MFA should not be involved in this subject.
I told him that I had had clear instructions from Pres Zia not to discuss
it with the MFA.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intelligence
Liaison Files, TIN 980643000012, Box 6, Afghanistan 1980. Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified].
