March 1952–February 1953
229
72.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, May 9, 1952.
4349. As result instructions rec’d by Brit Emb which lists questions
in different order from Deptel 2441 May 2,2 we have agreed here to
follow Brit sequence and phraseology of questions.
Before answering questions set, both Embs wish to emphasize that
Iranian situation remains highly uncertain and that it impossible to
assess its course beyond most immediate future. In considering inter-
play of internal Iranian forces and their possible shift with events and
time, we believe that policies of US, UK and USSR toward Iran are at
least as important as internal forces, which in turn react to these foreign
influences. With these observations in mind, there follows estimate of
Iranian situation by two Embassies:
1) Does Mosadeq still have the power to rally public opinion and
dominate any combination of opposition elements?
There no doubt that Mosadeq still has power to keep himself in of-
fice. His prestige has decreased and may go on decreasing; he no longer
has political invulnerability which he enjoyed up to few months ago.
His prestige relatively high, however, particularly in provinces. At
same time so long as he controls Radio Tehran and one or two news-
papers, as well as Government patronage and day-to-day administra-
tion of country, it difficult to see how he can easily be overthrown. As
we have so often pointed out, opposition is uncoordinated and Shah,
who might be rallying point of opposition, is weak and vacillating. Mo-
sadeq’s latest letter to Majlis clearly indicates that he intends
strengthen his grip on political life of country, if necessary by ruthless
exercise his political power. These methods will continue be effective
so long as Natl Front remains united and opposition remains divided.
At moment there no sign any effective combination of opposition
elements.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 29. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Melbourne and Hen-
derson. Repeated to London. The telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no
time of transmission.
2 In telegram 2441 to Tehran, May 2, the Department requested that the Embassy
conduct a joint analysis with the British Embassy of the situation in Iran. Specifically, the
Department, as well as the Foreign Office, requested the Embassies’ appraisals of Mo-
sadeq’s staying power, the general economic and financial situation, whether Mosadeq
could implement necessary, though unpopular policies, whether any successor to Mo-
sadeq stood on the horizon, whether there was a risk of Iran turning toward Russia, and,
finally, whether there existed a risk of financial collapse in Iran. Telegram 2441 is ibid.,
RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.2553/5–252.
