596 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement in enemy rear areas. The other units remain grouped into “combined arms” armies, now composed of motorized rifle and tank divisions. We believe that similar developments have been under way since 1956 throughout the Soviet ground forces. 173. These changes are in line with revised Soviet tactical doctrine which emphasizes the need to supplement standard ground force tac­ tics and training in order to meet the conditions of nuclear warfare. New doctrine stresses firepower, mobility and maneuverability, greater initiative, deeper objectives, intensified reconnaissance and the protec­ tion of individuals and units against the effects of atomic and chemical weapons. It also envisages the tactical use of nuclear weapons in sup­ port of Soviet field force operations. 174. Surface-­to-­surface ballistic missiles with ranges of 100 n.m., 200 nm., and 350 n.m. have probably been available for operational use since 1954. We believe these missile types are intended for mobile use in support of field forces, and for attacking fixed targets such as air bases. Depending upon operational considerations and the availability of nuclear warhead materials, nuclear, HE, or CW warheads could be employed. We have only a small amount of evidence of military units equipped to launch ballistic missiles, and it is possible that at present the Soviet capability to employ them in military operations is quite small. On the other hand, the Soviets have had experience in producing missiles in the 100–350 n.m. range class, probably have an extensive production capacity, and have had ample time to train troops in their use. Very recent evidence indicates that Soviet missile units equipped with 100 n.m. missiles may have been deployed to East Germany. It is possible therefore, that the USSR’s present operational capability in the 100–350 n.m. range class comprises as many as several thousand mis­ siles, although in view of other Soviet requirements for nuclear materi­ als it is unlikely that many would be equipped with nuclear warheads at present. Missiles of these types may now be held in the high com­ mand reserve, but as their availability increases they will probably be organically assigned to field armies. Some 700 n.m. missiles may also be allocated to the support of Soviet field forces. 175. Air support for ground operations is provided mainly by Tactical Aviation, the largest single component of the Soviet air forces. Its units are assigned to the military districts and groups of forces. Tactical Aviation has acquired at least some nuclear delivery capability. It is now equipped (as of 1 October 1958) with jet aircraft estimated to include about 4,700 fighters and 2,800 light bombers. The fighter units are predominantly equipped with FAGOTs and FRESCOs; however, the more advanced FARMER day fighter and FLASHLIGHT all-­weather fighter are also in service. Tactical bomber units are still equipped with the obsolescent BEAGLE, although a few units have received BADGER
