3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
643
phone book to her. As it was, he only spoke with her for a maximum of
ten minutes, since the entire interview only lasted fifteen minutes alto-
gether. We could have been severely criticized for this lapse, and we
are lucky to have escaped with relatively little damage. (C)
I do not recommend further action on this, but we should keep it in
mind for future reference. (C)
219.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, September 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Oral Message re Soviet Brigade in Cuba
Attached is a copy of the “oral message” that Vasev delivered to
Christopher at 4 o’clock this afternoon. The operational paragraph talks
about a “training center” which has existed in Cuba for 17 years and
where Cubans are trained in the use of Soviet equipment provided to
Cuba. On the whole, the message could have been much more polem-
ical than it was, which suggests that the Soviets may be looking for a
way out of this one. (S)
State will be working up a proposed reply, which will be discussed
at the 5 o’clock meeting tomorrow of the Newsom group. This will of
course be taken up during your breakfast on Friday. (S)
Since Dobrynin’s father just died, we do not know when he will be
returning to Washington. According to Shulman, Vance is leaning
toward making our reply himself directly to Vasev and as soon as
possible.2 (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, NSC Institutional Files, Box 82, MPRC009, Soviets in Cuba.
Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.
2 The talking points for a Vance meeting with Dobrynin is Tab 1 of Tarnoff’s Sep-
tember 6 memorandum to Vance. (Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff,
Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 3, President’s Break-
fast—9–12/79) There is no indication if or when this meeting took place.
