762 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII weapon to destroy in the air by conventional anti-aircraft weapons. If the insurgents can work out a way to destroy MI–24s with some regularity, there is the possibility that the Soviets’ effective use of this weapon can be curtailed. 5. The Soviets have been increasingly barbarous in their responses to INI attacks. There are several reports that the Soviets have killed tribal non-combatants and destroyed villages in areas the Soviets see as still hostile. More of this kind of reprisal is beginning to develop and it appears that village destruction, as retaliation, may be Soviet policy. 6. The Soviets appear to be trying to seal the borders of Afghanistan. When Soviet troops are in the border areas, they appear to be relatively successful in this effort. They can only continue to prevent the movement of most supplies across borders, however, by committing additional men so that they have a permanent force in the border areas. Even with an increase in manpower, the total prevention of crossborder infiltration from Iran and Pakistan will be possible. 7. This has been the wettest spring in Afghanistan in twenty years. The rains were to the INI’s advantage. The wet weather was almost immediately followed by hot weather in the plains. Because of the altitude of most of Afghanistan, the dust and the heat, helicopter operations are difficult in the summer months. Thus, because of weather, the Soviets have not been able to fully utilize this equipment which gives them an advantage. The Soviets are behind schedule in their pacification operations, we believe, because of these weather factors and their miscalculation of the intensity of the INI’s resistance. We have not seen signs that the Soviets have decided to discontinue their pacification plans; rather they have repeatedly gone back into several areas on search and destroy missions where resistance has reemerged. 8. There appears to be little likelihood that the Soviets will agree to a political settlement which includes their withdrawal because if they withdraw, the Babrak Karmal regime will fall and chaos will follow. For the Soviet side, there is nothing to be gained by a withdrawal. The situation would not return to pre-1975; the regime would be destroyed; the Soviets would be isolated from any new government; and the new government would probably be a fundamentalist Islamic government. There is no indication that a compromise government acceptable to both the Soviets and the various factions in the INI could be constituted. The positions of the opposing sides are too divergent at this time; therefore, the Soviets’ only course of action is to destroy the INI forces in the field. A military victory in the field will alleviate the need for a political solution. It is not possible for the INI to defeat the Soviets; rather the INI can only hope to conserve their forces’ while continuing to make the Soviet forces’ situation difficult and painful. To date, the Soviets have not taken unacceptable heavy casualties,
