Guatemala 685 and was trying to be helpful to our Latin American friends in the cotton marketing problem. The Department was supporting the adoption of measures and procedures that would avoid the very wide fluctuations in the prices of commoditize produced in Latin America and consequent damage to Latin American economies. Mr. Rubottom said that while it would probably be impossible to avoid some fluctuations in the prices of these commodities, the object would be to hold them within reasonable extremes. Mr. Alejos raised the matter of the 5 3/4% interest rate on the $5 million loan for rubber development recently offered to Guatemalan by the Development Loan Fund. He said that this interest rate was too high and was higher than ordinary commercial loans. It would mean, he said, that the rapper planters would have to pay 8% for funds from this source, and that only the wealthy planters who had other sources of income could afford to pay this interest rate for perhaps seven years before getting any return from their rubber trees. Mr. Rubottom said that he did not believe that 5 3/4% was higher than commercial loans. He said that he personally had strongly supported Guatemala’s application for the rubber loan, and that he could not help but be disappointed at Mr. Alejos’ remarks about the interest rate. Mr. Alejos said that while in Washington he planned to try to negotiate a lower interest rate on this loan with the Development Loan Fond. However, if he was unsuccessful, Guatemala would accept the loan at 5 3/4% "because she could not afford to refuse". Mr. Alejos said one of the primary policies of the Government of President Ydígoras was to help the poorer classes in Guatemala, and better their lot, thus making them less susceptible to communist pressures. This the Government could not, under present economic and financial conditions, afford to do adequately, and outside capital was essential. Mr. Alejos indicated that he was planning to discuss loans with commercial banks in New York, as well as seek development capital in Europe. He emphasized the necessity for the Guatemalan Government to do something soon far the poorer classes in Guatemala, and that these classes could not exist indefinitely on unfulfilled promises. Mr. Alejos referred to the comparatively large amounts of ICA money in the Guatemalan pipeline. He said this was not being spent, and it was doing the country no good as it was. He said that in his opinion there had been an overemphasis on rural development and resettlement in Guatemala, and that this program was now stalled because of lack of suitable land. He said that the Guatemalan Government wanted to have the pipeline funds re-­allocated to other more urgent projects, such as housing, and mentioned that the Guatemalan Congress was about to pass a law authorizing the establishment of an FHA-­type organization.
