ecclesiastical functions and benefices in the territory that Chile occupies
pursuant to the stipulations of the Treaty of Ancon.
“If the Treaty of Ancon placed the territories of Tacna and Arica under the
dominion of the Chilean Constitution and laws, it would seem
unquestionable that the President of the Republic must use there the special
faculty that is bestowed on him by the Constitution of the State in Article
LXXXII, section 13, which says:
“‘13. To exercise the faculties of patronage in respect of churches
and ecclesiastical benefices and persons in conformity with the
law.’”
The Peruvian Minister insisted in reply that the rights asserted were related to the
permanent and definite sovereignty, and belonged to Peru. In accordance with the
position of Chile based on the provision that the territory should be subject to its “laws
and authority,” the Chilean Government demanded that the Peruvian priests secure
permits from the Chilean authorities. The priests declined to request these permits and
the Chilean Government closed the churches. The Peruvian priests, it is alleged, then
“opened oratories which they called private but which were in fact public” and the
Chilean Government ended the controversy by expelling the priests under an order of
February 17, 1910. It appears that later in that year, the Holy See, without appearing to
take sides in the growing controversy, created a Military Vicarship in charge of a
Chilean Chaplain, who was afterwards promoted by the Holy See to the episcopal
dignity.
It is not the province of the Arbitrator to deal with any matter of ecclesiastical polity,
but as the fundamental question seems to have been one of ecclesiastical patronage as
above stated, there is no sufficient reason for concluding that this patronage did not
pertain to the territorial authority. The wisdom or expediency of the action is not before
the Arbitrator.
Peruvian Newspapers. The Peruvian Case charges Chile with suspending and
suppressing Peruvian newspapers but it does not satisfactorily prove this charge. In his
correspondence with the Chilean Foreign Office in 1900–1901, the Peruvian Minister
expressed his apprehension that the Chilean Government would yield to the wishes of
subordinate officials who desired to suppress the voice of the press but he made no
charge that the Government had actually interfered with the press and the Chilean
Government denied that it had done so. There the matter appears to have rested so far
as diplomatic exchanges are concerned until 1918 when the closing of Peruvian
newspapers was listed as one of the features of the so-called Chilenization campaigns
in the circular of the Peruvian Minister of Foreign Affairs of December of that year. No
evidence was adduced in support of this passing reference. In like manner the Chilean
