March–August 1953
679
suggested that he sponsor a military coup he accepted the idea. How-
ever, in giving it more thought he decided that such action as he took
must be within the framework of his constitutional power, hence, not
(repeat not) a coup. Thus, after consultation with an American, not (re-
peat not) an official of the State Department, decided to appoint Gen-
eral Zahedi as Prime Minister in place of Mosadeq. After being assured
that everything was arranged and that there was no (repeat no) possi-
bility of failure, he left Tehran for his Caspian Palace in order to put
Mosadeq off guard and from there three days ago sent letter of appoint-
ment of General Zahedi to Tehran with a trusted Iranian Colonel. The
letter was delivered to General Zahedi and he was to choose the timing
and method for informing Mosadeq. The Shah expected action would
take place that very day. But no (repeat no) action took place, appar-
ently because message arrived too late in day, and no (repeat no) action
took place the following day, apparently because it was a holiday. On
the third day Mosadeq by some means had been alerted and had had
the time to take successful countermeasures so that when the Colonel
arrived at Mosadeq’s house he was himself arrested.
This morning the Shah left his Caspian Palace in a Beechcraft with
a pilot, one Palace official and his Queen and landed in Baghdad at
10:15. King Faisal returned from Jordan at 11:00. This afternoon, the
Shah called upon King Faisal and King Faisal returned the call, offering
hospitality, but lacking the supporting presence of his uncle who is in
Cairo, seemed somewhat overpowered by events.
The Shah said that he will have to issue a statement very soon and
possibly tomorrow. He needs, however, to be informed of the situation
in Tehran and to have advice from his American friend. He will try to
hold off giving out a statement until he gets advice, but the pressure to
issue is great and mounting. He is thinking of saying in his statement
that three days ago he dismissed Prime Minister Mosadeq and ap-
pointed General Zahedi as Prime Minister, taking his action because
Mosadeq had continually violated the constitution. As he himself had
sworn, upon ascending the throne, to respect and uphold the constitu-
tion, he had no (repeat no) choice, but to remove the Prime Minister of a
government acting unconstitutionally. When it was apparent that his
orders were not (repeat not) being followed, he left the country to pre-
vent bloodshed and further damage. He is ready to return when he can
serve the Iranian people and in the meantime prays for the independ-
ence and safety of Iran and that all true Iranians will never allow their
country to fall under the control of the illegal Tudeh Party.
The Shah said that he is utterly at loss to understand why the plan
failed. Trusted Palace officials were completely sure of its succeeding.
The American friend was absolutely confident of its success. When he
had said to the American if it should fail what should he do, the Amer-
