Options Identified
237
2. Japan. Dr. Brzezinski briefly reviewed his meeting with the Japa-
nese Ambassador,2 in which he had noted the rather weak UN state-
ment and efforts by Japanese financial institutions to circumvent our
restrictions on Iran. The Ambassador had agreed, noting that his
country was very selfish, and promised to carry the message back.
The Ambassador said he was certain the Prime Minister wanted to
cooperate. (S)
3. Economic Steps. Mr. Solomon and Mr. Mundheim reported on
their discussions in Europe. Surprisingly, the Swiss appear to be the
most cooperative. They want any action taken to have the appearance
of private actions by banks rather than a formal act at U.S. request,
but they say they are prepared to act and will inform Solomon on
Wednesday. Whatever action the Swiss take will be observed very
quickly in the market and will have a desirable effect. The Germans
were more reluctant, although they raised some “private” counterpro-
posals stopping short of cross default. The Germans are evidently
prepared to instruct their banks to declare default on Iranian loans
within 24 hours of a missed payment, to accept no new deposits from
Iran in currencies other than dollars, and to instruct their oil companies
to insist on payment only in dollars.3 The Italians have many loans to
Iran but few assets; they also have problems with oil deliveries and
their large presence in Iran. They probably will have little effect on the
situation. The British were very hostile to the idea of cross default.
They would prefer to take measures which are directly linked to the
holding of hostages and which can be lifted quickly once the hostages
are released. They fear that cross defaults will get out of hand once
begun and be difficult to unravel. The British tend more toward a
government freeze or blocking of assets to complement our own
actions. They were also not enthusiastic about intervening with the
British courts. The French were neutral and cold.4
All agreed that there was reason to be hopeful. The ground had
been prepared for Vance’s efforts, and if the Swiss in fact begin to
move it could begin a cascade of actions by other European banks. Mr.
Solomon of Treasury and Mr. Cooper of State will follow up on the
2 Memorandum of conversation, December 7. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated
Material, Box 34, Memoranda of Conversation 9/79–12/79)
3 According to a December 10 memorandum from [name not declassified] to Turner,
CIA analysis indicated that the Swiss and the Germans were not as cooperative as the
meeting discussion indicated. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of
Central Intelligence, Job 81M00919R: Executive Registry Subject Files (1976–1979), Box
14, Folder 12: C–372 Iran)
4 Carter wrote in the left margin: “Push hard. We will go public if necessary to
encourage European help.”
