September 1953–December 1954
773
324.
Memorandum From the Chief of Station in Iran ([name not
declassified]) to the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)1
Tehran, September 25, 1953.
1. Qashqai Khans and all Kalantars pledged their word to the
writer 22–23 September that they:
A. Will fight only if attacked.
B. Have “complete confidence” in Gen. Zahedi whom they con-
sider friend of 30 year standing, but do not trust the Shah (because of
past betrayals) and must be prepared to protect themselves against
him.
C. Intend to obey laws, pay taxes, etc.
D. Would, if provided with “face-saving” device, swear (and keep)
allegiance to Gen. Zahedi and the Shah.
E. Will not join any Tudeh plan, nor tolerate Tudeh activity in their
area.
2. Qashqais’ requested that above be passed on to Gen. Zahedi,
and the following proposal be discussed with both Gen. Zahedi and the
Shah:
A. In order to save Qashqai face and free them from word given
Mosadeq to support him to “end” the Shah might pardon Mosadeq, on
Qashqai petition, allowing him retire to village or leave country.
B. On promise such action, Qashqais would bow before the Shah
and give guarantee they would:
(1) support him and government “100 percent.”
(2) have no further dealings with Mosadeq or followers.
(3) themselves (Qashqai Khans) leave Iran if the Shah felt their ab-
sence would benefit Iran.
3. Advised by the writer that he felt above proposal would not be
accepted, Qashqais said they view it as simple face-saving device, but
would welcome any other acceptable proposal under which they could
bow before the Shah without violating word to Mosadeq, whom they
hold in greatest respect. Once they considered their pledge to Mosadeq
fulfilled, Qashqais’ said, they ready assure same degree loyalty to
Zahedi–Shah.
4. In “parliamentary” discussion of 2 and 3 above Qashqai group
(chieftains and gray beards of all 18 Qashqai units and one Boir Ahmad
unit) stated:
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1953–1955, classified
general records, Box 9. Secret; Security Information.
