1977  211
Doctrine. I use this word in the straightforward sense of general-
ized and specific guidance which relates strategic concepts to opera-
tions, to the world of realities and of one’s capabilities.
The initial Defense response to the March 31 memorandum prom-
ised doctrinal change and improvements as a result of PRM 10 (the Force 
Posture Review), but it was a false promise. The PD–18 follow-­on stud-
ies reassert the promise. In truth, it seems that nobody wants to address 
the “escalation control” concept critically. The same is true for LNOs/
RNOs. There is a reluctance to think hard about “deterrence” failing, 
and there is a lot of foggy thinking about how to keep it from failing. 
In a sense, NSDM 242 was a declaratory measure (bluff?) to make the 
Soviets believe we might use “limited” nuclear strikes at lower levels of 
crisis of confrontation. Although we have made progress in developing 
the operational and staffing capability to deliver limited strikes tailored 
to a given situation, we have done nothing to prepare our homeland 
for counter-LNOs. Some who realize this want to return to “minimum 
deterrence,” or “assured destruction.” Others want to build toward 
something like a psychologically meaningful nuclear “superiority.” 
Still others seem to believe that arms control measures will dissolve the 
central dilemmas of our nuclear doctrine.
In this milieu of doctrinal confusion, it has not been easy to clarify 
for the President “where we are and whither we are tending” with our 
strategic capabilities.
5. Accomplishments attained.
The WHEP. It is in better shape than at any time in several years, 
perhaps decades. Particularly WHCA has tightened up its procedures. 
The interface with the NMCC is greatly improved, and it should remain 
so in view of the continual interaction we now have on that front. The 
best indication of the overall WHEP condition came with the IVORY 
ITEM drill in which the President participated. The OPAL III went off 
with precision and speed.
The real capstone in accomplishments has been the President’s 
participation in IVORY ITEM. It has never been done before, and the 
event triggered revisions and changes in the SIOP based on Presidential guid-
ance for the first time in history. Heretofore, the SIOP designers have had to 
imagine what the President would want to see and know in an emergency. The 
thick “Decision Handbook” is the product of years of speculating in J–3 
about the President’s needs without a single clue from a President!
NEACP, OPAL drills, and the Vice President’s role have been clar-
ified (although clarity has exposed yet new things to be done in some 
instances.)
