808
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
programs. Volunteers, if suitably trained and technically supported,
can complement and extend the work of experts. They can fulfill some
of the tasks for which highly paid professionals traditionally have been
recruited.
—Volunteers are motivated and adaptable. They reach into remote
areas, and help link villagers to the available technical assistance.
—Food volunteers can promote technical cooperation among de-
veloping countries (TCDC).
Recommendations:
1. That you endorse the Study Group finding that the Food Corps
concept is viable, subject to agreement on appropriate financial and in-
stitutional arrangements.7
2. Having approved recommendation 1, that you authorize us to
discuss the Study Group’s views with FAO and selected other interna-
tional organizations and governments without making any commit-
ments on behalf of the U.S. Government.8
7 Vance approved this recommendation on March 1.
8 Vance approved this recommendation on March 1. Telegram 2595 from USUN to
multiple diplomatic posts, June 20, 1979, transmitted a Food Corps progress report, high-
lighting the creation of the Corps d’Alimentation du Sahel (CAS) and establishment of a
Tanzanian Food Corps, among other projects. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790282–0364) A June 1979 “Food Corps Progress Report,” prepared by the
Presidential Commission on World Hunger’s Ad Hoc Committee on Food Corps, is in the
Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Box 13, Food Corps.
248.
Editorial Note
Following on the recommendations of the Interagency World
Hunger Working Group (see Document 245), the President’s Special
Assistant for International Health Issues Peter Bourne began preparing
a message to Congress on world hunger. Under a March 17, 1978, cov-
ering memorandum, Bourne circulated to the members of the World
Hunger Working Group a draft message to Congress and a draft
charter and executive order for the proposed Commission on Domestic
and International Hunger and Malnutrition. Bourne’s draft provided a
historical overview of U.S. food aid, summarized current U.S. food
policy, discussed the establishment of the World Hunger Working
Group, and highlighted administration initiatives in the area of food re-
