September 18–December 16, 1978 469 I. In conclusion, Sadat asked that I convey the following to “my dear friend, President Carter”: “if you choose these Israeli claims, either in opposing specific linkage between the Sinai treaty and West Bank/ Gaza arrangements or on priority of obligations or on other demands such as oil, our entire treaty negotiations will collapse. As a friend of yours and of the United States, and not as President of Egypt, I want to say that we will in that case lose everything that has been built together.” He, Sadat, would not agree. He had, in fact, made most of the concessions, the Israelis had made hardly any. “If the Egyptian and American positions differ on these matters, it will not be my fault,” Sadat said. He wanted President Carter to know that he stands by everything that he promised, but President Carter should also know that there are limits to what Sadat can do. He asked that President Carter reconsider the above points as they had been conveyed to him in last night’s telecon and in what he was telling me; otherwise he cannot sign the treaty. 3. After he had finished, I told Sadat that I was sure that President Carter had no desire to offend him. As he knew, President Carter has worked long and hard to try to bridge the gap between the parties (Sadat readily agreed). In making the points that he did to Sadat, President Carter was acting in good faith. I reminded Sadat that he had specifically told President Carter at Camp David that no linkage was necessary between the two framework documents. Sadat intervened to deny this; he claimed that he had never made any such statements; perhaps there was a misunderstanding based on his agreement to separate the two framework documents. I allowed that perhaps there had been a misunderstanding on this point, but I thought Sadat was asking more than the traffic will bear. There is already reference in the preamble and the accompanying note to the general framework document. The Israelis do not like this and contend that it is contrary to Camp David. Nevertheless, President Carter and the Secretary have pressed hard to retain that degree of linkage. To be specific in terms of timetable, is hardly feasible. Sadat insisted that in view of Israeli statements and actions regarding settlements, some specificity in timetable is needed; otherwise Egypt will find itself with a separate peace on its hands. 4. On separating Gaza, I recalled that when VP Mubarak had first mentioned this idea, I had told him that I thought it was a non-starter. The objective should be to get West Bank/Gaza negotiations underway as soon as feasible. Gaza by itself is hardly enough to serve as a model. Sadat insisted that if a Gaza self-governing body is negotiated, this will put pressure on Hussein to join the negotiations. He was not seeking to separate Gaza from the West Bank, but simply to begin with Gaza if circumstances in the West Bank militate against an early negotiation
