906 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI has led to an accelerated rate of progress. One interesting aspect of this has been some useful competition on the Soviet delegation. The recent promotion of Kryuchkov, coupled with completion of his portion of the treaty (conversion or elimination protocol), has made him available as a constructive rival to Masterkov and Zaytsev, two old-­style negotiators who have slowed progress. Both Rick and Nazarkin have used this to stimulate these two to be more reasonable. 3. Recent achievements of note include the following: — An ad ref agreement on test and training launchers—­you have the request for approval. — An ad ref agreement on rapid reload issues—­you have the request for approval. — An ad ref agreement on the verification regime to be applied after exercise dispersals (same procedures should apply after operational dispersals, but the Soviets thus far refuse to address this)—­you have the request for approval. — An ad ref agreement on throw-­weight—­you have the request for approval but it is running into opposition in Moscow, primarily with regard to possible late separation of the shroud on some flights. We assume these are short-­range SLBM flights. — The MOU data exchange is successfully under way. Problems thus far have centered on the Soviets’ claim that the SS–N–18 has only 3 warheads rather than the 7 declared at the 1987 summit, and their claim that they have no former heavy bombers (the aircraft which should be in this category are claimed to be under the maritime exclusion). We are trying to convince them to declare the SS–N–18 at 7 and then reduce to 3 via downloading procedures after entry into force (assumes that downloading by 4 warheads will be allowed). There is no give thus far on their side and this could be a troublesome issue. All the data should be exchanged by the end of next week, with site diagrams and photos to follow later. — Good progress on the heavy bomber/ALCM issues. It appears we may soon have solved nearly all of these, ad ref, except for the pivotal question of whether some OSI of the B–2 can be allowed. Washington should be preparing to face this question soon, presumably during Shevardnadze’s visit. The Soviets consider this the key to many other parts of the package we are putting together and it appears to be a major political issue for them. Even some token OSI here could buy us a lot. Unfortunately, if what they see in the bomb bay of a B–2 is an ALCM-­capable rotary [garble] do anything further on this. It is not clear what they will do, but I would expect some statement for the record protecting their position that non-­nuclear strategic offensive arms could arise in the future and should be controlled. Both sides need to remind themselves that there is not, and never has been, any agreed
