International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
443
stantly reviewed by delegations based on the information of our
notetakers.
We have also agreed that there should be only three people from
each country at the table, although substitutes are possible for indi-
viduals if the delegations so wish. In addition, of course, there would
be Roy Jenkins and a notetaker from each country.
Before the meeting I received a delegation from the International
Conference of Free Trade Unions. I believe Jim Callaghan received the
same group last year. All of our countries were represented in the dele-
gation. The Group gave me a paper, which I have distributed to you.3
The only point I want to make is that the trade unions do not have a
recipe for us either.
Giscard: We should discuss the text of the declaration as we pro-
ceed. The Ministers present can then agree during the next two days on
the parts discussed and then present them to us.
Schmidt: It is a good idea to update the draft as we go along, but
nothing should be published before the end. Who now wants the floor?
Jim Callaghan?
Callaghan: The countries represented here have over 50% of the
world trade. The results of this meeting will be extremely important to
investors confidence, trade unions and money markets. It is important
that we recognize our responsibilities in this situation of many ten-
sions, such as protectionist pressures. Protectionism has been growing,
but we have managed to keep it at bay as a result of the Downing Street
Summit and earlier meetings. Protectionism arises from pessimism,
which is hurting our ability to achieve growth. What we can produce
will be seen to be of great significance.
At Downing Street we joined to make general commitments. We
will not make them this time, but should be more specific. There are
blank spaces in the communique. If each of us can make contributions
to fill those blank spaces, it will have a great impact. The Sherpas4 dem-
onstrated that what we all need is a package approach. Each of us will
be called on to make conclusions that are not popular but will be of
value to the world as a whole. The package approach can reach certain
collective conclusions that we might not reach individually.
The fact of this meeting is important and the results will influence
people. All of us should make individual contributions. The thought of
individual decisions will be greater than the sum of its parts.
3 Not found.
4 The “Sherpas” refer to the representatives of the G–7 heads of government who
were responsible for the planning and preparation for each G–7 Summit; Henry Owen
was the U.S. sherpa during the Carter administration. The term derives from the term
used for guides employed in Himalayan climbing expeditions.
