946 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II borrowing five people not counting me, and if we can hold them together for 2 months, we will have a decision document ready. It has cost the government zero extra dollars and created no permanent new entity in EOP. Examples abound where domestic and international interests converge and compete, e.g., energy (at least 10 agencies), world food production and nutrition (26 agencies). It is impossible to improve on Congressional committee fragmentation unless we establish a means to mediate competing interests and develop objective options for Presidential decision. A case could be made for a Cabinet mechanism which has a separate institutional base free from day-to-day responsibilities, is a renewable entity (e.g., staff temporarily borrowed from affected agencies and rotating EO assignments) and bridges domestic and international interests. P.S.: Peter Bourne is in England for 2 weeks, and I am filling in. 286. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, June 16, 1977 SUBJECT Proposed Joint U.S.–U.S.S.R. Health Cooperation in Selected Third World Countries Background As you know I have been consulting with a number of agencies regarding the subject proposal to obtain their views prior to submitting a recommendation to you. State, AID, HEW, and the Science Advisor were requested to comment on the concept paper2 and offer their views. NASA and Transportation (FAA) were also sent copies for their information in view of their involvement with the Soviet Union in the medical scientific area. They have all commented, and what follows is a summary of their views and my overall analysis. A copy of each agency’s comments is at- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 6/16–30/77. No classification marking. 2 Not found and not further identified.
