“If either High Contracting Party require the presentation of an
authentic document establishing the identity and authority of a
commercial traveler, such document to be issued by the authority
to be designated in each country for the purpose shall be accepted
as satisfactory.”
This phraseology, it will be observed, embodies language found in the
second paragraph of the new proposed Article XI, as found on page 2 of
Department’s Instruction No. 605 of June 30 last, and in paragraph (b) of
Article XI as originally proposed by the Department. It is the thought of the
Foreign Office that inasmuch as the language in said sub-paragraph (b), to
wit: “… this certificate which shall be issued by the authority to be
designated in each country for the purpose … was proposed by the United
States, there can be no objection to it and no difficulty in its application. It
is assumed by the Austrian Government that the United States would
designate Chambers of Commerce or some administrative body conforming
with the European practice. The Austrian Government has no particular
objection to having the certificate mentioned in subparagraph (b) viséed by
the consul of the country in which the applicant proposes to operate, as is
there provided, but prefers to eliminate such a requirement on the ground
that it would multiply the fees. In this connection I direct attention to
Article 13 of the Commercial and Nautical Treaty between Austria and
Great Britain concluded on May 22, 1924, with which the Department is no
doubt familiar, and which is said to be more or less typical of provisions of
this character:
“The stipulations of the present Treaty with regard to the mutual
accord of the treatment of the most favored nation apply
unconditionally to the treatment of commercial travelers and their
samples. The certificates for commercial travelers shall be issued
in the territories of His Britannic Majesty by the Chambers of
Commerce or such Trade Associations and other recognized
Commercial Associations as may be authorized in this behalf. In
Austria these certificates shall be issued by the Police Direction in
Vienna, and by the Political Authority of first instance in other
places.
