800
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
325.
Study Prepared by the Ad Hoc Interagency Group on
Nuclear Proliferation1
Washington, March 9, 1977
This report has been prepared in response to PRM–152 in which
the President has requested recommendations on how the United
States should proceed in its efforts to deter the spread of nuclear
weapons. The material which follows includes an introductory section
setting out the background, broad policy considerations, and principal
issues that the current study is designed to address. This is followed by
a series of sections outlining optional and recommended courses of ac-
tion in the primary areas of current concern.3
[Omitted here is the table of contents.]
I. INTRODUCTION
A. BACKGROUND
For over twenty years the United States has been firmly committed
to preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. The President has
pledged that this Administration would, as a matter of priority, in-
tensify US efforts. The proliferation of nuclear explosive capabilities
to an increasing number of countries threatens to reduce our ability to
control international events and manage crises, expose our nation to
new risks, have a dissolvent effect on our alliances, and enhance the
prospect of terrorist nuclear attacks. Our objective is to prevent this
proliferation.
A successful non-proliferation policy requires attention both to the
political and security motivations that lead states to acquire explosive
devices and to the technical capabilities that make it possible for a state
to develop nuclear explosives with little timely warning. Avoiding pro-
liferation ultimately will depend to a large extent on how successful we
are in reducing motivations to acquire nuclear weapons capability.
These motivations are complex and are not amenable to short-term so-
lutions. They reflect political evaluations of national security interests,
1 Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarma-
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Subject Files Pertaining to Presidential Review Me-
moranda and Directives, MEMCONS with Foreign Officials, and National Security De-
cision and Study Memoranda, May 1963–October 1980, Accession #383–98–0053,
Box 1, Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–15—Nuclear Non-Proliferation Policy,
January–March 1977. Confidential.
2 See Document 317.
3 Detailed analyses of these issues and options were prepared as a basis for this re-
port and are available. [Footnote is in the original.]
