First Responses
183
71.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Iran: Next Steps
Your press conference2 has been enormously helpful in placing the
issue in perspective, in reassuring the U.S. public, in dramatizing your
personal leadership, and in keeping up front the central issue: the
illegal detention of hostages.
In the meantime, we are proceeding with the UN Security Council
debate and with the World Court case. What other steps ought we
contemplate, in the event the Iranians are not accommodating? The
table I gave you a week ago has a complete list of options,3 and I will
not duplicate it here. However, I do want to outline a possible scenario,
in the event that peaceful accommodation proves not to be possible.
Khomeini’s conduct suggests that he may not want any compromise or
peaceful solution. Accordingly, you may wish to consider the following:
1. We obtain a positive Security Council vote—while refusing to
debate Iranian charges as long as our hostages are detained. (Through
the middle of next week—in progress.)
2. We press for a World Court ruling. (Anywhere up to about the
third week of December—in progress.)
3. We go to our allies and ask them to join us in a financial and
economic embargo of Iran—hinting to them that lack of support will
leave us no option but to act militarily, a contingency they much fear.
We should also consult with them at a high level, perhaps through a
Presidential emissary.4
4. We request economic sanctions from the UN under Chapter 7.
5. You appear before the General Assembly to appeal for support
in preserving international norms.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 30, Iran 11/28/79–12/4/79. Top Secret. Carter initialed “C” in the upper
right corner.
2 See footnote 9, Document 67.
3 Not further identified.
4 The attachment on Giscard is relevant. [Footnote is in the original.] Not further
identified. The Summary of Conclusions of the November 30 SCC meeting noted that
“strongly worded letters from the President to the appropriate heads of state requesting
their cooperation in calling Iranian defaults and other economic measures are being
prepared.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Box 23)
