Human Rights 373 cluding human rights activists) here and abroad are likely to be far more responsive to candid discussions of difficulties, dilemmas, and inevitable inconsistencies, than to generalized rhetoric which seems to gloss over our problems. We have done a lot in a short time to inject new considerations into American foreign policy—to move beyond formal relations with other governments to a concern with how our actions affect people living under those governments. We have done so with encouraging success, and with little if any cost. We can expect to learn from experience and do even better next year. But it is in the nature of the problem that our performance will not become “perfect.” We should go on the offensive to convey that message, and especially a sophisticated understanding of the obstacles we confront. 106. Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts1 Washington, January 24, 1978, 0019Z 18330. Subject: Annual Human Rights Reports. Reference: 77, State 282352.2 1. Human rights reports on countries proposed for or receiving security and bilateral economic assistance (see reftel for list of countries) are going through final approval in the Department for submission to Congress by January 31. It is expected that Congress will immediately make these reports public. 2. Prior to submission to Congress, the Department will cable the text of each individual country report to the post concerned. In order to ensure that most government officials see the report before it appears in the press, the Embassy should make it available to the host government upon receipt. None of the versions of the reports sent to posts to date have been finally approved. Posts should be careful to wait for receipt of final versions before taking action to make them available to host governments. 3. Given the short lead time, it is preferable, in the interest of speed, to turn over the report at the post rather than in Washington. In cases, 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 15, Human Rights—Country Evaluation Papers. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Hill on January 23; cleared by Oxman, Tice, Lister, Holly, Martens, Fuerth, and Shurtleff; approved by Schneider. 2 See Document 91.
