500  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
At this point, Smith and Hadley decided this draft looked more 
like a rubric of what was disagreed than a report of what the Ministers 
said. We decided we would be better with no joint statement. Smith 
proposed this to Nazarkin who readily agreed. Bartholomew and 
Karpov approved the decision.
Burt
77.	
Editorial Note
On February 10, 1990, Secretary of State James Baker flew from 
Moscow to Sofia, where he met with Bulgarian officials and opposition 
leaders. He flew to Bucharest on February 11, departing that evening 
for Ottawa to attend the Open Skies Ministerial Conference of North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization and Warsaw Pact Foreign Ministers. The 
Secretary returned to Washington on February 13.
From Sofia, in telegram SECTO 1018 to the Department of State, 
February 10, the Secretary’s Delegation transmitted to Washington the 
text of the February 10 U.S.-Soviet Ministerial, which included the fol-
lowing language on the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks:
“The Secretary and the Foreign Minister held a through exchange 
of views on arms control and disarmament issues. With respect to the 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, 
they reaffirmed their common objective of resolving all major issues 
by the June Summit in order to allow signature of the treaty by the 
end of the year. To further this goal, the sides reached agreement or 
exchanged new proposals in a number of areas.
“On air-­launched cruise missiles, the sides made substantial prog-
ress on a package approach, agreeing on all remaining issues with the 
exception of the range threshold.
“The sides also made good progress on search-­launched cruise mis-
siles. The sides agreed that such missiles would be dealt with by paral-
lel, politically binding declarations for the duration of the START treaty. 
The Secretary and the Foreign Minister agreed that the remaining issues 
involving SLCMs would be addressed at the negotiations in Geneva.
“The sides agreed that there would be numerical limits on non-­
deployed ballistic missiles and the warheads attributable to them for 
all ICBMs of a type that has been flight-­tested from a mobile launcher. 
Other non-­deployed ballistic missiles, non-­deployed cruise missiles and 
non-­deployed heavy bomber weapons will not be subject to numerical
