3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
119
naive. We were suggesting that the guiding principle at these talks be
parity of manpower in the area, in other words, equality; equality had
been the guiding principle in the strategic arms limitation talks from
the very beginning, and should also be the guiding principle at the
Vienna talks on conventional arms in Central Europe. According to our
estimates, there was currently a difference of more than 150,000 in the
land forces of the two sides in Central Europe. We believed that there
should be an exchange of data to ascertain if our estimates were correct.
If they were correct, of if they needed correction, then necessary steps
could be taken to reduce manpower to equal numbers for both sides.
The Secretary also wanted to note with satisfaction that progress
had been made on some matters, and a basis laid for further work
which would advance our common interests in some areas. As he had
already said, he looked forward to meeting Mr. Gromyko in Geneva to
discuss how to proceed and work in order to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. We had common interests and a common re-
sponsibility as co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference to bring about
reconvening of that conference and to see to it that the Geneva Confer-
ence produced a solution that would give a just and lasting peace to
this troubled area.
The Secretary noted that Brezhnev had asked two questions, the
first concerning non-transfer and non-circumvention, and the second
concerning forward-based systems. As for non-transfer and non-
circumvention, the Secretary had already said, as Brezhnev knew, that
this was one of the remaining issues to be resolved at the strategic arms
talks in Geneva. That was one of the issues that could be addressed
once the basic provisions of the new agreement had been determined.
As for forward based systems, it was our view that they were not an ap-
propriate subject for SALT, because these negotiations dealt with inter-
continental ballistic missile launchers, submarine-launched ballistic
missile launchers, and heavy bombers. These negotiations did not in-
volve our forward-based systems any more than they involved Soviet
medium-range ballistic missiles or intermediate range ballistic missiles,
such as the SS–20. If forward-based systems were to be included in the
strategic arms talks, then obviously the Backfire bomber would also be
covered, even though not deployed for intercontinental ranges. We be-
lieved that we should stick to our task, i.e., control strategic interconti-
nental nuclear weapons, and not theater weapons. Finally, the Secre-
tary would point out that the Vladivostok Aide-Memoire contained no
mention of forward-based systems.
Brezhnev said that in his remarks he had referred to many ques-
tions that had been the subject of discussion. He did not think there was
any need to repeat what had already been said. He only wanted to say
that he had listened very attentively to what the Secretary had said, and
