966  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
probably but not definitely means they can accept our position on B–1 
and B–2 if we agree to include Midgetman in PPCM.)
3. The letter pleads again for a meeting between Bartholomew and 
Obukhov January 17–18, and describes this as the position of the Soviet 
leadership. It does not propose a place for the meeting. (Obukhov 
delivered a copy of the letter to Jack Matlock in Moscow this morn-
ing and took the opportunity to press Jack for a response ASAP to the 
Soviet proposal to hold a meeting between Bartholomew and Obukhov 
in Geneva next week. You recall that several days ago Obukhov told 
Jack that their preference was to meet in Geneva, but if necessary he is 
prepared to come to Washington.)
4. I will want to talk to you first thing Monday3 about how to 
respond. If we decide to go forward. I don’t in any event see how we 
could be ready before the first of the week after next, i.e. January 21 at 
the earliest. I understand this is your view as well. I plan no further 
action until we have talked.
5. January 12, 1991, Moscow
Dear James,
– I consider our continued personal exchanges—­through letters 
and by telephone—­on START issues after Houston and Washington to 
be extremely useful. They help not only focus on and keep in the fore-
front what matters most—­the resolve of our leaders to sign the START 
treaty at their meeting in Moscow on February 11–13, but also to expe-
ditiously deal with those concerns that are inevitably arising on both 
sides in Geneva at the level of delegations as the Houston package is 
being consummated.
– It is certainly encouraging that you share our understanding 
of the Houston agreements, which was spelled out in my letter dated 
December 30. Thus, the Houston package has begun to work in all its 
major aspects, and the task now at hand is that this effort to translate its 
constituent provisions into a treaty text proceed steadily and at a good 
pace in all areas, without stalling or exemptions.
– In this connection, I consider your reiteration of the position on 
heavy ICBM silo launchers that you and I agreed upon in Houston 
and Washington to be of fundamental importance. You certainly 
noted that we had tried to take into account to the maximum extent 
possible your concerns in this matter which I hope is now definitively 
closed.
– Now, about the interpretive differences that have emerged. One 
shouldn’t perhaps overdramatize them and still less, attempt to portray 
3 January 14.
