278 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 fully solvent; nevertheless, he believed that by that time both people of Iran and peoples of other friendly countries wld have more reason to trust in future Iran than they have at present. He intended to move just as fast as conditions wld permit in solving oil problems on reasonable fair basis. Qavam added that situation was extremely urgent and he hoped have some kind indication US Govt attitude within next two or three days. 7. It was agreed between Primin and myself that his request for help wld be maintained for time being in complete secrecy. He said, however, that he expected inform Shah of details our conversation. Henderson 90. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1 London, July 19, 1952, 4 p.m. 358. In continued absence Eden and Strang, I saw Makins and Bowker this morning and made points contained Deptel 431, July 18.2 Their tentative reactions, which are being sent to Eden in country and to which they hope have his reaction later today, are as fols: FonOff agrees in principle it wld be desirable extend finan assistance Qavam and that US shld furnish it. They feel strongly, however, that amt of aid shld be minimum necessary to enable Qavam meet his immed finan difficulties. They feel it is desirable that aid be tied to oil settlement, but stress that it shld be connected only in genl way and not (rpt not) with Iran acceptance any specific proposals. I said I did not (rpt not) think there was any difference between us on either of foregoing points. Dept had stressed in its instrs to me that only question at issue is extending small amt of aid as interim stop-gap measure without promise any more will be forthcoming. Re tying aid to oil settlement, I said this wld be done only in genl way by making it 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.10/7–1952. Top Secret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to Tehran. Received at 1:45 p.m. 2 The reference to telegram 431 is in error. The correct reference should be to telegram 421, July 18, in which Acheson suggested to the Embassy in London that “you also emphasize to Fonoff we consider it essential Brit Govt be prepared reopen negots early date and have ready proposals likely be acceptable to new Iran Cabinet.” (Ibid.)
