Yugoslavia
997
that such a negative process is under way. The leadership understands
the gravity of the economic situation; has taken politically unpopular
steps to turn the situation around; and has had some initial if far from
adequate successes in this regards.
12. Second, a shift to a softer Soviet tactical line. Since Tito’s death,
the Soviets have waged something of a “friendship offensive” toward
Yugoslavia, generally holding their tongue in the face of Yugoslav
actions (as the December 12 GOY announcement on Poland) and press
coverage (as of Afghan events) which Moscow must find offensive.
Should Moscow revive the polemics the Yugoslav leaders would imme-
diately fear this would presage an attempt by Moscow to translate
Yugoslavia’s increased trade and energy vulnerability into political
gain. This fear of the potential consequences of growing trade with the
East has become a pervasive element in the GOY leader’s thinking.
For some, overt Soviet pressure, should it occur, could change the
calculation of the balance of risk and some fence-straddlers might
conclude that more accommodation and tighter internal controls pose
fewer risks than further political and economic experimentation.
13. Third, a degeneration of the present more open climate into a
nationalistic free-for-all or into a frontal attack on Party prerogatives
or power. Either development could well trigger a reaction from the
military, as in the 1971–72 “nationalist” crisis when the military strongly
urged (and enabled) Tito to crack down on a situation that seemed to
be getting out of control. Either a nationalist free-for-all or a too-far,
too-fast erosion of Party prerogatives could undercut those arguing
that post-Tito Yugoslavia can only find the right solutions, and public
support for them, through a process of more open debate, criticism,
and decision-making. This is the least clear area of all: the outcome
will hinge on the ability of contending groups to handle their differ-
ences during a period of economic sacrifice and international tension
with political maturity and good sense. So far the post-Tito record has
been encouraging on this score.
14. In short, some eight months after Tito’s death and a year after
his taking ill, Yugoslavia is entering 1981 with a more open political
climate, with its leadership and its commitment to Yugoslav independ-
ence and non-alignment intact, with its course set for continuity and
cautious change, and with some problems on the way to resolution
but many more to be worked out. Economic problems at home, tensions
abroad, and liberalizing pressures continue to weigh upon the leader-
ship, inching it toward a limited kind of pluralism, stirring conservative
counterpressures, and forcing the pace of change faster than many in
the leadership, and particularly in the Party, would like.
15. Thus, while the going will not be easy and the prospect is for
more rather than less political turbulence as power relationships are
