954
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
events for “we do not wish to see the movement split.” The NAM must
focus on reestablishing respect for the vital principles of international
conduct. This is still being discussed in Belgrade. It was with Sekou
Toure and will be with the Iraqis and also Kaunda.
25. President Kolisevski also recalled that in his last letter to Brezh-
nev President Tito called for a withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghan-
istan and appealed to him to let the Afghan people settle their own
affairs according to their own wishes and traditions. Kolisevski said
this also had been stated by the Yugoslavs publicly. This position is
very much appreciated, Vice President Mondale said.
26. He then thanked President Kolisevski for the time he had taken
during a day with such a heavy schedule. Their discussion was a most
useful opportunity to review the U.S. commitment to a strong and
friendly relationship, and to say again that the U.S. is prepared to
assist, as and if the Yugoslavs find appropriate.
27. President Kolisevski asked Vice President Mondale to convey
on behalf of all the peoples of Yugoslavia best wishes to President
Carter “for his own success and for the well being of your country.”
Eagleburger
291.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Presidential Determination to Permit IMET for Yugoslavia (U)
Ed Muskie recommends that you sign a determination permitting
Yugoslav officers to study in the United States under the International
Military Education and Training program (Tab A).2 OMB, Defense, and
ACDA concur. (U)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 87, Yugoslavia: 6/80–1/81. Confidential. Sent for action. A draft of this memo-
randum was forwarded to Brzezinski on June 6 by Kimmitt. Carter initialed the memoran-
dum, indicating he saw it.
2 Attached but not printed at Tab A is a May 30 memorandum from Muskie to
Carter, with the recommendation that Carter approve the use of funds for two IMET
positions for Yugoslavian officers.
