474
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
selves in this joint statement, requesting confirmation in writing would
be undiplomatic and unnecessary.
—The U.S. proposals on the ceremony for transfer of the Crown
call for participation of representatives of Hungarian religious groups,
including the Cardinal, and the Hungarian government has accepted
these proposals. Ambassador Kaiser met with Cardinal Lekai just a
few days ago and confirmed to him our desire that he participate in
the ceremony and he affirmed his willingness and intention to do so
(see report of this meeting at Tab B).5 The Vatican has informed the
Cardinal that it considers the return of the Crown to be a bilateral affair
between the U.S. and Hungary and expressed its disinterestedness and
neutrality on the question. While Lekai expressed his willingness to
issue a statement or write an article in a Hungarian Catholic publication
welcoming the return of the Crown, it is unlikely that we will get any
kind of public statement from the Vatican or the American Catholic
Conference (see Ambassador Kaiser’s cable about approaching the Vati-
can for a statement at Tab C).6
Vance reportedly plans to propose that we fix January 7th as the
date for the return of the Crown and request concurrence from the
Hungarian government. Once the date has been agreed upon, a public
announcement should be issued. The arguments for this course are:
(1) to prevent public speculation that the President has reconsidered
his decision to return the Crown; (2) to help Congressmen Zablocki
and Hamilton who are being pressed by Congresswoman Oakar to
bring to a vote her resolution requiring Congressional approval of any
decision to return the Crown. If the President’s decision is announced,
they can argue that it is too late for Congressional action.
I agree with this position. The public announcement that the Crown
will be returned on a specific date will close the issue. The longer we
postpone an announcement of the date, the more it will encourage
opposition on the grounds that the White House is undecided or has
backtracked because of public reaction. This is the time for a bold
step—we should not return the Crown timidly.
5 Tab B is telegram 4161 from Budapest, November 30. See footnote 5, Document 156.
6 Tab C is telegram 4162 from Budapest, November 30. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box
14, Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen: 12/77)
