Great Britain. We cannot determine if that parity is being attained or
maintained unless definite comparisons are made. No criticism can justly lie
against us or our motives if we strive towards a position definitely laid
down in the treaty.
6. The table given in paragraph 4 above shows that at present there is no
parity of the British and American fleets but rather a very great superiority
of the British capital-ship fleet at vital and presumably decisive ranges. It is
true that at ranges in excess of 25,000 yards advantage lies at present with
American ships but the highest ranges are not decisive ranges. The
consensus of present opinion is that decisive ranges in favorable weather
are the very ranges where our inferiority is greatest, viz., between 20,000
and 25,000 yards. This fact makes the gun-elevation question one of
commanding importance to the Navy.
7. Joined to the present British superiority of range of guns is a superiority
in speed of their capital ships which enables the British fleet in comparison
with our own to make full use of their superiority of range of guns. Nothing
that we could do would bring our ships to an equality of speed with British
ships so that should the unhappy event arise of the two fleets being engaged
in battle under present conditions, the British fleet would by its superior
speed be able to choose the range at which it would fight. Sound tactics
would, of course, dictate the very ranges at which we are weakest, that is,
the ranges between 20,000 and 25,000 yards. Illustration of the use of this
advantage is to be had in the Battle of the Falkland Islands. Admiral Sturdee
had under his command ships of speed superior to the speed of the German
squadron under Von Spee. Admiral Sturdee deliberately chose to fight the
German squadron at so great a range that the German fire was ineffective
against the British ships. These sound tactics on Admiral Sturdee’s part
enabled him to achieve victory with practically no injury to the personnel or
ships under his command. I do not desire that the American Navy should
ever be placed in a position at all corresponding to that of the German
squadron at Falkland Islands.
8. I might elaborate farther upon the disadvantages under which our fleet
suffers at present but will not do so. Such further information as you may
desire on this subject will be gladly furnished.
