Venezuela 1203 VE–10. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, May 20, 1958.1  Washington, May 20, 1958. SUBJECT Political and Economic Factors in U.S. Relations with Venezuela PARTICIPANTS Dr. Hector Santaella, Venezuelan Ambassador Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr. Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Mr. C. E. Bartoh, Venezuelan Desk Officer Dr. Santaella made a farewell call this afternoon on Mr. Rubottom, who congratulated him on his important new position as Secretary of the Junta of Government, but expressed regret that he was leaving Washington. The Ambassador said he was sorry to leave, especially on such short notice, but found comfort in the knowledge that he would have an opportunity in his new position to continue to work for even closer relations with the United States, which he said he understands and admires very much. Although Dr. Santaella thought perhaps he should call on President Eisenhower before leaving, he said he would be guided by Mr. Rubottom’s advice. Mr. Rubottom told him he didn’t think a call on the President would be necessary, especially since the Ambassador was calling on the Vice President later today and on the Secretary tomorrow. Moreover, on such short notice it would probably not be possible to arrange an appointment with the President. The Ambassador said in that case he thought he might simply write a letter to the President, and Mr. Rubottom agreed that that would be satisfactory. Dr. Santaella said he had talked by telephone with President Larrazábal and other members of the Junta of Government, as well as with representatives of the Armed Forces and political leaders. He had been assured of their confidence and support in his new position; he would not have agreed to accept the appointment if such support had not been forthcoming. He said he is not a member of any organized political party. Commenting briefly on the political situation, the Ambassador expressed confidence that, despite temporary setbacks, Venezuela would attain an orderly, democratic form of government. He pointed out that an electoral law, drafted by the multi-­partisan Electoral Law Commission, is to be promulgated on May 23, at which time several cabinet changes will be announced. It looked to him as though 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Venezuela 1958.” Confidential. Drafted by Bartch on May 29. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
