1957 1351 is that it calls into question whether agreements between us are to be mere forms and words or whether they to have concrete substance. It calls into question whether we to give appearance by form of words of having resolved questions between us—or whether we to resolve them. Thus first question we called on to deal with been resolved with respect Chinese in my country. It had not been resolved with respect Americans imprisoned in Wang’s country; and it would not be resolved until they permitted to return in accordance agreement entered into 1955. 18. Wang replied I had quoted him as having said in past that what­ ever agreement we entered into should be advantageous to both sides. I had indicated having accepted this opinion. However when it came to concrete facts, I had always demonstrated attitude entirely ignor­ ing interests his side, while simply seeking advantage my own side. This particularly conspicuous respect Chinese now in U.S. prisons for offenses. This group Chinese in prison in U.S. very big yet my side so far failed give his side complete full list their names. In dealing with ques­ tion Chinese in U.S., my side only thus far released one of these people and allowed him return China. My side not taken steps with respect remaining prisoners. My authorities even conducted illegal screening process on them against their will. Wang’s side could not believe anyone in prison could freely express his choice as to where he wished to go. 19. Wang continued he glad be informed by me concerning desire among American people improve relations between two countries. However American officials not only dared not openly make remarks expressing such desire but had deliberately insulted and made false charges against China. Wang’s side agreed that improvement rela­ tions between two countries urgent task we called upon to serve. They acknowledged question civilians had been one part of differences between us. Insofar as question civilians concerned his side already entered into Agreed Announcement and up to two sides to carry out this agreement faithfully. Frankly he had to make it clear that while his government, his side, willing continue strive for improvement relations between two countries, his government could not be made to renounce its sovereignty. What was more, question civilians was far from being sole issue between us. In addition to this question there were other questions such as Foreign Ministers Conference, removal of embargo against his country and reestablishment of peoples contacts and cul­ tural exchange between two countries. All these questions and maybe others urgently call for solution between us. If I were going to entangle these talks by sticking to question civilians while refusing take steps resolve other important questions, he could only interpret this as delib­ erate attempt prevent progress our talks by using question civilians as pretext. This certainly cannot result in any benefit to our talks. 20. I replied tangling had been done by his side. If his side wanted to resolve first question civilians, could have done so August 2, 1955 by
