1022
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
higher in those countries where social, economic and cultural factors
encourage population growth. For example, in Bangladesh, where
rural societies are male-dominated, village systems are weak, adequate
numbers of administrators are lacking, and rural health and educa-
tional systems are sadly deficient, costs per user are almost certain to be
higher than in a country such as Thailand, where basic social, economic
and cultural factors are more favorable. Hence, any performance evalu-
ation system must take these essential factors into consideration in
judging cost-effectiveness.
V. Critique
The purpose of this Section is to evaluate the overall effectiveness
of a country’s population program, bearing in mind the socio-economic
factors affecting the program, the leadership commitment to the pro-
gram, the encouragement, especially through person-to-person con-
tacts, of smaller families and the supply and delivery of family plan-
ning services. To the extent possible, quantitative estimates are made of
the effect of these factors in reducing fertility. The critique also contains
recommendations for program action and emphasis.
In order to make this overall assessment of program effectiveness,
additional data must be obtained, through such means as better vital
registration systems, sample surveys, and research projects. There is
also the need, especially in key countries, for more sophisticated multi-
variate studies to quantify, as far as possible, the impact of socio-
economic variables on population growth and identify more accurately
the degree to which a nation’s family planning program is responsible
for lowering fertility rates.
Global Policy and Program Analysis
These individual country analyses are aggregated into an overall
examination of the global effort to reduce population growth. This
global summary includes an evaluation of the efforts of recipient na-
tions, the U.S., other donor countries, and multilateral and private or-
ganizations. Total funding for population programs on a regional and
global basis is measured against special priorities and objectives which
have been established and, where possible, progress toward specific
targets is estimated.
The performance evaluations, as improved by new data and
analysis, are applied on a regional and global basis to guide decision-
makers with respect to the performance of US-funded bilateral, multi-
lateral, and private population assistance. The global summary will in-
clude a projection of demographic factors and estimated impacts of al-
ternative funding and program strategies.
