Eastern Europe Region the possibility of occasional eruptions when East European hopes and Soviet fears collide. 13. The development of East-West trade and appropriate Western technology transfers has enormous relevance and appeal to the coming educated generation of East Europeans. In time, expansion of East- West economic relations could lead to shifts in trade patterns and to some reduction of East European economic dependency on Moscow; this has occurred to some extent already in Romania and Poland. On the other hand, all East European states remain fundamentally dependent on the USSR for markets and for the supply of oil (except Romania) and other raw materials. However tight the future Soviet economic and petroleum pinch, Moscow is unlikely to permit this basic political reality to change. Finally, East European indebtedness and bleak export prospects pose serious obstacles to sustained Western commercial credits, and Western countries have other high priority demands on their limited resources. 14. Soviet leaders are determined to maintain overall control in East European politics, through military force if necessary. But they also seek to fend off East European pressures for change with partial concessions. How this balance evolves could be a major factor for Europe in the 1980’s. II. East European Foreign Policies 15. Against the above analysis, this section describes the endeavors of East European states to delineate nationally-based foreign policies. Those efforts occur primarily in their private bilateral consultations with Moscow prior to multilateral Warsaw Pact and CEMA conferences, where the Soviets expect and generally obtain obeisance. The same approach is used concerning East-West conferences, such as MBFR and CSCE, where the limited East European influence must be exercised in private bilateral meetings with the Russians. 16. With the exception of Yugoslavia, Albania and Romania, Soviet control over East European foreign policy clearly is the norm. Nonetheless, there are some variations relating to particular East European national concerns. YUGOSLAVIA 17. When considering foreign policy autonomy in Eastern Europe, Yugoslavia must immediately be put into a category separate from the Warsaw Pact member countries. Yugoslavia’s foreign policy is made exclusively in Belgrade. Non-alignment, which sets Yugoslavia apart from both the major alliance systems in Europe, remains the key pillar of Yugoslav foreign policy. On East-West issues, including CSCE, Yugoslavia seeks to play a moderating role and to maintain an arms-length
