First Responses advance was near zero even if they did not know where the operation was going to be conducted. Tehran cannot easily be reached from the sea. It would probably require staging from bases in either Saudi Arabia or Turkey. Marine helicopters are not equipped to be refueled in the air, therefore, it would be necessary to use Air Force helicopters. Six of these are in Britain, others are in United States and Okinawa, which would require a long movement in order to bring them into position. This would effectively ruin any chance for a lengthy practice session. They were currently examining ways in which helicopters could be moved into position without in any way connecting it with this operation such as an exercise in the Mediterranean. If an operation were conducted during daylight hours, they would probably have to confront the Iranian air force. It was estimated that fifty percent of the Iranian air force could be airborne, if they discovered the helicopters in the air or sighted the C–130s. The area is 500 miles from the Persian Gulf so it would greatly stretch the ability of carrier based aircraft to provide air cover. It might be possible to accomplish that from Turkey or Dhahran. Secretary Vance noted that the Turks would probably turn us down. General Jones added that any advance tip-off would permit them to get the hostages out of the area to unknown locations. Secretary Vance said that he could not see how we could get in without giving them time to kill the hostages. The Vice President noted that they would probably see the helicopters coming perhaps an hour before they arrived. General Jones said that even under the very best of circumstances the chances were great that there would be some casualties. Dr. Brzezinski said that casualties are to be expected in this kind of a situation. He noted that this group is not organized and communications are not good. Their warning system might not function. There was a good chance of conducting the operation with surprise. Secretary Brown said that they might very well have strategic warning if the planes landed in Saudi Arabia. It would mean many hours to organize a staging operation from there. Moreover, it was a five hour flight time from there to Tehran. The President wondered whether an attack team could go in with empty spaces in the helicopter to carry out some hostages. Secretary Brown said that they needed to put a great number of people in, in order to be able to hold the airfield. General Jones noted that a helicopter holds twenty-five persons. There is a 120 man team to go in and only 3 helicopters could land at once. The operation was a very high risk. It would require up to one to two hours on the ground inside the compound if everything worked
