798
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
sents a welcome step.30 However, in the absence of continuous surveil-
lance and commitment on this matter over the next year, the Congres-
sionally mandated minimum amounts of wheat and feedgrains re-
quired to be resealed under this program will be difficult to meet. With
the time being propitious for the placing of farmer-held stocks under
government loans, with world demand and prices capable of rising in
the future, and with world food security still plaguing many devel-
oping countries, now is the time to act.
Many reasons are put forth for establishing grain reserves: to pro-
vide reasonable price stability for U.S. farmers and consumers; to take
care of natural disasters such as the Sahel famine; to provide food secu-
rity for developing countries that are trying to improve agricultural
production; and to reduce price fluctuations in the world market.
While all of these purposes may not be fulfilled by a single reserve
system, it does not seem necessary to wait for a reconciliation of all of
them before taking action on any one of them. Establishing food re-
serves at both national and international levels, with either centralized
or decentralized management, should be included in our overall plan.
The United States now faces large surpluses in major grains and
announced a set-aside of up to 20 percent of U.S. acreage planted for
wheat and of various other percentages for feed grains. The 35 million
metric tons of wheat alone which the United States will carry over into
the next crop year represents roughly half of the total world wheat
trade, more than one-third of the world’s carryover, and about 9 per-
cent of the world’s consumption. The United States clearly has the ca-
pacity and should play a leading role in establishing and maintaining
two reserves: a food-security reserve and a reserve for stabilization of
the international grain market.
Recommendations
• Establish a U.S. food security reserve of up to six million tons. A
draft Administration bill is already under review by the Food and Agri-
culture Policy Committee. A request by the President for a draft bill on
his desk by March 1st will ensure no further delay.
30 Section 1101 of the Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 (P.L. 95–113) amended the
Agricultural Act of 1949 to add a grain reserve program. Under this program, farmers
would receive loans from the Federal government in exchange for withholding a portion
of their crop from the market. In addition, farmers would agree to store wheat and feed-
grains in Federally-financed grain storage facilities for at least 3 years or until prices im-
proved, whereupon the grains would be sold or turned over to the USDA as payment in
kind. In early February 1978, Bergland had urged the President to approve an increase in
the storage fee from $.20 to $.25 a bushel and a request to feed-grain farmers to plant 10
percent fewer acres. (“A Farm Program for All Seasons,” The New York Times, February 1,
1978, p. A–22 and “U.S. Takes Further Steps to Reduce Grain Brought to ’78 Market, Help
Boost Prices,” The Wall Street Journal, February 7, 1978, p. 38)
