386  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
otherwise, internal security requirements shall not be the basis for mili-
tary assistance programs to American Republics. Third, pursuant to the 
Sections 141 and 142(a) of the Act, prior to the furnishing of equipment 
or materials, the recipient nation must have agreed to the undertakings 
which are specified by Section 142(a) of the Act and normally included 
in the conventional military assistance agreement. Fourth, under 
Section 511(c) of the Act, any nation receiving military equipment or 
materials on a grant basis must make arrangements for the return to 
the United States of any such equipment and materials when no longer 
required for the purposes for which furnished.
The first condition has been satisfied. In the President’s message on 
the Mutual Security program of February 19. 1958,4 the necessary find-
ings were confirmed as to the countries for which military assistance 
was then proposed or had been furnished, Colombia being among such 
countries.
The second condition requires a Presidential determination under 
Section 105(b)(4) and 451(a) of the Act to permit the proposed program. 
The military assistance proposed to be furnished would be without ref-
erence assistance to Western Hemisphere defense missions and would 
strengthen the internal security capability of the Colombian armed 
forces and be used for internal security purposes. Therefore, it is con-
sidered necessary as to the equipment and the materials element of 
the proposed assistance only to request that the President waive the 
first of the two above-mentioned requirements of Section 105(b)(4) of 
the Act and make the determination required by the third sentence of 
Section 105(b)(4). The first sentence of Section 105(b)(4) is not applicable 
to assistance in the form of training or other services, and, as to train-
ing, the function of making the determination required by the third sen-
tence of Section 105(b)(4) has been delegated to the Secretary of State.
The third and fourth conditions have been satisfied also by a mili-
tary assistance agreement effected by an exchange of notes on April 17, 
1952.5 However, this military assistance agreement does not apply 
to the assistance herein proposed, namely, the furnishing of military 
equipment, materials and services to assist Colombia to maintain its 
internal security without reference to Western hemisphere defense mis-
sions. Therefore, a further agreement will be sought with Colombia to 
satisfy the conditions required by Sections 141 (second sentence), 142(a) 
and 511(c) of the Act with respect to the assistance program herein 
proposed.
4 For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958 (Washington: 
Government Printing Office, 1959), pp. 160–168.
5 For text of the agreement, see 3 UST (pt. 3) 3690.
