Afghanistan
373
The President noted that Chapter VI says that an accused state has
no vote, but that there were also no punitive actions which could be
taken under Chapter VI. He wondered whether we shouldn’t go to
the General Assembly as well. The Deputy Secretary of State com-
mented that our allies say that this is a Chapter VII, Article 39 issue—
a threat to the peace, not a simple dispute among countries.5
The President asked what we would get out of a Security Council
session in view of the possibility of a Soviet veto. Mr. Christopher said
that the Soviets would pay a high political price for a veto. We could
then go to the General Assembly. The Secretary of State said that we
could go to both at the same time. The President said that he also
thought of that possibility. He said the Czech example was disappoint-
ing because after a while it was only possible to get NATO support
for our opposition to the Soviet invasion.
The Secretary of Defense said that we are likely to have the same
experience in this instance. We will not get sanctions nor military
action, but we will get a backdrop for individual actions taken by the
allied groups set up by Mr. Christopher.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what forum would be best for a punitive
public relations exercise. He thought that probably the General Assem-
bly, but that would depend on what the members are prepared to do.
In the Security Council, he noted, we can already tell who will support
strong action and who will equivocate. The Secretary of State was of
the opinion that Bangladesh will not vote against the Soviets in the
final analysis.
The Secretary of Defense repeated that, nonetheless, the Security
Council debate would provide a positive backdrop for actions to be
developed in the groups set up by Warren Christopher.
The Secretary of State said that there was a strong desire by Western
nations to take this issue to the Security Council. We do not want to
be in a position of blocking this effort. The question is whether we
should also go to the General Assembly while it is still in session.
The President said his preference would be to go to both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. We should go as far as we can
and try to get others to join us. He concluded by saying he was willing
5 Article 39, Chapter VII of the UN Charter, “Action With Respect to Threats to
Peace, Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of Aggression,” reads: “The Security Council
shall determine the existence of any threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of
aggression and shall make recommendations, or decide what measures shall be taken
in accordance with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international peace and
security.” Article 41 discusses the non-military measures UN members may take in
protest against aggression as defined in Article 39. Article 42 lists military measures UN
members may take if the non-military measures described in Article 41 prove inadequate.
