286 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Lt Gen Scowcroft: It’s not easy for me to say how to make a trade in numbers because they are two very different kinds of systems. Marshal Akhromeyev: If a trade is possible, then at a later stage in the negotiations we could approach these issues in greater detail. We’re concerned with nuclear SLCMs. You keep saying that MIRV’d mobile ICBMs are the most destabilizing system. We could combine long range nuclear SLCMs and MIRV’d mobile ICBM’s and try to achieve a radical solution to this problem. Lt Gen Scowcroft: The problems have different sources. MIRV mobiles are perhaps manageable, but verification is a problem. This is important because of the MIRV aspect rather than the single warhead missile like the SS-25. It will be eventually in our interest to get MIRV missile out of our silos, where they are both vulnerable and lucrative targets. The SLCM problem is different because its a less destabilizing weapon. Marshal Akhromeyev: I wouldn’t say that. Lt Gen Scowcroft: It’s my own perspective that its less destabilizing for you rather than us. The principal problem is the impossible task of verification because of the platforms involved and problems associated with whether the cruise missiles are nuclear or conventionally equipped. Mr. Gates: At CIA, an expert once drew me a picture of a nuclear equipped MIRV and a conventionally equipped cruise missile. They were identical. Marshal Akhromeyev: Another option is Nitze’s. I met with Nitze several days ago but didn’t speak about a suggestion I heard that he had made. Nitze said that only naval forces should be equipped with ballistic missiles while all other ballistic missiles should be completely eliminated. This has not been reported to our political leaders, but in general seems to be a worthy idea. The difficulty is that nuclear armed cruise missiles should be scrapped. In this regard, what would be the response from Great Britain, France and China. Today they are against taking part in similar negotiations. Lt Gen Scowcroft: I believe that the ships on which these cruise missiles are deployed could have no other nuclear weapons. SLBMs would be on submarines and could be easily monitored. Admiral Crowe: Not easy, but more manageable. Lt Gen Scowcroft: It would be worth thinking about. Marshal Akhromeyev: I also think this notion is a serious notion. If we think on this line, SALT could find solutions and confidence would grow as verification is worked. Lt Gen Scowcroft: In certain circles this would be a very controversial issue.
