1978  325
have on society’s survivability? Keeny responded by challenging the 
paper’s3 estimates of survivors and condemned it for omitting atten-
tion to the long-­term consequences. Soviet civil defense evacuation, he 
added, would give us added strategic warning. Harold Brown agreed 
about the warning, observing that we could generate high alert levels 
in 48 hours. Keeny suggested [4 lines not declassified].
Keeny challenged the paper’s assertion that only a ten percent 
spontaneous U.S. evacuation would occur. Harold Brown observed 
that a large spontaneous evacuation without a reception plan would 
adversely affect longer-­term survivability. Keeny insisted that the 
paper overstates Soviet opportunities to use civil defense and omits 
[3 lines not declassified].
Admiral Turner observed that U.S. suburban and rural areas are 
better prepared for a spontaneous reception than would be the case in 
the Soviet Union. Cutter agreed and emphasized the U.S. advantage in 
roads and family automobiles.
Keeny argued that evacuation in the context of this analysis cer-
tainly helps but it does not take into account the longer term effects. 
Huntington added that the Working Group had discussed the long-­
term effects but happily we do not have nuclear war experience to give 
us sufficient data to answer Keeny’s question.
Brzezinski emphasized the effect that any U.S. civil defense has 
on the Soviet leaders. First, since the Soviets apparently believe in the 
efficacy of their own civil defense, it is bad for [2 lines not declassified]. 
Second, the crisis management role of civil defense on both sides is crit-
ical. A superpower confrontation in the coming decade is not to be dis-
counted. In a situation where the Soviets implement a controlled civil 
defense evacuation and the U.S. responds with a chaotic spontaneous 
evacuation, the President’s diplomatic bargaining position would be 
seriously undercut.
Harold Brown tried to defer this discussion of “perceptions” to 
later discussion of policy choices. Brzezinski rejected that suggestion, 
insisting that talk of civil defense effectiveness requires discussion of 
mutual perceptions of civil defense effectiveness.
Secretary Brown then proceeded around the table soliciting agency 
positions on the five program options, adding that he thought civil 
defense and continuity of government are separate in this case.
Christopher led off for State by arguing that we cannot compart-
mentalize the discussion. Suppose civil defense is part of the strategic 
balance and we frighten the public and allies by saying so. If we cannot 
3 See the attachment to Document 72.
