National Security Policy 379 is imperiled; however, he wants everyone in the Department to have a complete understanding of the total problem of the interrelation­ ship between national defense and the balanced budget, that unless the ­budget is balanced sooner or later, procurement of defense systems will avail nothing. Mr. McElroy defended the Defense Department budget by point­ ing out the risks which he had consciously taken already in its compo­ sition. He pointed out the deliberate downgrading of the requirement for continental air defense confining our concern to the protection of our retaliatory bases. He further pointed out that this is the type of judgment which he feels qualified to make; but he emphasized that he hesitates to second-­guess the scientists and those other people who are scientifically competent in judgments pertaining to their field. He con­ cluded that there are two kinds of judgment involved and he himself is in a position to make only one kind. As a final discussion item, the President reopened the matter of overseas deployments of Army forces. More specifically, he asked why we do not consider some redeployment from Europe. He pointed out the great savings that could be made by reduction of divisions in Europe by three. In this connection, the President drew upon his own experience as the first SACEUR. The U.S. had agreed to maintain six divisions in Europe on a temporary basis, with the concept that the ground role should be taken over by the countries on the spot. General Twining agreed that it would be desirable to reduce forces in Europe by one division this year. All agreed, however, that the State Department should be consulted before this is pursued further. Conclusions—The presentation and discussion being completed, it was concluded that a stag dinner scheduled for December 3 would give this group an opportunity to discuss philosophy in some detail. Based on this meeting, the Department of Defense will re-­examine their budget with an effort toward further reductions for consider­ ation at a later date. (The NSC meeting scheduled for December 4 was deferred to December 6 to allow further study of the matter by the Defense staff.) John S.D. Eisenhower
