1056
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“We plan to:
“—Strengthen institutions in our Government which are dealing
with international health problems, reemphasizing our commitment to
help meet the health needs of other nations, and improve the use of ex-
isting resources through better coordination.
“—Build greater awareness among the American people of the le-
gitimacy and the importance for our foreign policy goals of improving
other people’s capacity to meet their basic human needs.
“—Work closely with nations around the world, individually and
through organizations such as WHO, UNICEF, the World Bank, and
the regional development banks, to improve the health of people
everywhere.
“—More fully involve American universities, technological foun-
dations, and other private organizations in making U.S. scientific and
professional resources more accessible to the developing world.”
The full text of the statement is printed in Public Papers: Carter,
1978, Book I, pages 816–817. In telegram 115550 to all diplomatic and
consular posts, May 5, the Department repeated the text of the Presi-
dent’s statement with a request to “bring this statement to the attention
of the Minister of Health and other appropriate officials.” (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780193–0915)
Califano, in his May 9 address to the World Health Assembly, re-
emphasized many of the objectives outlined in the Presidential state-
ment. The Secretary pledged additional resources for the combating of
major infectious diseases, especially in the area of child immunization.
Providing clean drinking water also existed as a high priority; to this
end, Califano highlighted U.S. support for the United Nations Decade
for Drinking Water and Sanitation (1980–1990). Califano also described
American collaboration with the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in formulation
of international nutrition programs. He indicated U.S. support for
WHO programs dedicated to the prevention and treatment of
blindness and extension of primary health care programs, including
maternal and child health services, nutrition, and family planning. In
his concluding remarks, Califano asserted, “We are, as you know, a na-
tion seeking to reassert our commitment to human rights—at home and
in the world. Our participation in this organization gives us an oppor-
tunity to express that commitment not simply in words but in deeds.
Together with you, we stand ready to seize that opportunity. We can,
and we must, build a healthier world for all our children.”
The full text of Califano’s remarks is printed in Department of
State Bulletin, September 1978, pages 35–38. The other members of the
U.S. delegation included Assistant Secretary of Health, Education and
Welfare Julius Richmond; John Bryant (Director-designate, Office of In-
