614  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
coexistence” on the one hand, or of tensions bringing a rising danger of 
nuclear war on the other, hoping by occasional measured reminders of 
the latter to stimulate acceptance of the former on Soviet terms.
231. The underdeveloped countries in Soviet strategy. The effort to align 
the USSR in apparent support of broadly held popular aspirations takes 
its most general form, other than in peace propaganda, in identification 
with various “national liberation movements.” People in underdevel­
oped countries are being told that the USSR champions peace, progress, 
and national independence, while the West stands for war, reaction, 
and colonialism. Moscow clearly sees the underdeveloped countries—­
with their weak economic and political systems, strong nationalist and 
anticolonialist sentiments, neutralist tendencies, and resentment at 
past and present domination by Western European countries—­as the 
most susceptible ground for expansion of Soviet influence at Western 
expense. It is this calculation which underlay the Soviet attack in recent 
years on Western interests in the colonies and former colonial countries 
of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa.
232. In part this campaign is intended to deny resources and bases 
in these areas to Western use. But the Communists have apparently 
come to believe also that it is precisely in underdeveloped and colo­
nial areas that the best prospects for Communist advances now lie. At 
a minimum, they hope to bring national movements and states in these 
areas under Soviet diplomatic and economic influence. By thus entering 
into what in current Soviet parlance is called the “zone of peace” these 
peoples would enhance the weight of the Bloc in the world political bal­
ance. At a maximum, the Soviet leaders hope that anti-Western national 
movements can with native Communist participation be given a gradu­
ally more radical complexion, a process which would result ultimately 
in the establishment of Communist or Communist-­controlled parties 
in power. They anticipate that rising expectations in these areas will 
far outrun the possibilities of fulfillment, thus giving the Communists 
a chance to seize the revolutionary initiative. We believe that the effort 
to capture a dominant position in underdeveloped areas of the world 
will continue through the period of this estimate to be one of the main 
preoccupations of Soviet policy.
233. The USSR’s targets among the underdeveloped countries may 
shift considerably during the period under consideration, in accor­
dance with changing opportunities and local Communist successes 
and reverses. Frictions between Moscow and Afro-Asians will tend to 
arise in many countries—­as they have already arisen in some instanc­
es—­as the first bloom of friendly cooperation wears off. Moreover, 
the basic rationale for Moscow’s present collaboration with most 
Afro-Asian countries—­their common anti-Western orientation—­may 
even be somewhat eroded as some of the current points of difference
