562
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Japanese policy are necessary to achieve the dramatic reduction in
Japan’s external surplus which is the key to a successful Summit in
1979, as change in German policy was to a successful Summit in 1978.
Japanese responses made clear that they believe their existing policies
are adequate to reduce their external surplus. My Japanese colleague
and I arranged further US-Japanese talks to try to resolve these differ-
ences. (C)
(b) US Inflation: There was strong approval of your November 1
decisions.3 The only concern was whether the US will stick to tough
fiscal and monetary policies during the several years that other coun-
tries, notably Germany and Japan, believe on the basis of their own ex-
perience will be required for success.
2. Energy: Passage of the energy bill was welcomed. The Germans
would like us to meet our Summit commitment to raise US oil prices to
world levels by December 1980, but will understand if we let the target
date slip to October 1, 1981, when control legislation expires. They say
that letting decontrol slip beyond that date would raise doubts as to
whether the US commitment would ever be fulfilled. (C)
3. North-South: There was general support for the proposal that the
World Bank has developed, in response to the Bonn Summit’s direc-
tive, for large-scale IBRD lending to help LDCs explore for oil—and
also for the World Bank proposal to convene a spring meeting of donor
nations to coordinate their bilateral aid to LDC energy programs. It was
agreed that these World Bank proposals had been among the more
useful Bonn results. (U)
4. Tokyo Summit: We agreed that no commitment to a specific date
(June 28 and 29 were preferred) should be sought until the next
meeting of our Preparatory Group in March, when it could be deter-
mined how much progress was being made. (C)
II. December 18 Meeting with French Trade Minister Deniau (who
had wanted to come to Washington to meet with you)4
1. Agriculture: The French say that the language that the US and the
EC have agreed on to prohibit agricultural export subsidies that dis-
place other countries’ exports in third markets will be seen by French
farmers as a threat to the EC’s Common Agricultural Policy. Al Mc-
Donald, our Geneva trade negotiator, and I pointed out that this was a
problem of perception, rather than substance, since this language did
not pose such a threat; we suggested that the perception should be cor-
3 See footnote 2, Document 175.
4 A memorandum of conversation of the meeting on December 18 among Owen,
Deniau, and other U.S. and French officials is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 23, France: 1–12/79.
