404  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Materiel readiness against the mobilization base objectives in 
quantitative and qualitative terms.
Selected problems.
Summary.
FORCE BASIS FOR DETERMINING REQUIREMENTS
The force basis used in determining requirements is shown on the 
next three charts. All data are expressed as a percent of the active forces 
in being on M-Day. For logistic planning purposes we place D-Day at 
M-/6 months. The first chart shows the Post M-Day mobilization of 
forces authorized in the Joint Strategic Objectives Plan with an M-Day 
of July 1, 1961 which is our authorized planning base. The Post M-Day 
mobilization build up by Military Service is shown on the right. Army 
enters M-Day with 14 divisions, and proceeds to build up its forces 
to 21 divisions at M-/1; then continues as indicated to 42 divisions by 
M-/6 or D-Day. Navy begins with 684 combat ships, increases its forces 
to 1,044 ships by the end of the first month and, as indicated, to 1,630 
combat ships by M-/6. Air Force increases its 101 wings to 140 wings 
by M-/1 and maintains that 140 wing structure constant throughout the 
build-­up period. In like manner, the Marine Corps’ strength at M-Day 
is 3 divisions and air wings. These are increased immediately to 4 divi­
sion/air wings and maintained constant thereafter. The forces are por­
trayed on the left as a percentage increase to the active forces on M-­day, 
during the M to D-Day build-­up period. The Army mobilizes its forces 
throughout the six months, increasing to 150% of the M-Day forces 
by M-/1 month; 229% by M-/3; and 300% by M-/6 months. Comparable 
positions for the Navy are 153% of its beginning forces by M-/1; 225% 
by M-/3; and 238% by M-/6. Both the Air Force and the Marines com­
plete their build up by M-/1 month with the former increasing to 139% 
of its M-Day force and the latter 133%
The deployment of these forces during the M to M-/6 and D to D-/6 
planning period is pictured here. JSOP–61 stops at D-Day. Post D-Day 
force projections, therefore, represent Service plans. For logistic plan­
ning purposes only, the deployment depicted here provides a basis for 
determining combat requirements for the forces engaged. Accordingly, 
they should not be interpreted as how deployment of the forces would 
actually take place under a variety of possible conditions. The effects of 
nuclear attack are not reflected in these force levels. For the Army and 
Marine Corps, the deployment figures represent total forces outside 
the U.S. For the Navy, deployment figures represent ships on station, 
and exclude ships in port in the U.S., or enroute. For the Air Force all 
combat units are shown as deployed, including those in the U.S., since 
all are in a position to perform their mission from their home bases. Of 
the 14 Army Divisions in being on M-Day, 8 are deployed; these rise 
to a level of 21 divisions by D-Day and continue upward, as indicated, 
until all 42 are assumed to be deployed at D-/6 months. Of the Navy’s
