International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
75
to continue to pursue their stabilization policies until they have
brought inflation under control. The message should be that while we
still have problems, we are implementing policies that will correct
them. The Preparatory Group agreed that the Declaration should also
say something encouraging about efforts to deal with youth unemploy-
ment. Callaghan may propose an international conference on this sub-
ject, which could be useful.
International Economic Policy
The Preparatory Group had no difficulty in agreeing on draft Dec-
laration language dealing with international issues: financing, trade,
energy, and North-South relations. I attach the agreed text,5 which is
largely based on the U.S. draft; the British draft, which was more gen-
eral, met little favor. The Group noted that this agreed language would
have to be drastically revised to take account of whatever the heads of
government decided at London. Herewith a few comments on the at-
tached draft:
—Balance of Payments Financing. The draft supports the large IMF
expansion that has been proposed by Witteveen and that would help
both developed and developing countries. As of this writing, the
IMF Interim Committee6 is discussing this issue. We will know in a
day or two whether its discussions require change in the agreed draft
language.
—Trade. The British and French, who favored blander language,
were persuaded both to accept the proposed U.S. trade language. This
language rejects protectionism in strong terms, indicates that the Tokyo
Round should achieve results as important as the Kennedy Round, and
pinpoints the areas in which the heads of government will seek
progress in trade negotiations in 1977. These areas include an interna-
tional system of national grain reserves (tactfully described as an
agreed approach to grain stocks). The British were convinced by the ar-
gument that the only way for the industrial countries to avoid suc-
cumbing to growing protectionist pressures is by being able to show
our peoples that the trade negotiations are making real progress: Hence
the importance of each head of government being able to return from
London saying that the Summit had achieved concrete results in re-
viving trade negotiations. This required a Declaration with specific
commitments; generalities would not suffice. Bob Strauss made the
5 Attached but not printed at Tab B are four undated papers on “Balance of Pay-
ments Financing,” “Trade,” “Energy,” and “North-South Relations.”
6 The IMF Interim Committee (formally known as the Interim Committee of the
Board of Governors on the International Monetary System) was established in October
1974. It succeeded the Committee of Twenty as the primary international monetary re-
form group.
