January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1207 elections—as in the Camp David Accords. We won’t put this issue aside, but keep it on the top of the agenda. Secretary Vance asked: in 40 days? The President said yes. If we get near the end, then we can look at this again. Prime Minister Begin said there is a problem of control in the Sinai. In the peace treaty, a UN force is provided for. There is the problem of Sharm-el-Sheikh, in particular. But the Soviets vetoed this approach.10 And there is the U.S. letter11 about efforts to be made to find acceptable alternatives—i.e. a multinational force. Maybe the United States had talks with the Soviet Union, and it said that it would use the veto. Therefore, it was necessary to try an alternative. The President said that we had been talking primarily with Secretary General Waldheim. Secretary Vance said we talked with the Soviets at the end. Prime Minister Begin said that UNTSO was not for the time of the peace treaty; it was for the armistice period. The U.S., Israel, and Egypt joined in agreeing that members of the UN group should carry out the functions. This was not signed. Then there was a promise that, a year before the ultimate withdrawal from the Sinai, we would meet again. The former foreign Minister (Moshe Dayan) said, and he (Prime Minister Begin) subscribed to his view, that if there is no UN force, and no multinational force—the former foreign minister would like it (multinational force) now. So they accepted the agreement, but stated that if neither of the forces is established, then Israel can’t withdraw from its positions in the Sinai. They want the commitment to be fulfilled. Also, the U.S. commitment is one of the most vital parts of the peace treaty—bearing in mind problems like Sharm-el-Sheikh. Nobody knows what will happen. We could have a situation one day with the Straits (of Tiran) closed. That would be, in the European concept, a casus belli, but Israel does not want that. He suggests accelerating the talks on the tripartite agreement, where now there is no agreement. What should be done if there is no UN or multinational force? This should be decided bilaterally between Israel and the United States. Otherwise, a vital part of the peace treaty would be out. Therefore, he suggests that we accelerate the tripartite agreement and sign a bilateral agreement. The U.S. has noted Israel’s announcement. There is a vacuum: let’s fill it up. The President called on Secretary Vance. 10 See footnote 2, Document 276. 11 See Document 295.
