1979 529 —The Soviets almost certainly do not have full confidence in the countersilo capabilities they will possess in the early 1980s, in part because success would depend on execution of complex and inherently uncertain targeting tactics. We believe they will seek to develop and deploy new or modified ICBMs with accuracies sufficient to permit them to employ simplified targeting tactics to attack US ICBM silos, thereby increasing Soviet confidence in the probability of successful attack. We also believe they will concentrate heavily on attempts to overcome the USSR’s weaknesses in low-­altitude air defense and in ASW capabilities against SSBNs, and will continue R&D on improved ABM systems. —Momentum is imparted to Soviet strategic programs by the USSR’s large, permanent military R&D establishments, the military services, and the military industries. In R&D especially, the Soviets will strive to match or surpass the United States in selected advanced technologies having strategic application, and at a minimum to avoid falling behind technologically. —The possibility, however remote, that intercontinental nuclear war might actually occur will continue to support Soviet efforts to improve the USSR’s strategic posture. The Soviets still express concerns about the US capability to conduct a surprise intercontinental attack, even though they believe the likelihood of such an attack is low for the foreseeable future. They are evidently also doubtful about whether escalation to intercontinental warfare can be avoided once the nuclear threshold has been crossed in theater warfare. In evaluating their chances of surviving a nuclear war, the Soviets are likely to remain uncertain about the degree to which their active and passive measures would protect their economy and population, and about their ability to conduct sustained military operations. —In general, in their planning for the future, the Soviets are likely to be seeking ways to increase the options available to the leadership in crisis or conflict, to control nuclear escalation in the event of a NATO-Warsaw Pact theater conflict, and to improve the endurance of the nation and its forces so that in the unlikely event of intercontinental war the USSR could emerge in a better position than that of its adversaries. Other Considerations 28. Effects of SALT II Limitations. We have examined the effects of a prospective SALT II agreement on Soviet intercontinental offensive forces. As the preceding analysis shows, we expect Soviet strategic capabilities to improve steadily under SALT II limitations. —In the forces we have projected under SALT II, Soviet delivery vehicles of types limited by the agreement are some 15 to 30 percent fewer than we would expect in the middle and late 1980s in the absence of such limitations. Total online weapons projected for Soviet intercontinental forces are several thousand fewer, but SALT limitations would not prevent the USSR from matching or surpassing the United States in this index, at least for a few years in the early 1980s. —SALT II limitations would not reduce the threat to US ICBM silos and other intercontinental forces and bases. However, both prelaunch and residual Soviet lethal area and hard-­target potentials are somewhat
