634 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 140. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 3, 1979 SUBJECT NSC Meeting on Strategic Issues and US-Soviet Relations (C) You will chair a meeting of the National Security Council on June 4 to discuss selected strategic issues and the general balance of power in US-Soviet relations. It will have a four-­fold importance: —On the eve of the Vienna Summit,2 you will review the trends in the East-West strategic balance. For example, there is no doubt that JCS support for SALT ratification will be enhanced if problems with this balance are addressed at an NSC meeting and some specific actions taken to mitigate them. —The following day you will review the Defense budget with OMB. It is important that strategic perspectives guide the budget decisions, not vice-­versa. —You will meet with Chancellor Schmidt two days later3 at which time you will want to indicate your position on TNF, which will also be reviewed at this NSC meeting. —DOD will formally present its analysis of the M–X alternatives. (TS) NSC Meeting: Issues and Conduct With the above points in mind, the NSC meeting agenda will be as follows: 1. I will provide a brief review of CNA–78 and the PRC on the DOD Consolidated Guidance with conclusions that bear on the strategic trends. I shall also indicate several topics for a later NSC meeting, including C3I and strategic doctrine. Others will comment briefly. 2. We shall briefly review policy and planning on Theater Nuclear Force modernization, specifically: a) Chancellor Schmidt’s visit; b) the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 56, NSC– 019, 6/4/79, Strategic Arms Policy and Relations with USSR. Top Secret. Sent for action. The date is handwritten. 2 Carter traveled to Vienna on June 14 and met with Brezhnev June 15–18. On the final day of the summit, the two leaders signed the Treaty Between the United States and the Soviet Union on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Document 241. 3 Documentation on Chancellor Helmut Schmidt’s June 6 visit to the White House is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
