Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Mr. Aaron stated that it was his impression that the groups were concerned that the numbers were dropping. Basically, he thought they wanted to support MFN but they were continually receiving reports about procedural problems, etc. (C) Amb. Bogdan replied that the Romanians were going to propose a formula which they hoped would help. He insisted, however, that they could not accept any third party intermediary. Rabbi Rosen (leader of the Jews in Romania) would make a statement saying that the Jews who wanted to leave are not intimidated, etc. This statement would be publicized. Some sort of monitoring system, perhaps similar to that of SALT (i.e., national means), could be established. He pointed out that Senator Jackson had an entire office doing this type of work and that the Romanians were ready to do it as well. (C) Mr. Aaron suggested that the best way to prove the present procedures were no bar to emigration was to reform them. He asked why Jews making an application could not notify the Israeli Embassy at the same time. (U) Amb. Bogdan replied that it did not look feasible, but he did not elaborate why. He insisted, however, that there was no intention on the part of the Romanian Government to keep the Jews from emigrating. (C) Mr. Aaron stressed in response that the Romanian Government would have to do something about the procedures. The Administration would work hard, but he pointed out it could lose if the groups interested in Jewish emigration failed to support MFN. (C) Amb. Bogdan suggested that the concerns of the Jewish groups could be allayed by the formula he had outlined. (U) Mr. Aaron returned to the question of procedures, insisting that some change had to be undertaken and that there was a need for some sort of real action. The groups interested in Jewish emigration had backed off from some of their original ideas, but there was a need to respond to their concerns. He felt that Rabbi Rosen’s statement might not be enough; something more would have to be done. (C) Amb. Bogdan replied that he did not know what more the Romanian Government could do. He stressed, however, that the Romanian side was ready to try to meet the concerns of the Jewish groups. (U) Mr. Aaron stated that he would not argue the case for others. This was not his role. He reiterated the seriousness of the situation and the need to find a way to resolve it. (C) Amb. Bogdan said that he intended to stay in the States for the duration of the struggle rather than returning to Romania as he had originally intended. (C)
