Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX approach to economic problems, including economic reform; toleration of limited internal dissidence and criticism; and reasonably settled church/state relations which permit, inter alia, increased interaction with American religious institutions. 7. The next two years: It is not possible at this time to predict how long the deterioration in East-West relations will last, but this trend will undoubtedly dominate our relations with Hungary for the first part of this period. We should expect our ability to make progress in bilateral relations with Hungary will be affected even though the Hungarians have already told us that they hope the present international scene will not hurt our bilateral relations. 8. We should take into account other specific developments which may also have some influence on our policies: A. Party Congress: The Hungarian Party Congress will be held in March.9 The outlook is that the leading political personality in Hungary, Janos Kadar, will remain in power and that his policies, most notably economic reform and relatively relaxed domestic policies, will be reaffirmed and continued. The main themes of Hungary’s foreign policies, including its loyal support of the USSR, will also be reaffirmed. If the examination of Hungarian policy which will take place at the Congress results in any major changes leading away from internal liberalization or produces such changes in the Hungarian relationship with the Soviet Union as an increased military role for Hungary within the Warsaw Pact, our policies will need reassessment. In this regard, we should examine the Hungarian posture in case instability develops in Eastern Europe as a result of some crucial development such as Tito’s death. B. Economics: Hungary is attempting both economic reform and stabilization at the same time. Reform opens up possibilities which we should be alert to pursue to increase Hungary’s integration into the West and encourage its development of a decentralized and market oriented economy. Trade and possible membership in the IMF are obvious areas of possible cooperation. Stabilization means that the Hungarian regime will be less capable of responding to the needs of the Hungarian people for a better standard of living. Both elements introduce elements of potential political instability into a overall stable situation. For the foreseeable future, Hungary will be following a policy of relative economic austerity, which will hamper our efforts to increase our exports and may undercut to some extent the political acceptance by the Hungarian people of the present regime. C. CSCE: The Madrid Conference is scheduled for November. On balance, I believe we should continue to plan to consult with the Hun- 9 See Document 168.
