392 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 116. Memorandum of Discussion at the 390th NSC Meeting1 Washington, December 11, 1958 SUBJECT Discussion at the 390th Meeting of the National Security Council Thursday, ­December 11, 1958 Present at the 390th Meeting of the National Security Council were the President of the United States presiding, the Vice President of the United States; the Acting Secretary of State; the Acting Secretary of Defense; the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present were the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director, Bureau of the Budget. Also present and participating in Council action on Item 1 were the Attorney General; the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; the Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers; the Special Assistants to the President for Science and Technology and for Public Works Planning. Also attending were the Acting Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Acting Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Director, International Cooperation Administration; the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs; Assistant Secretaries of State Gerard C. Smith and Livingston T. Merchant; the Deputy Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, The Assistant to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President for Congressional Affairs; the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and for Security Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the Naval Aide to the President; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive, NSC. There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. 1. MEASURES TO CARRY OUT THE CONCEPT OF SHELTER (NSC 5807; NSC 5807/1; NSC Actions Nos. 1882 and 1948–­b; Memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated November 5 and 18, and December 4, 1958) Mr. Gordon Gray explained briefly the nature of this item and called on Governor Hoegh to summarize the main points in his report. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s briefing note is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting.) After describing in general the status of measures to carry out the concept of shelter, Governor Hoegh went to the main point which was his specific recommendation for one additional measure to carry out 1 Source: Agenda item 1: Measures To Carry Out the Concept of Shelter. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—5 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
