172 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 1. Summary: On October 25 and 26 US Reps briefed allies in Geneva on present rounds of US–USSR negotiations on chemical weapons and on radiological weapons. End summary. 2. On October 26, Ambassador Fisher (head of USDEL) briefed CCD western group (FRG, Italy, the Netherland, Canada; no reps from UK and Japan were present) on present round of US–USSR negotiations on chemical weapons (CW) and on radiological weapons (RW). 3. Fisher presented points on RW along lines of Reftel, stressing that the Soviet proposal to include reduced blast/enhanced radiation weapons (the so-called neutron bomb) in the definition of radiological weapons was unacceptable to the US side. He said that other than the RB/ER weapon issue, which the Soviets had introduced late in the game, the two sides were very close to an agreement on an RW joint initiative. He noted that no date had been set for the resumption of negotiations on RW, but if after the UN disarmament debate it appears useful to continue talks, it would be possible to do so in the margins of the US–USSR negotiations on CW when they resume on January 10. 4. With respect to the CW negotiations, Fisher said that both sides had made a full presentation of positions and that a drafting group had been established and had started its work on a joint initiative for the CCD. 5. On the scope of prohibition of a possible CW convention, Fisher said that the two sides were not far apart except for three issues: A. Irritants—the US side does not want to include irritants used as riot control agents in the prohibition; the Soviet side does. B. Precursors—the US side would like to have the convention apply to chemical substances extending back down the production chain from the actual production of chemical agents; the Soviet side would like to have the concept of precursors apply to chemicals used in the final stage of production of chemical agents. C. Carcinogens and teratogens—the Soviet side has proposed specifically including chemicals causing cancer and birth defects in the treaty; the US does not think such chemicals would be suitable for chemical warfare purposes and would be covered by the general purpose criterion without being specified. 6. Fisher said that the key difference in the US and Soviet positions is in the area of verification. Perhaps the toughest question is the verification of the destruction of declared stocks of CW and of the disposition of declared facilities. The US side is insisting that there be mandatory on-site inspection; the Soviet side is suggesting that there be inspection by national committees (self-inspection). 7. Fisher noted that the Soviets have accepted the concept of a consultative committee, but that they have a problem with the committee
