Human Rights 423 126. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Bennet), and the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, March 20, 1978 SUBJECT Department Position on Fascell/Fraser Bill to Establish an Institute for Human Rights and Freedom Issue for Decision Whether the Department should support the legislation introduced by Congressmen Dante Fascell and Donald Fraser to establish an “Institute for Human Rights and Freedom.”2 Essential Factors Congressmen Fascell and Fraser introduced legislation on March 7 to establish an independent Federal agency, the Institute for Human Rights and Freedom. The Institute, modeled in part on the National Endowment of the Arts and the Inter-American Foundation, would provide financial and other assistance to private individuals and groups to “openly carry out and promote international respect and observance for human rights and fundamental freedoms.” Our support is expected on the bill. Endorsing it will yield certain advantages. Opposing it, however, will certainly entail significant political disadvantages. To date this Administration, which has identified itself fully with a higher priority for human rights, has opposed virtually all legislative human rights initiatives since taking office, thereby raising doubts as to our intentions. The Institute bill is receiving wide support on the Hill 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780066–1957. Limited Official Use. Sent through Christopher, who did not initial the memorandum. Drafted by Schneider on March 14; concurred in by Runyon and Hume, who did not initial the memorandum. Kreisberg initialed the memorandum on Lake’s behalf. The date is hand-stamped. 2 Fascell and Fraser introduced H.R. 11326 in the House on March 7, whereupon it was referred to the House Committee on International Relations. Zablocki, under a March 14 letter to Vance, sent a copy of the bill to the Department of State, requesting the Department’s comments on the proposed legislation. H.R. 11326 outlined the functions, bureaucratic structure, powers, and responsibilities of the proposed Institute for Human Rights and Freedom. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780039– 2463)
