Afghanistan
375
that we cannot hold back on going to the Security Council. Otherwise
we will be dragging our feet. There was a meeting today on this issue.
The President said that we should go forward on the Security
Council and should not wait for a package. (The Secretary of State then
left to call Ambassador McHenry.)
Dr. Brzezinski said we should now go through the separate steps
in the paper prepared by the State Department.7
The President agreed and asked that Warren Christopher please
indicate what the allied reaction was to each of the specific measures.
Dr. Brzezinski said the first issue was SALT. The President said
that he had talked to Robert Byrd and the Majority Leader wanted to
keep SALT on the calendar but not bring it up onto the Floor.
The President said that he had been able to persuade Byrd not to
make a statement to that effect when he left the White House. It was
the President’s view that we ought to leave it on the calendar and
maintain our approach of working closely with the Majority Leader
on this issue.
Dr. Brzezinski said that SALT was important regardless of our
relationship to the U.S.S.R., but we will have to accept that at this time
it is not advisable to bring it to a vote. Lloyd Cutler agreed. There was
7 Carter read the December 31 paper, entitled “Afghanistan: Steps in the Framework
of U.S.-Soviet Relations,” in advance of the NSC meeting. A copy with Carter’s marginalia
is in the Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–1981, Box 57,
NSC–026, 01/02/80, Afghanistan Invasion, Christopher/Brown, Pakistan/Afghanistan/
China. The first paragraph of the paper reads: “There are three kinds of impacts we
hope to achieve vis-à-vis the Soviets in Afghanistan. The first is punitive: we want them
to pay a price for infringing on fundamental principles of international behavior. The
second is coercive: we want them to withdraw their troops and allow Afghanistan to
return to a semblance of sovereignty and neutrality. The third is deterrent: we want to
prevent the Soviets from crossing further thresholds, such as hot pursuit of rebels across
international frontiers or escalation of the fighting with the rebels to a massive scale.”
In the right margin beside the paragraph, Carter wrote: “1 & 3 inter-related, 2 unlikely.”
The second paragraph reads: “We are also interested in the impact of our responses
on other international actors, including European allies, nervous Eastern Europeans,
nonaligned Third World countries, and Islamic governments. Thus, even actions that
may make little impression on the Soviets can be of value for other audiences; some US
actions could cause concern to our allies.” In the right margin beside this paragraph,
Carter wrote: “Maximum initiative & action by others.” The second and third sentences
of the fourth paragraph read: “Soviet reactions may also take the form of countermoves
across a broad spectrum. In choosing one course of action over another, the irrevocability
of the action will be one important factor to consider.” Carter underlined “Soviet reac-
tions,” and in the right margin wrote: “need to assess.” The final sentence of the paper
reads: “Certain steps affecting US-Soviet relations may have the desired effect on other
countries, but the most effective steps in getting our point across to Moscow are likely
to be those that strengthen opposition to the Soviets worldwide.” Carter underlined
“Soviets worldwide,” and wrote: “true” in the right margin. The table of contents of the
December 31 paper, which lists the proposed actions, is printed in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 249.
