232
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
document had to have this element in it and we feel deeply that there
must be a comprehensive peace in order for the framework to be
durable.
Thirteen. Is it possible that an unacceptable result could come
about at the end of the five year period?
The document provides that there must be a conclusion reached by
the end of five years, regarding relations with the neighbors and the
other issues. We have also stated that these negotiations are based on
242 and on all its parts. Obviously it requires negotiations and the out-
come is not certain. But the document does state that the result must be
accomplished by the end of five years.
Fourteen. Ambassador Atherton noted that King Hussein men-
tioned that the Israeli/Egyptian document is more specific than the
West Bank one.
He pointed out that Secretary Vance said that in the former case
you had two parties (Egypt and Israel) who were negotiating directly
and could, therefore, reach a specific agreement. The other document
was general because the other parties (Jordan, the Palestinians, Syria)
were not there.
Fifteen. Ambassador Atherton mentioned the question regarding
the refugee problem and said President Carter in his speech14 to Con-
gress stated the refugee problem must be solved under the relevant Pal-
estinian refugee UN resolutions.
Sixteen. There is a different tenor to President Carter’s earlier call
for Palestinian rights and a homeland in contrast to the new direction
that Camp David is alleged to take.
We still support a Palestinian homeland and we promote this con-
cept by (a) the transitional stage which provides for full autonomy and
(b) allowing the Palestinians to choose their status and relations with
their neighbors. We have made no change in our view on Israeli with-
drawal nor on legitimate Palestinian rights. In fact, we added the con-
cept of “just requirements” for the Palestinians. There has also been no
change in our position of Jerusalem.
This conclude the Secretary’s response to the King’s questions and
the session turned to general discussion.
IV
Sharaf made the following point:
If Jordan plays a role, it must be on a more solid basis. Self-
government during a transitional period makes sense only if the transi-
tion leads to a final solution.
14 On September 18, President Carter addressed a Joint Session of Congress on the
outcome of the Camp David Summit and the agreements reached. The text of this speech
is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1533–1537.
