3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1980 913 311. Summary of Conclusions of an Ad Hoc Meeting1 Washington, December 3, 1980, 12:20–12:51 p.m. SUBJECT Poland PARTICIPANTS White House CIA Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski Admiral Stansfield Turner State NSC Secretary Edmund Muskie Steve Larrabee (notetaker) Defense Secretary Harold Brown On December 3, 1980 a meeting was held in Dr. Brzezinski’s office to discuss contingency measures in response to increasing signs that the Soviets may be preparing to intervene militarily in Poland. Participating in the meeting were Dr. Brzezinski, Secretary Muskie, Secretary Brown and Admiral Turner. (C) (Notetaker missed first few minutes of discussion.) Secretary Brown raised the question of whether a hotline message should be sent to President Brezhnev.2 (C) Dr. Brzezinski thought a message would be appropriate which emphasized that the U.S. had no interest in exploiting the situation in Poland for its own political advantage and that any invasion would have serious consequences for East-West relations, especially U.S.-Soviet relations. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Brement Subject File, Box 57, Poland: Fall of 1980: 12/1–8/80. Secret. The meeting took place in Brzezinski’s office. 2 No hotline message was found. Carter, however, wrote about Poland and the hotline message in his memoirs: “I sent Brezhnev a direct message warning of the serious consequences of a Soviet move into Poland, and let him know more indirectly that we would move to transfer advanced weaponry to China. I asked Prime Minister Gandhi to pressure Brezhnev (who was about to visit New Delhi), and warned the opposition leaders in Poland so that they would not be taken by surprise. I and other administration officials also made public statements about the growing threat to European stability.” Carter then quoted from his diary, December 8, “We’re continuing our worldwide effort to arouse information and interest in the Soviet moves toward Poland . . . The Soviets have not denied our public statement, and Brezhnev has not answered my hot-line message. This is the first time that has occurred.” Carter continued, “I was convinced that the Soviets would already have moved into Poland if they had not been bogged down in Afghanistan and condemned by most nations of the world for it.” (Keeping Faith, pp. 584–585) Ellipsis in the original. The text of Carter’s public statement, December 3, is in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–1981, Book III, pp. 2771–2772.
