556  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Article IX. This has always been U.S. position. The word “currently” 
as used above is intended to recognize that Government of Ecuador 
has right to request that its claims of invalidity of protocol based on 
(a) duress and (b) impossibility of applying boundary description to 
the ground (the watershed issue under Article VIII B(1) of Treaty) be 
submitted to the International Court of Justice. For the Department 
to recognize that Ecuador has right to make such a request does not 
imply that Department considers that Ecuador’s claims in this respect 
are necessarily valid or that they would probably be sustained by the 
International Court. Furthermore, we recognize that Peru’s agreement 
to submission of Ecuadorean claim to International Court would be 
necessary as neither country has accepted compulsory jurisdiction of 
Court. In this connection we note Embassy Lima believes there is little 
likelihood that Peru would agree at this time to a reference of Ecuador’s 
claim to the Court.
(2) Department also considers that the 1942 Protocol may not be 
nullified or abrogated by a unilateral declaration on the part of the 
Ecuadorean Government. There are no caveats or qualifications to this 
second point.
(3) Department also considers that under terms of the 1942 Protocol 
Guarantors currently repeat currently have two principal responsibil-
ities. The First relates to the “guaranty” under Article V. The Protocol 
does not define the word “guaranty” but it would seem to impose upon 
the Guarantors a duty to use their good offices to the end that Peru and 
Ecuador accomplish the definitive demarcation of the frontier line and 
that Peru and Ecuador resolve any legal difficulties which stand in the 
way of that demarcation. The second responsibility of the Guarantor 
powers arises under Article VII of the Treaty which specifically pro-
vides that any disagreement arising in the execution of the Protocol 
“shall be settled by the parties concerned” with the “assistance” of the 
Guarantor powers.
Foregoing is consistent with comments which Department has 
made (Deptel 493 to Rio) regarding Peruvian assertions that Protocol is 
“untouchable”; that existing boundary markers are “immovable”; and 
that parties should renew activities to complete demarcation. These 
would seem to deny, by affirmative guarantor decision, the possibility 
of future reference of legal issues to International Court. In our opin-
ion Guarantors should carefully avoid arrogating a judicial function to 
themselves.
Following are Department’s views on tactics and procedures:
(1) No “gentlemen’s agreement” concerning any future Guarantor 
meeting was entered into with Ecuador by Guarantors (Quito’s 231).3 
The Guarantors informal decision among themselves on September 26 
3 Not printed; 622.233/10–2160.
