Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
143
though leaving us the necessary margin of flexibility in dealing with
most governments. In general, we should stress that achieving human
rights is a process and that we are watching carefully progress toward
greater respect for human rights, realizing that there is no single
standard for all the countries of the world.
I believe that all of the foregoing is implicit in what you have been
saying, but making some of these points more explicit may make it
more difficult for your critics to attack your position and for others to
distort it into excessively rigid and politically confining meanings.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
35.
Editorial Note
In preparation for President Jimmy Carter’s April 25, 1977, inter-
view with European journalists, President’s Assistant for National Se-
curity Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski provided the President with a the-
matic overview in an April 23 memorandum. Brzezinki indicated that
the interview would help the President “set the scene for the London
summits” and afford him the opportunity to discuss his views on
“industrial-state relations.” He devoted the first portion of the memo-
randum to the upcoming London meetings:
“The three meetings in London are all of a piece. In each, you have
a chance to meet, on a group and personal basis, the leaders of most of
our industrial state allies (you have seen so far Callaghan, Jenkins,
Luns, Trudeau, Fukuda, and Soares). In each meeting, you will be able
to lay out basic American commitments—both the steadfastness of pur-
pose of a new Administration and directions and guidelines for the
future.
“This is a start on a new time of building—different from the late
1940s (all start from an advanced industrial base, and the U.S. no longer
has the same economic pre-eminence); but this time of building is just
as challenging, just as vital, and even more difficult to gain popular
support for new directions.
“Your trip is a direct extension of Vice President Mondale’s trip 92
hours after Inauguration: it is a break with the past, in that there is a
much clearer sense that allies are important in their own right, and that
these relations should have pre-eminence. The past three years of eco-
nomic slump have also reaffirmed the need for strong industrial state
partners, in order to guarantee the security and prosperity of any one
