1979  631
Secretary Brown responded that a surface-­mobile system might still be 
possible, or deployment in the sort of small submersibles that Frank 
Press’ panel had suggested. (S)
General Jones argued in favor of the large M–X, noting that the 
smaller missiles were less capable, and that development of a common 
missile could lead to common failure modes and would be a manage-
ment disaster according to several experts who had managed larger 
missile programs before. Secretary Brown argued that these manage-
ment concerns were in his view overblown, and Bill Perry showed a 
chart3 indicating that the capabilities of the common missile do not 
compare that unfavorably with those of the large M-X if its accuracy 
goals can be met. Secretary Christopher noted that given the tension 
between survivability and verification, and Congressional attitudes, he 
thought the trench concept with the full-­sized M-X missile would be 
the best answer. Finally, Secretary Brown noted that interest in Option 
5A implies interest in proceeding with the fully common missile. (S)
3 The chart was not found.
139.	 Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Science and 
Technology (Press) to President Carter1
Washington, June 1, 1979
SUBJECT
M–X Missile and Basing Option
As you recall you directed me to convene a panel to review vari-
ous alternatives for the M–X missile size and basing mode. Although 
much of their effort focused on multiple protective shelter (MPS) and 
airmobile ICBM systems, they also briefly considered the recently pro-
posed trench and included some general comments on this system in 
an addendum to their report (Tab A).2 Following is a brief summary of 
the panel’s conclusions:
—Although technically feasible and more effective than other 
alternatives in preserving the current attributes of our Minuteman 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Office File, Subject 
Chron File, Box 86, Defense: 1979. Secret.
2 Attached but not printed is the May 1979 M–X Panel Report.
