Arms Control and Disarmament 1527 I believe that it would be unwise to give this change in position any undue publicity by making it the subject of a public announcement at this time. However, I believe that we should in the negotiations exploit our flexibility on this question every way possible to put pressure on the other side to make concessions. I have requested Foster to discuss with your people how best to put forward this position in the negotiations. As ever, /s/ Dwight D. Eisenhower 408. Memorandum From Gray to Eisenhower1 Washington, January 13, 1959 SUBJECT Conference on Discontinuance of Nuclear Testing The attached memorandum summarizes the views of the Execu­ tive Departments and Agencies as to Senator Albert Gore’s proposal for a position which the United States might take in the event it appeared that the negotiations were on the verge of a breakdown. However, consideration has also been given to the proposal as one of substance which might be made in the current negotiations. In summary, Senator Gore suggested an approach to consist of a Presidential announcement of (a) “unconditional and unilateral cessa­ tion of all nuclear tests in the earth’s atmosphere” for perhaps three years, (b) a call for similar action by other nuclear powers, and (c) a suggestion that the Geneva Conference concentrate on the negotiation of a limited treaty for a permanent stoppage of atmospheric tests. You will recall that when Senator Gore made his proposal to you orally, you assured him that his suggestion would be given most careful evaluation by the appropriate Government officials. This has been done. The task, however, has been complicated by the fact that the negotiating position of the United States is being continually affected by day-­to-­day developments in the Russian negotiating position at the Geneva Con­ ference. Even now, it is not clear, as Senator Gore believed at the time he 1 Source: Advises against Gore proposal on nuclear testing at this time. Confiden­ tial. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Suspension of Nuclear Testing.
