National Security Policy 513 nuclear weapons. In addition the USSR is probably concerned about the enormous cost of its military establishment and would welcome a measure of disarmament which would permit some diversion of resources to meet other pressing needs. It may also have some concern over the possible development of nuclear capabilities by “fourth coun­ tries,” particularly in Europe. However, we do not believe that either of these concerns would be compelling in Soviet thinking. 214. The Soviet leaders, no doubt pleased with the impact to date of their disarmament maneuvers, will continue to give the appearance of a flexible and constructive attitude in an effort to mobilize world opinion in their favor. They will lay further stress on simple propos­ als, calculated largely for their propaganda appeal, such as ending tests or banning the use of nuclear weapons. They clearly hope to broaden the UN discussions to include other powers, as also serving their ends. Further vague proposals designed to appear as attempts to meet the Western position are likely. The USSR may even make some further unilateral gestures at disarmament, perhaps the sloughing off of certain marginal forces, provided this seems desirable for other reasons. 215. While the USSR will thus rely largely on diplomatic and propaganda exploitation of the disarmament issue, it probably feels that some form of limited international agreement would reinforce its pose as the strongest exponent of disarmament, stimulate further relaxation of Western defense efforts, and inhibit the use of nuclear weapons. In Soviet eyes the preferred form of agreement would be a loosely drawn mutual pledge without significant inspection fea­ tures. But the Soviet leaders undoubtedly recognize that they must pay some price for such an agreement in terms of inspection and con­ trols. In our view they would be willing to accept limited inspection arrangements to detect violation of a nuclear test ban, and a mini­ mal number of fixed observation posts in connection with any agreed arms reductions. Their interest in inducing a US troop withdrawal from Europe would probably lead them to go even further in allowing mutual inspection in Europe. 216. But the USSR clearly regards the present Western disarma­ ment proposals as heavily loaded in favor of the West. In particular it will almost certainly continue to reject comprehensive inspection and controls. As is amply indicated by their repeated denunciation of such proposals as elaborate intelligence gathering schemes, the Soviet lead­ ers react suspiciously and defensively to these proposals as Western efforts to pry into Soviet weaknesses and to interfere with Soviet efforts to maintain a controlled society. In our view this deepseated distrust of the West and Soviet preoccupation with security will long remain a bar to any but the most limited inspection and controls. With equal suspi­ cion, they almost certainly will reject any cut-­off of nuclear weapons
