Guatemala 651 information regarding the health program and what the United States might do to be of assistance to Guatemala. Mr. Rubottom and Ambassador Sparks engaged Secretary McElroy in discussion regarding the oil problem, particularly the matter of off-­ shore procurement of certain types of fuel for the Defense Department needs. Mr. Rubottom told the Secretary that he was going to Venezuela tomorrow to consult with the Government there on the oil problem. The Chargé d’Affaires, Dr. Julio Asensio-Wunderlich, expressed to the President appreciation on behalf of the Government of Guatemala for the invitation to General Ydígoras to come to the United States with his party. He also thanked the President for making the President’s Guest House available as the group’s residence while here and expressed their appreciation for the cordial reception given them by the President at breakfast this morning. At the conclusion of the breakfast, the President led his guests to the portico of the White House where photographs were taken by assembled newsmen. GT–5. National Intelligence Estimate1 Washington, April 29, 1958. NIE 82-55 THE OUTLOOK FOR GUATEMALA2 THE PROBLEM To estimate the outlook in Guatemala over the next few years, with special reference to political trends and to Communist prospects. CONCLUSIONS 1. President Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes, inaugurated on 2 March 1958, is authoritarian in background and outlook, but will probably endeavor 1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff participated in the preparation of this estimate. The Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on April 29, 1958. 2 This estimate supersedes NIE 82–55, “Probable Developments in Guatemala,” 26 July 1955, and so much of NIE 80–57, “Political Stability in Central America . . .,” 23 April 1957, as pertains to Guatemala. [Footnote in the source text.]
