Panama 889 I assure you that my Government appreciates your comments on the implementation of the recently signed Act concerning employment and wage practices in the Canal Zone, and they will be kept in mind while preparing the regulations under which the Act will operate. It is the intention of my Government that the interpretation and application of the Act will be one more step by which we strengthen the ties of friendship which already unite our countries. Dwight D. Eisenhower” No public release this message planed here. In view Department’s decision not to release text de la Guardia message delivered Department August 5 believe decision should be left to GOP whether release this message. If GOP decides release, please advise 2 hours in advance release time.2 2 In telegram 144 from Panama City, August 21, Amb. Harrington informed the Department of State that President de la Guardia was pleased to receive President Eisenhower’s message and planned to release all but the first paragraph of it to the press on August 22. (711.11-EI/8–2158) PM–7. Letter from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Irwin) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, September 22, 1958. Dear Mr. Rubottom: Our letter of 27 November 19562 requested that negotiations be resumed with the Republic of Panama for the acquisition of two radar sites to be used for anti-­aircraft purposes. It has now been determined that for the present no action should be taken to modernize the anti-­ aircraft defenses of the Panama Canal. It is requested therefore, that no further effort be made at this time to secure the sites in question.3 Sincerely yours, Deputy Assistant Secretary 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.56319/9–2258. Secret. 2 Printed in Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VII, American Republics: Central and South America, Document 167. 3 The following handwritten notation appears at the bottom of the source text: “Note: This is an example of what happens to many an issue we take up with a foreign government on behalf of the Defense establishment. W[illiam]. P. Snow 10/7/8”
