790  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
renunciation of force that would enable us to proceed to the next stage 
of our talks in an atmosphere free from the threat of war. As I under­
stand the situation the only objection you have had to the draft we have 
been discussing was to the clause relating to self-­defense. Your stated 
objections to this clause have been based on the assertion that it prej­
udiced the views of your government with regard to the merits of our 
dispute in the Taiwan area, requiring your government to recognize 
the validity of the U.S. position there and thus preventing your gov­
ernment from peacefully maintaining and asserting its position in this 
regard. If this were a fact your objections would certainly have validity 
and I would be entirely prepared to recognize them.
B. However, as I have repeatedly pointed out, I have no such intent, 
and the plain language of at least the English text has no such meaning 
or connotation. I have repeatedly pointed out that all that the text says 
is that in making this declaration each of us states that he is doing so 
without prejudice to what each of us consider our inherent rights of 
individual and collective self-­defense. As I pointed out at our last meet­
ing, this does not mean that your government is recognizing the merits 
of any and all U.S. claims in this regard any more than my government 
is recognizing the merits of any and all claims of your government in 
this regard. I have tried to make this just as clear as I could and partic­
ularly at our last meeting explained it in very simple terms. Therefore, 
if this was in fact the basis of the objection of your government to this 
clause, I hope that it has reconsidered its position in the light of my 
explanations.
C. I hope that it is not the intention of your government to demand 
as prior or concomitant condition for the issuance of our declaration 
that my government agree to a resolution on your terms of any of the 
disputes between us. If this is not the intent of your government I see 
no reason you cannot promptly agree to the text of the draft declaration 
we have been discussing and pass on to the discussion of other matters 
in accordance with the terms of reference for these talks and the text of 
that declaration.
2. Wang, reading from his notes, said I had properly stated that we 
indeed have spent so much time on discussion of declaration renounc­
ing use of force. It all the more unsatisfactory that in spending so much 
time we have not yet been able reach agreement.
3. Chief reason for this delay has been fact that there still exists 
difference of principle between two of us on this question. It now for 
both us try overcome and resolve differences existing between us. 
It also necessary for us to clarify some of points we encountering in 
discussion such a declaration.
4. Wang, turning to prepared statement, said I had repeatedly 
stated at last meeting that in making declaration it not the intention to
