228 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 —It will bring a degree of order back to international relations. —It will enable Iranians to sober up and decide on their future in a rational manner, thus preserving the integrity of Iran. Losses for the U.S.: —It will accelerate temporarily anti-U.S. actions in other Moslem countries. —It might bring about Soviet intervention and a splitting up of Iran. —It will offer the Soviets and other leftist elements a propaganda leverage against the U.S. for a certain period of time. George T. Kalaris2 2 Kalaris signed “George” above this typed signature. 86. Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe (Horelick) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner and the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1 Washington, December 5, 1979 SUBJECT Vance-Dobrynin Conversation 1. Dobrynin has been recalled to Moscow for 10 days for consultations and is leaving today. Because of his imminent departure, Secretary Vance called Dobrynin in this morning to protest this morning’s Pravda article by A. Petrov on Iran.2 [portion marking not declassified] 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81M00919R: Executive Registry Subject Files (1976–1979), Box 14, Folder 12: C–372. Secret; Sensitive. Sent through Clarke. A copy was sent to the NIO for warning. 2 The Pravda article by A. Petrov states that, while contrary to the Vienna Convention, the hostage situation had to be understood in the historical context of U.S. actions toward Iran; that the United States was preparing to use force; that Israel had offered its services for this and that the Pentagon would use bases in Egypt; and that Kennedy and Young supported the extradition of the Shah. The article included a warning from Brezhnev against any outside interference in Iran’s internal affairs. According to an INR analysis, the article’s byline implied high-level Foreign Ministry approval but was essentially “an exercise in waffling” since it omitted an earlier statement by Brezhnev that U.S. military intervention was an infringement of Soviet national security. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West File, Box 56, West Europe Country File, Iran 11/79–7/80)
