676
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Pakistan and a significant number of the fighting tribesmen. ([classifica-
tion marking not declassified])
In the past these six exile leaders have never been able to set aside
their deep personal and ideological differences in order to unite into
a more forceful opposition against the pro-Communist government in
Kabul. Attempts at unification in April 1978 and August 1979 foun-
dered after only a few weeks. A third attempt was initiated in January
1980, when the six leaders united under the banner of the Islamic
Alliance for the Liberation of Afghanistan (IALA). This attempt at unity
has an important distinction from previous tries; it incorporates a direct
agreement between two significant exile figures—Sayed Ahmad Gai-
lani and Sebqatullah Mojadedi—who had hitherto been unable to set
aside for very long the historical rivalry of their respective families.
This try at unity has also been the first since the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan in December 1979. As a consequence of that act, the IALA
has come under increased pressure from the Governments of Pakistan,
Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states to keep itself united as a
precondition for military and financial aid. In March 1980, in response
to this pressure, the IALA selected a figurehead leader, Abdul Rasul
Saif. Imprisoned for the past five years, Saif, unlike the six other exile
leaders in Peshawar, is not known to have any political or religious
following. ([classification marking not declassified])
Despite these efforts, the potential for disintegration remains. The
IALA was formed in haste to achieve a semblance of unity before the
26 January Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference in Islamabad, so the
six leaders had to postpone negotiating any organizational details. The
charter was drawn up by Mojadedi and Gailani; under it Mojadedi
will be prime minister (head of government) in a government-in-exile
or any future post-Communist government, while Gailani will act as
chief of a revolutionary council (chief of state). Another council, com-
posed primarily of tribal leaders, is to elect other government officials.
The leaders have not yet all agreed to the specifics of the charter. In
fact, Gulbuddin Hikmatyar has withdrawn his Islamic Party from the
IALA—at least temporarily—because he believes that it will have too
small a representation on the revolutionary council. He was demanded
a system of proportional representation that will reflect the number of
guerrillas that each alliance group has fielded. ([classification marking
not declassified])
The IALA, the Tribesmen, and the King
The view the embattled tribal leaders have of the IALA probably
varies from individual to individual. Some no doubt look to it for
political coordination of their opposition to the pro-Soviet government
and as the channel for external military assistance. Others are most
