and Coleman that he refused to accept my written representations until I had had time
to consider the fact that should the two unsatisfactory situations be mentioned in the
same paper he would be able to use it against the United States in the press and before
the League of Nations. After carefully going over the representations again and finding
that the two situations were not dependent upon one another in any way I left the above
mentioned Note Verbale at the Foreign Office.
The Albanian Government’s reply, copies of which are transmitted herewith both in the
original and in translation, was dictated in my presence by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs to the Secretary General of the Foreign Office, Djemail Bey Dino, on the 23rd
instant. (Legation’s telegram No. 33 of March 24).26 The Minister showed even more
by his attitude than by his Note that he did not understand either of the two situations or
the serious view which the American Government took of them. He felt that the
American Government was in no position to exercise effective pressure upon his
Government and actually stated in a cheerful side remark that whatever happened it
would not be war. …
I had asked for an appointment with the President of the Republic to follow the
delivery of the Department’s representations to the Foreign Office. Ahmet Bey Zogu
was not able to receive me, however, until the afternoon of the 24th instant. He seemed
to understand both the details and the significance of the unsatisfactory situations better
than did his Minister for Foreign Affairs and stated that he regretted that Veisel Idrizi27
had been killed in a fight with gendarmes who were pursuing him in an attempt to take
alive this leader of the band of alleged murderers of the Americans. He wished that the
Americans had a machine of some kind that could be secured to go into the mountains
to round up all the bandits and hoped that even without one all the murderers would be
apprehended in the near future but it was beyond his power to command that this be
accomplished by a certain date. To his definite knowledge Cub Sul Cana and Elez
Hasani27a were being tracked down.
Concerning the unfulfilled commercial assurances the President gave his promise that
he would instruct the Minister for Foreign Affairs to enter into an agreement of such a
nature with the representative of the American company in Tirana that the American
Government would be satisfied that a very real improvement had been made in the
situation. … Mr. Sheffield states that up to the present date he has not been able to
come to satisfactory terms with the Albanian Government for even a third choice of
areas.
I have [etc.]
TROJAN KODDING
[Enclosure—Translation]
