1955  335
if there are not. Latter even will of course require very strong renewal my 
stress on implementation. If one or more released before next meeting 
presentation on implementation could be milder and could show more 
disposition move on to discussion topics under item two.
2. In any event major subject will undoubtedly continue be his 
insistence on inclusion higher level meeting. I will of course stick to our 
position but would appreciate Department’s suggestions on any fur­
ther debating points it feels I might make. Can without difficulty keep 
discussion going on this subject for at least next meeting but we should 
be looking ahead to probability deadlock will develop over this point.
3. As stated my telegram 794 believe it may be useful for me make 
renunciation of force statement at next meeting if opportunity devel­
ops. Believe this would assist in keeping situation fluid without giving 
away anything to CHICOMS.
4. My present plan is not to go into any detailed presentation miss­
ing military personnel at next meeting but only touch on it as required 
to support its inclusion as subject for discussion.
5. Hope Department will assure I promptly receive any infor­
mation CHICOMS may give O’Neill on releases or other aspects 
implementation.
Gowen
253.	 Letter from Clough to McConaughy1
Letter No. 10
Geneva, September 29, 1955
Dear Walter:
Alex took off at 4:00 a.m. by automobile for Prague. Since we 
had worked until 11:00 p.m. getting off yesterday’s telegrams, he was 
unable to write the usual weekly letter to you and asked me to get a 
note into the pouch in explanation. He expects to leave Prague for the 
return trip on Sunday, arriving here late Monday night. He hopes that 
you will repeat to him in Prague any important telegrams.
Actually, there is nothing on the substance of the talks to be added 
to yesterday’s telegrams. We tried to cover the situation as thoroughly 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Clough signed the original “Ralph.” A handwritten note on the letter indicates 
it was received on October 3.
