Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Smith said that in preparing his paper, he did not want to demean the President’s 1977 policies. Those policies have greatly increased international awareness that the fuel cycle is a “dangerous beast.” Our successes include persuading the FRG and France not to export sensitive technologies, turning off dangerous developments in Korea and Taiwan, and cancellation of the reprocessing contract in Pakistan. INFCE came out better than expected. On MB–10 issues, while there has been a fair amount of static, we did not turn any down. Our failures include the FRG/Brazil deal, Argentina and our efforts to use organized sanctions in Pakistan. We have not made a dent on India, and have not made much progress with South Africa, although we probably did manage to abort a test. (S) We now face the problem of the post-INFCE period and the NPT Review Conference. The law requires us to get consent rights over reprocessing in the US–EURATOM agreement. Europeans have hinted that they might be willing to give us the juridical right if there were an implied understanding on how we would exercise it. The Japanese plan to build a large reprocessing plant; they want predictability in meeting their plutonium requirements. (S) Smith said that we have essentially three options: to continue on our present course, which would not get us to our 1977 objectives; to follow the course advocated by the UK (a universal code of nuclear trade)3 which is dangerous, or to become more flexible and try to build a better regime. The proposals put forward would not require a change in the law, but he personally hoped that we would change it later. (S) Smith defined the regime he seeks as including: —full-scope safeguards as a common supplier requirement for new export commitments; —deferral of thermal recycle; —IPS; —reaffirmation and perhaps extension of FRG and French policies not to export enrichment and reprocessing technology; —enhanced cooperation in dealing with mavericks; and —multinational auspices for sensitive facilities. (S) Smith said that what he seeks now is approval of planning assumptions; i.e. authority to take soundings in some depth on the Hill and abroad, particularly on the central question of relaxing our MB–10 policy to permit generic approval of reprocessing and plutonium use in advanced countries. (S) There was some discussion of which countries might qualify for this treatment. Would Korea, for example, qualify? Smith said that the 3 Not found.
