Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 168. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to President Carter, Vice President Mondale, Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown, and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 15, 1980 The attached paper sets forth our preliminary views of Soviet options and constraints in Southwest Asia following the invasion of Afghanistan. Its focus is on the major actors in the region from the Soviet perspective; it does not deal explicitly with possible US policies or how those might influence Soviet positions. Stansfield Turner2 Attachment Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency3 Washington, undated SUBJECT Soviet Union and Southwest Asia 1. It is unlikely that the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan constitutes the preplanned first step in the implementation of a highly articulated grand design for the rapid establishment of hegemonic control over all of Southwest Asia. Rather than signaling the carefully timed beginning of a premeditated strategic offensive, the occupation may have been a reluctantly authorized response to what was perceived by the Kremlin as an imminent and otherwise irreversible deterioration of its already established position in a country which fell well within the 1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Mondale Papers, Box 42, Foreign Countries—Afghanistan, 1980. Secret; Noforn. 2 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature. 3 Secret; Noforn. In an undated, unsigned memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski summarized the CIA memorandum and wrote: “it is thoughtfully argued and deserves your attention.” Still, Brzezinski noted, it “does not examine the possibility the Soviets may move more forcefully with their military power against Iran, and possibly Pakistan, in the near future.” Brzezinski surmised that a combination of a settlement of the Iran hostage crisis (which, in his view, would increase Iranian anti-Soviet sentiment) and the perception of a growing U.S. military presence in the region could convince the Soviet leadership to make preemptive moves “while the balance is more in their favor.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 82, USSR: 1/
