Article 5. The most vigourous debate, as was to be expected, took place on this article. It is needless to summarize this debate, since the Department is thoroughly familiar with the points of view. The representative of the Netherlands and myself made continuous efforts to force the representatives of France, Japan and Italy to explain why they were reluctant to give full publicity, without eliciting any response from them. The Chairman called for a vote on those who advocated the principle of equal treatment for public and private manufacture. Italy was the only State voting against the principle, with the French delegate maintaining that he would not vote until he knew the text of Article 5. It is safe to assume, however, that they will only acquiesce in the principle of equal treatment if a very limited publicity is accorded. This also was the basis of the Japanese position. A re-wording of Article 5 was adopted which is contained in Document C. F. A. 29.80 This phraseology represents a so-called “minimum agreement”, but an agreement to which the confirmed advocates of complete publicity, among them ourselves, and the confirmed advocates of a distinction between public and private manufacture, as, for example, Italy, made reservations. Article 6. In the discussion of this article I am happy to report a certain measure of achievement. The Japanese delegate could not agree to the inclusion of the remark following this article although Mr. Cadogan did so agree. I thereupon asked the Japanese delegate whether his instructions were definite. He replied that they were. 1 then stated that my Government had no desire to take such an unbending position in this debate that it would cause difficulties to other governments and make it impossible for them to accept; that I was able to show a certain measure of conciliation in this matter if it was essential, but I pointed out to the Japanese delegate that he was alone in his opposition to the inclusion of this additional information and begged him to consult his Government again as to whether, in view of the circumstances, they would not alter his instructions. In the final meeting Mr. Sato reported that he withdrew his opposition and that therefore the additional information could be inserted. I should like to emphasize at this time the continuous endeavor of the Japanese delegate to meet our point of view as far as his instructions permitted. The Italian delegate was anxious to adopt in the first paragraph of Article 6 of the phraseology of the Washington Treaty, at least not to adopt any
