176
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The Western democracies, the OPEC nations, and the developed
Communist countries can cooperate through existing international in-
stitutions in providing more effective aid. This is an excellent alterna-
tive to war.
We have a special need for cooperation and consultation with
other nations in this hemisphere—to the north and to the south. We do
not need another slogan. Although these are our close friends and
neighbors, our links with them are the same links of equality that we
forge for the rest of the world. We will be dealing with them as part of a
new, worldwide mosaic of global, regional, and bilateral relations.
It’s important that we make progress toward normalizing relations
with the People’s Republic of China. We see the American and Chinese
relationship as a central element of our global policy and China as a key
force for global peace. We wish to cooperate closely with the creative
Chinese people on the problems that confront all mankind. And we
hope to find a formula which can bridge some of the difficulties that
still separate us.
Finally, let me say that we are committed to a peaceful resolution
of the crisis in southern Africa. The time has come for the principle of
majority rule to be the basis for political order, recognizing that in a
democratic system the rights of the minority must also be protected.
To be peaceful, change must come promptly. The United States is
determined to work together with our European allies and with the
concerned African States to shape a congenial international framework
for the rapid and progressive transformation of southern African so-
ciety and to help protect it from unwarranted outside interference.
Let me conclude by summarizing: Our policy is based on an histor-
ical vision of America’s role. Our policy is derived from a larger view of
global change. Our policy is rooted in our moral values, which never
change. Our policy is reinforced by our material wealth and by our mil-
itary power. Our policy is designed to serve mankind. And it is a policy
that I hope will make you proud to be Americans.
Thank you.
