February 1951–February 1952
133
Mosadeq himself could get Majlis and non-Tudeh acceptance of any
compromise settlement which he would present and support. How-
ever, should he or a successor government approach an agreement
with the British, Tudeh opposition will probably come into the open. It
may also be expected to offer open opposition if the government pre-
sents any new legislation not related to the oil nationalization issue.
In the event that Mosadeq is forced out of office, part of his large
popular following will probably join the anti-AIOC organization and
ultimately the Tudeh ranks. Since any successor government would
probably have to maintain order by force if it accepts any agreement
which will, in effect, restore the AIOC to its former position in Iran,
Tudeh may be expected to exploit the anticipated popular indignation
to the fullest extent. The allegiance of the security forces, if ordered to
support an unpopular settlement, is doubtful.
The balance of political power in Iran is now held by a third force
composed principally of skilled workers, students, government em-
ployees, teachers, and industrial labor. The spokesmen of this force are
the National Front leaders. Nazi, Soviet, and Western propaganda in
the past 10 years has convinced this group that a better, freer standard
of living is possible in Iran. The contrast between possible methods for
achieving this end—that is, between revolution and evolution—is often
overlooked or disregarded. Unless effective demonstration of evolu-
tionary procedures appear, it is inevitable that increasing numbers of
Iranians will be attracted to revolutionary methods. Cessation of rev-
enues from the oil operations, and the economic dislocations that are
occuring in consequence, will present Tudeh with increasing opportu-
nities to promote revolution. At the present time the Shah’s influence is
practically nil. If the oil controversy continues to be regarded by Ira-
nians as a fight for their national independence, it is probable that revo-
lution will be ultimately accepted rather than acquiescence in any com-
promise which calls for retention of British predominance in the oil
industry.
Conclusion
At the present time, Tudeh is not capable of seizing control. Given
a continuation of the present economic deterioration and/or the re-
placement of the Mosadeq government by one willing to reestablish the
British economic position within Iran, it is possible that that capability
may exist by the early part of 1952.
