World Hunger and Food Policy
889
4. Announcement
That you authorize us to announce on Friday any decisions you
make on the basis of this memorandum.13
Bob Beckel, Congressional Liaison, supports my recommendations.
13 The President approved this recommendation and wrote “Sat.” above the word
“Friday.” At a January 19 White House news briefing, Eizenstat and Owen announced
that Carter had approved the purchase of grains for inclusion in the Food for Peace pro-
gram. (J.P. Smith, “U.S. Will Buy the Grain Union Refuses to Load,” The Washington Post,
January 20, 1980, p. A–4)
266.
Report Prepared by the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger1
Washington, undated
[Omitted here are a title page and an introductory note.]
Recommendations for U.S. Actions to Help Alleviate Starvation and
Malnutrition among Victims of the Kampuchean Famine2
Long-term Arrangements and U.S. Organization
Most experts agree that substantial international relief will be
needed in Kampuchea at least through 1981, if hundreds of thousands
of people are not to die. Such a long-term effort must be authorized,
funded, and organized as quickly as possible. Current U.S. Govern-
ment funding for the relief effort will suffice only until Spring of 1980.3
Also, should further military action occur on a major scale, the diffi-
culties of dealing with famine and refugees will greatly increase, both
in Kampuchea and Thailand.
Even at the present time, international relief organizations are
finding great difficulty in maintaining cash flow.4 Any steps taken by
the United States to make funds available quickly and to convince other
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800052–1807. No
classification marking. Mayer, serving as acting Chairman, transmitted the report to the
President under a January 25 covering letter, indicating that the Commission “shall con-
tinue to monitor this situation on your behalf and we hope that our recommendations at
this time are helpful.” (Ibid.)
2 See Document 261.
3 An unknown hand underlined this sentence.
4 An unknown hand underlined “cash flow.”
