1140  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
275.	 Record of Meeting Between Burke and Aurand1
November 25, 1960
ADMIRAL BURKE’S CONVERSATION WITH CAPTAIN 
AURAND, 25 NOV 60
CAPT AURAND: Dr. Kistakoswky saw the President this morning 
and he really gave him a charge. I didn’t even mention it—and when I 
got up stairs he said, “Pete I’m hearing some things about this Omaha 
deal that really frighten the devil out of me”.
ADM BURKE: Did you get a copy of my letter to Lemnitzer?
CAPT AURAND: No sir. He says this thing will over-­kill and what 
not. He said they are going to make a hell of a lot more bombs than we 
have now and I think we have too many already. I said those would 
be relatively cheap if you’re going to have to buy a lot more missiles 
and bombs. He said that’s right. Then he started talking about how to 
knock-­off this being sure—you know, times 10 business.
ADM BURKE: That’s why I want you to take this memorandum.
CAPT AURAND: He said, you know what I think we could do—he 
said POLARIS may be the solution to this whole thing, he said what we 
can do is take the POLARIS boats and say “alright, you’re the back-­up” 
and we will let everybody just have one whack—not ten whacks and 
then we will get a report from these satellite and whatever other recon­
naissance we can get and tell the POLARISES to clean up what isn’t 
done. He said that maybe that will cut—
ADM BURKE: Through the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
CAPT AURAND: Well he wasn’t—Now, one thing that Kisty told 
him and he told me this too—I think it’s a cover for Kisty and I think I 
would do this if I were in his place too—he told the President that he 
recommended that he not disapprove the plan but say that the next 
plan has got to be brought up along these guidelines.
ADM BURKE: Give the President a copy of this memorandum.
CAPT AURAND: I told him that if he ever approved this plan 
it would be a prescription for everything you ever heard of. He said, 
yes the other night when Kisty told him that Powers told him that this 
thing would never be used as a thing to increase forces and he said that 
if he said that, he’s crazy. He says the plan calls for more forces and if he 
1 Source: Eisenhower’s reaction to targeting plan, dispersal sites for President Top 
Secret. 8 pp. Naval Historical Center, Burke Papers, Transcripts and Phone Calls (NSTL).
