150
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
asked them to stop.2 ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
Soviet backing for the regime has been a major deterrent to Paki-
stani support for the insurgents. Even clandestine help to the rebels
has been limited by fear of Soviet retaliation and of provoking much
greater and more open Soviet military support for Kabul. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
The new regime in Iran is strongly sympathetic to Afghanistan’s
dissident Muslim tribesmen but its problems at home prevent it from
furnishing significant material help. Iran’s main contribution has been
moral encouragement to the insurgents. ([classification marking and han-
dling restriction not declassified])
The Afghan Military
Tribal loyalties, religion, heavy casualties, suspicion of Soviet
motives, and the slim prospects for an early end to insurgency have
already seriously damaged morale in the Afghan Army. Purges of
suspected disloyal officers have placed inexperienced men in key posi-
tions, and desertions occur daily. Some Afghan units reportedly have
fled or surrendered after only token resistance. ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
The government is taking steps to limit the impact of these losses.
The Army is retaining soldiers beyond their obligatory terms of service
and may have begun recalling individuals released from active duty.
The Army also is using tribal irregulars to fight other tribes opposing
the government. Kabul is undertaking a longer term program to im-
prove command and control in the eastern provinces and to expand
the Army as a whole. None of these measures, however, will have any
immediate impact on the military’s ability to cope with the insurgency.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
2 In telegram 2772 from Kabul, April 9, the Embassy reported that on the previous
day Radio Afghanistan alleged that “a large number of Pakistani soldiers in Afghan
dress” had attacked camps in the border province of Paktia. The Embassy further noted
that the charge, delivered during a high-level Soviet military visit to Kabul, suggested
both Soviet endorsement and a “considerable escalation of the propaganda war” that
Afghanistan was waging against its neighbors. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790163–0227) A memorandum prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency,
May 3, noted that Pakistan’s decision to aid “tribal rebels” would likely raise border
tensions and could possibly lead to increased involvement in Afghanistan by third
countries. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting) A field report prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency, May 23, forwarded information from [text not declassified]
claiming that Pakistan commenced a covert aid program on May 18 to support Afghan
rebels through material and financial means. (Department of Defense, Afghan War
Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan (May 79–Jun 79))
