6  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
2.	
Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant for 
National Security Affairs (Gregg) and the Vice President’s 
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Watson) to 
Vice President Bush1
Washington, March 28, 1988
SUBJECT
START: Anne Armstrong’s Letter
On reading her letter (attached)2 you keyed on the PFIAB assertion 
that the Soviets have better passive and active defenses than we do, and 
then asked why we would be worse off if both sides reduced by fifty 
percent under a START treaty.
The PFIAB assessment is really just the tip of an iceberg that could 
become quite serious for our strategic relationship with the Soviets and 
which will certainly be highlighted in any ratification hearings on a 
START agreement. The question will come up, repeatedly, whether a 
START agreement improves our security or detracts from it.
If the Soviets have better defenses then our post-­reduction coun-
terattack force would deter even less.3
This could dramatically alter the fundamental strategic equation 
between us.4
Some say this would give the Soviets strategic superiority such that 
they would be able to apply political and military pressure forcing us to 
back down in a crisis.
If all other things were equal then fifty percent reductions would 
begin and end at the same place, and leave each side with quantitatively 
and qualitatively equal forces. All said, the US and the USSR have very 
different forces, of different quality, different defenses, and experience 
tells us the Soviets have a strong propensity to cheat.
The PFIAB considered several factors in reaching their assessment 
on the effect superior Soviet passive and active defenses would have on 
the strategic equation. These are:
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Vice Presidential Records, Office of 
National Security Affairs, Donald P. Gregg Files, Subject Files, OA/ID 19863–001, START 
[1]. Secret.
2 Attached but not printed. See Attachment, Document 1.
3 Bush underlined “If” and placed a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside this 
sentence.
4 Bush placed a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside this sentence.
