780
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
undertaken. In particular, the last rescue operation seemed to him to
be contrary to the purposes the United States wanted to accomplish.
Had it continued, it would surely have led to the death of all the
hostages and perhaps many other people. It would surely be much
better to get the hostages out alive. As for the broadcasts the Secretary
had mentioned, if one were to compare these broadcasts with those
the United States beamed at the Soviet Union, one could only come to
the conclusion that if medals were awarded for hostile statements, the
United States would walk away with all the medals. He would only
ask the Secretary not to consider these to be Olympic medals since the
United States obviously did not believe in the Olympics.
Gromyko said that the only policy toward Iran the Soviet Union
was pursuing was aimed at seeing an independent, sovereign state,
peacefully developing its own interests without any outside interfer-
ence or intrusions.
[Omitted here is material on topics unrelated to Iran.]
285.
Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the
Department of State1
Tehran, May 19, 1980
1. Last night I met with my Algerian colleague Abdelkrim Gheraieb
(GB) and informed him on our position concerning carrying out our
respective mandates, a future examination of respective grievances and
a reconciliation of the countries in dispute. GB whose Deputy Foreign
Minister (and also Secretary General) is here at present was very much
interested and told me that his Deputy Minister had received a much
briefer note from Algiers about Algerian-Swiss cooperation. Our for-
mula was not only interesting but sound.
2. GB briefed me about steps undertaken by his country.
2.1. At Tito’s funeral, the Algerian president had two meetings
which underlie the present Algerian démarche.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 42, Subject File, Iran Papers 5/80–7/80. Secret; Sensitive.
2 As reported in telegram 9294 from Bonn, May 14, Schmidt asked Algerian President
Chadli Benjedid at the funeral of Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito “to consider an
Algerian initiative” to resolve the hostage crisis. Benjedid then dispatched the Algerian
Foreign Ministry Director General to Tehran for discussions on resolving the crisis.
(Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS Cables May 1980)
