276  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
would agree to UK performing functions and assist them. He had indi­
cated when UK invited by US, then PRC would agree and assist. There 
would be no differences of opinion if I meant GOI invited by PRC and 
US would agree and assist, but if I meant GOI was invited by US, then 
he would have to consider statement was intentional distortion and 
misrepresentation of agreed announcement. If by my statement that US 
formally informed UK I meant US had formally invited UK, and if I 
formally decleared this to be so in this meeting, then his government 
would contact UK and express agreement it assume functions set forth 
in agreed announcement with assistance PRC.
20. I said we had formally notified both UK and GOI immediately 
and wonder what more we could do to put agreed announcement into 
effect.
21. Wang replied if my statement today meant that I was formally 
notifying him US had completed invitation UK, then PRC would con­
tact UK and give assistance.
22. I asked if, whatever word was used by his government, his gov­
ernment would promptly take action with respect UK so that it could 
promptly undertake functions under agreed announcement.
23. Wang said if we had completed invitation process PRC would 
certainly do its part and that what he meant was if US had transmitted 
formal text to UK.
24. I said this had been done.
25. Wang said, very well, that meant we had invited UK and that 
PRC had not, but that PRC had only agreed.
26. I asked if PRC would contact office of UK Charge in Peiping.
27. He said as a matter of course they would do whatever was 
required under the agreement.
28. I then told him I would like to inform him about the publicity 
carried in Chinese language press in US regarding agreed announce­
ment. I said in New York full text announcement carried in five Chi­
nese papers, and gave names. In San Francisco text carried in Chinese 
World while news and editorials carried two other papers. Since these 
publications circulate freely throughout US it was assured even Chinese 
in US who did not understand English could have access text agreed 
announcement.
29. I said at last meeting I had raised several questions regarding 
implementation of agreed announcement with respect to Americans 
on China mainland. I would appreciate it if he could give me fuller 
answers to my questions than he had ­been able to last time.
30. Wang said he had nothing to tell me beyond what he had said 
in the last meeting because at that time he told me all he was able to.
