356  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Burt said that, if the experts continued to feel there was ambiguity, 
then it should be clarified. Perhaps the experts could meet again and 
try to find a solution.
Nazarkin said he hoped that wouldn’t be necessary. Although 
his conviction was that the Russian equivalent of “military exercise” 
should not be used in the singular, he was prepared to do so in this case. 
He would therefore accept a literal interpretation of the English even 
though it sounded a bit strange in Russian.
Burt said he appreciated Nazarkin’s willingness to bend the beau-
tiful Russian language.
Koltunov, turning the discussion to the agreement on data denial, 
argued that it was important to have a clear understanding of what 
practices were prohibited and what were permitted. Data could be 
transmitted in many different ways, such as low-­energy, narrow beams, 
compressed data, and complicated algorithms. The U.S. draft did not 
make clear what was allowed. Unless the text was made more specific, 
there would be disagreements which neither side should want. One 
possibility was to have an addendum which listed techniques that 
would be incompatible with the sides’ obligations.
Foley said he thought the two sides had a clear understanding of the 
technical issues. The U.S. side was prepared to entertain the idea of an 
addendum. We wanted to stress, however, that the U.S. August 4 paper2 
was explicitly limited to ballistic missiles, whereas several of the Soviet 
technical concerns pertained to cruise missiles. The U.S. was not propos-
ing to change current practices except those practices intended to deny 
data to the other side. He had enumerated some of those practices on 
Monday.3 He reiterated that the U.S. was not asking the Soviet side to 
change its practices except for those practices intended to deny data.
Nazarkin said this was a difficult and complicated matter. He had 
understood in Geneva that an early agreement would contain only 
those elements already agreed in NST. Thus, it was fair that it would 
cover only launches from test sites. But there was no agreement in 
Geneva on the question of systems to be covered. Mr. Foley mentioned 
that cruise missiles should not be included. But there was disagreement 
on this. He didn’t want to say the problem was insurmountable. But 
further time was required for decisions. There was also the question 
of duration. The U.S. side wanted an agreement on telemetry as a trial 
verification measure. But if it was only a trial measure, it would not 
resolve the telemetry issue as a whole, and it could come back to com-
plicate the completion of START. That was why the Soviet side wanted 
2 Not found.
3 September 18.
