VIII Preface the resumption of the U.S.-Soviet Nuclear and Space Talks (NST) and draft instructions for the U.S. START delegation. Following meetings of the Deputies Committee (DC) and Principals Committee (PC), on June 19, President Bush approved U.S. positions on START which included, inter alia, approaches to fundamental limits, nondeployed missiles, air breathing systems, mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), and counting and verification procedures in advance of the June 21 resumption of the NST in Geneva. The focus of research and selection in this volume was to document how U.S. policymakers and negotiators worked with their Soviet counterparts to overcome these and other outstanding matters to reach a START agreement that built upon the December 1987 joint U.S.-Soviet statement from the Washington Summit establishing basic counting formulas. Principles of selection include the documentation related to the development of and substantive changes to U.S. negotiating positions; summations of the rounds of negotiation in Geneva; and forward—or backward—movement toward an agreement, whether in Moscow, Washington, or elsewhere. These themes are brought out in documentation such as agency memoranda and position papers, records of National Security Council (NSC) meetings, National Security Directives (NSD), reporting telegrams from the U.S. delegation in Geneva, and records of the so-called “Gang of Eight” informal NSC meetings that President Bush convened and the NSC’s interagency “Ungroup” on arms control matters. Key moments included Secretary of State James Baker’s hosting of Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Eduard Shevardnadze in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, in September 1989—a visit in which the Soviets dropped a longstanding insistence on linkage between a START agreement and a U.S. nonwithdrawal commitment to the 1972 Antiballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty; summits between Bush and Gorbachev in Malta, Washington, and Moscow; and U.S. and Soviet experts group meetings led by Under Secretary of State Reginald Bartholomew and Soviet negotiator Marshal Sergei Akhromeyev. Memoranda of conversation and minutes for these meetings are included in this volume. Key figures, who are represented in the documents selected for the volume, include Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Arms Control Arnold Kanter and his successor John Gordon; U.S. START Negotiator Richard Burt and his successor Linton Brooks; and James Timbie of the Department of State. Also included here is documentation on the domestic and congressional expectations for a “peace dividend” as the Cold War wound down. On February 22, 1990, Senators John Warner and Sam Nunn informed Bush that the remaining components of the decade-long U.S. strategic modernization effort— consisting of rail-based garrison Peacekeeper (MX), the small ICBM (“Midgetman”), large quantities of the B–2 bomber, and sustained funding of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)—would not survive
