Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 182. Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State1 No. 843 Washington, August 18, 1977 CEAUSESCU’S LEADERSHIP POSITION Summary Romanian President and party boss Nicolae Ceausescu has concentrated more power in his own hands than has any other Warsaw Pact leader; his control of the party and state apparatus is seemingly unassailable. There have been indications, however, of a steady erosion in the extent of support he enjoys both within the party and among the population at large. Ceausescu’s handling of the aftermath of the earthquake which struck Romania in March—he completely dominated the relief and reconstruction activities—highlighted and increased the gap between him and the rest of the party leadership. Since then, his intensification of an already blatant personality cult and his failure to modify unpopular economic policies have further alienated a dissatisfied public. The June 13 riot at Bucharest’s “August 23” stadium and the coal miners’ strike in western Romania in early August reflect a considerable degree of popular frustration and anger. Although no immediate challenge to Ceausescu’s leadership position is likely, his isolation probably will grow, further hampering effective policy formulation and implementation. Within the next few years the resulting pressures could pose serious problems for Romania’s political stability. Ceausescu’s Leadership Style Ceausescu remains Eastern Europe’s most unusual Communist leader, integrating nationalism and Marxism in a uniquely Romanian blend. His domestic policies in recent years (he has ruled Romania for 12) increasingly have departed in significant ways from prevailing Soviet and East European norms. These deviations, while less publicized than his foreign policy initiatives, may be of greater importance in the long run for Romania’s stability and policy orientation. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1958–1978,
