3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
599
templated in this area was the signing of an international convention
on the prohibition of radiological weapons.
Turning to neutron weapons, Gromyko noted that the Soviet Union
had tabled a proposal at the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva,
proposing that these weapons be prohibited and that both our nations
be a party to such an agreement. The Soviet Union had stated its views
on this matter more than once and, in particular, this had been empha-
sized repeatedly by President Brezhnev. The Soviet Union believed
that the manufacture and deployment of weapons of this kind would
be a major negative step that would adversely affect relations between
our two countries and the international atmosphere as a whole. He
would therefore express the hope that President Carter personally and
the United States approach this matter seriously and that an agreement
be reached which would serve the interests of improving relations be-
tween us and the interests of detente and peace.
Turning to chemical weapons and the possibility of reaching
agreement to prohibit such weapons, Gromyko noted that the negotia-
tions on this question are proceeding badly and in an unsatisfactory
way. It would evidently be difficult to go into detail at this meeting, but
he wanted to make two points in this connection. First, we had major
differences between our views on questions relating to verification in
this connection and, secondly, for an agreement on chemical weapons
to be effective, it was important that all major powers, and certainly the
permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, join in such an
agreement. What kind of an agreement would that be without the par-
ticipation of China? Could one really agree to a situation in which the
Chinese alone would have a free hand to manufacture chemical
weapons? These were the major points to which he wanted to draw the
President’s attention.
Turning to anti-satellite systems, Gromyko said that Secretary
Vance and he had discussed this matter just two days ago. He did not
believe it necessary to repeat what he had said to Secretary Vance. The
President was well aware of the Soviet position. The difference be-
tween our respective positions was very great indeed, and he would
ask the President to take a more objective look at this matter. An agree-
ment could not possibly be one-sided, benefiting the United States
alone.
When Gromyko turned to conventional arms transfers, the Presi-
dent interjected a few comments on the anti-satellite talks. We had not
complained about the Soviet-manned Soyuz/Salyut flights, and had
not asserted that they were anti-satellite systems. Our space shuttle will
not be designed as an anti-satellite system. It was the very center of our
space effort in the future. The President hoped that this would not be al-
lowed to block progress in the talks because we are going to continue
