1138
Uruguay: U.S. Relations with Uruguay
UR–1.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under 
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
 
Washington, March 12, 1958.
SUBJECT
Uruguay; Proposed Approach to Economic Cooperation.
It is paradoxical but true that with no country in the Hemisphere 
do we have more difficulty in our relations than with Uruguay – 
­traditionally the most stable and democratically-­oriented nation in Latin 
America. For a variety of reasons, detailed below, the adverse drift in 
our relations in the past few years has now reached a critical stage, and 
the time has come when Uruguay, politically in a state of near-­paralysis 
(Tab A)2, and economically in a state of increasing deterioration (Tab B)3, 
needs help from us. Help, which can most fruitfully be accorded in the 
economic sphere, will have a resultingly beneficent effort in the political 
sphere. If, on the other hand, no tangible form of assistance is forthcom-
ing, we can look forward with assurance to worsened economic con-
ditions and correspondingly more difficult political relations. Already 
the Uruguayan Government – tolerant of native Communism to the 
point where infiltration is a serious problem – is looking to the Soviet 
bloc for markets, and no one can say with certainty that, in the event of 
further economic deterioration, Uruguay could withstand more serious 
economic and financial penetration. The purpose of this paper is to set 
forth some of our salient problems in connection with Uruguay and to 
suggest certain steps which I believe must be taken.
1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Uruguay 1958.” 
Confidential. Drafted by Livingston S. Watrous, Officer in Charge of River [illegible in the 
original] Affairs in the Office of South American Affairs, and concurred in by Alexander 
M. [illegible in the original], Officer in Charge of Economic Development in the Office of 
Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 Not printed.
3 Not printed.
