Afghanistan
227
promising interventions with the White House. Since I don’t know
why the SCC (I) turned down the original proposal, I can’t assess
how much of a reopening the issue requires.3 I think he could raise it
noncommittally at a BVB lunch, without risking much.)
4. The fact that the Paks and the Iranians are already helping seems
to me an argument for some modestly increased US effort, rather than
the reverse. We have learned over the years that we can’t easily affect
complicated distant local conflicts operating from here—but that we
can have some impact when we can reinforce local concerns. (In current
circumstances, being on the same side as the Ayatollah seems strange,
but someday we may want to be able to remind them that the Shah
wasn’t opposed to the Soviets as a way of being nice to the US but
because the US can be a helpful ally against Soviet adventures.) In the
current state of our relations with Pakistan, being able to cooperate in
this is a useful way of making clear that we have—and can follow
through on—some common security concerns. In fact, in my view a
principal argument for somewhat increased US support is the beneficial impact
on other countries (Iran, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, even China) rather than
our impact on events in Afghanistan itself.4
In short, I think we should adhere to the policy that I believe
was adopted some months ago: Do what is appropriate to keep the
insurrection going, working with others in the region. I can’t comment
on specific plans because I don’t know enough about what’s been
proposed, but if it’s feasible, I’d favor funds for arms and facilitating
services to locate them and get them there.
Walter Slocombe5
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
(Policy Planning)
3 See Document 76. The Presidential Finding did not include a provision to support
the Afghan insurgents with military supplies. In the left margin beside this paragraph
an unknown hand, likely Murphy’s, wrote: “Also my points.”
4 In the left margin beside this paragraph, an unknown hand, likely Murphy’s,
wrote: “True.”
5 Slocombe signed “Walt” above his typed signature.
