318 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 94. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Maynes), the Legal Adviser (Hansell), the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz), the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), and the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, November 30, 1977 SUBJECT Human Rights Resolution in UNGA Issue for Decision Whether the U.S. should vote against or abstain on a draft resolution in the UN which sets forth guidelines for future work within the UN system with respect to human rights questions or, alternatively, join in a consensus adopting the resolution. The vote will likely take place on December 1. Essential Factors Under an agenda item entitled, “Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,” Iran proposed a draft resolution which concentrates on collective rights at the expense of individual rights. Subsequently, the co-sponsors accepted some Western amendments, so that the present draft resolution (at Tab 1)2 has now gained the co-sponsorship of a few Western States (New Zealand, Finland and Sweden) and an apparent willingness to go along with a consensus by most other Western States. USUN informs us that if there were a vote, the UK, Japan, Ireland and possibly the Netherlands, would abstain, while most other Western States would vote yes. None, however, are planning to call for a vote. An additional factor is that the vote on the UN resolution to establish the High Commissioner for Human Rights will come up immediately after the vote on the Iranian resolution. All bureaus recognize that 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 19, Human Rights—UN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Bond and Schwebel. Bond initialed for Hansell, Katz, and Lake. Derian did not initial the memorandum. A notation on the memorandum reads: “SO, Original has gone into WC. DL [Denis Lamb].” 2 Tab 1, attached but not printed, is a copy of telegram 5020 from USUN, November 26.
