4 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI warheads given the “counting rules” outlined in the US/Soviet Joint Summit Statement.4 Several Soviet missile systems will be counted as carrying fewer warheads than they actually can. In time of crisis or war, the Soviets could, undetected by our National Technical Means and unconstrained by whatever peacetime on-­site inspections might have previously occurred, deploy these missiles armed to their full capacity. Combined with counting rules that underestimate the Air-Launched Cruise Missile capacity of Soviet strategic aircraft, the United States could face nearly half again as many Soviet warheads as permitted under the treaty. These additional warheads could be deployed in times of crisis with little or no prior testing. Such deployments might well provide the Soviets a militarily and politically significant advantage in a world of deep reductions. [2 paragraphs (18 lines) not declassified] On-­site inspections cannot overcome these uncertainties. They will not tell us confidently of Soviet warhead deployments when we most need to know, nor can they solve issues of clandestine production and deployment. Although the details of the suspect site inspections agreed to in principle in the US/Soviet Joint Summit Statement need to be carefully worked out, there are limits to the compliance gains that can be hoped for from any inspection regime. Notifying the Soviets that a particular installation is a suspect site risks the intelligence sources and methods that brought the Soviet installation to U.S. attention. It also places sensitive U.S. installations at risk by opening them to reciprocal Soviet inspections. In either case, there will be an understandable reluctance on the part of the United States to demand inspections of Soviet suspect sites. We have reservations whether satellites or inspectors can confidently be expected to pierce in a timely way a determined Soviet effort to conceal illegal missile production and storage. [1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified] Similarly, we worry that Soviet military capabilities that seem less central to the strategic balance today, such as Soviet Anti-Submarine Warfare and Air Defense, may weigh much heavier if nuclear weapons are sharply reduced. Finally, we believe that these specific concerns should be addressed in light of a general assessment of where Soviet strategy is heading. The key question is: from the Soviet perspective, regardless of what other objectives they might have, how does the START treaty advance their military goals? In our opinion, these and similar intelligence uncertainties require immediate and focused review. 4 The Washington Summit Joint Statement is printed in Foreign Relations, 1981–1988, vol. XI, START I, Document 255.
