772 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Karpov: Gen. Omelitchev says the figure given you stands—400. Burt: Let me ask roughly speaking how many naval Backfire does the Soviet Union have? Omelitchev: I am afraid I may make a mistake. And that is not what matters. In this context we can discuss Backfire under air force command. Naval can be discussed in naval negotiations, they are not subject to this negotiation. Bartholomew: There are two naval problems in the Backfire declaration. First, in the 400, and second, in CFE. Given that you are prepared to freeze naval Backfire, why not 400 for all and not raise naval armament, with the understanding that having the 400 cover all Backfire is without prejudice to your position regarding naval arms in CFE. The effect is the same. This would be very good. We note what you have said on naval arms, there would be no prejudice either way. You as well as we would be better off with one number. You and we would not have to worry about this, and not highlight the issue. We think 400 is right. If Gen. Omelitchev thinks it is not right, he should tell us. Karpov: A freeze is not something I can propose as a solution, I must report it. Omelitchev: The Soviet Union is prepared not to give this airplane intercontinental capability, including by in-­flight refueling. 400 is the figure that will not include naval Backfire, which are not a subject of these negotiations and must be addressed within the framework of future negotiations on naval arms. Bartholomew: One more try. Suppose we have language in the declaration that would say the Soviet Union would freeze the total number of Backfire at current levels as of the end of this year, which is supposed to be the time of signature. We would need an exchange on what that number is, but there would be a freeze at current levels. Karpov: I don’t have this possibility in my brief. If you propose it, I will report it. Bartholomew: You check this ad ref, and I will too. This is not in my brief either. Bartholomew: Let us return to the joint statement on future negotiations. Consider the following: We have agreed language through “strategic delivery vehicles,” and on highly survivable systems. Let us delete everything else up to the “In particular” paragraph. Now on the bracketed paragraph, you have said this goes beyond the commitmenmts your president has made. But we both agree your president did say he was prepared to discuss this subject. We can add one word, “addressing.” Karpov: That does not change anything.
