3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 149 provided that we carefully monitor each major issue (SALT, CTB, Indian Ocean, CSCE, the Middle East, and human rights),11 to shape Soviet policy at a time of uncertainty. We still have most of the high cards. [Omitted here is information on the Quadripartite Meeting on Conventional Arms Restraint.] US–USSR Working Group on Proliferation The first session of the US–USSR working group on proliferation was recently held in Washington. Morokhov,12 who led the Soviet delegation, had an hour long opening statement full of substance, including: (1) they agree, without reservation, to participate in our INFCE program (fuel cycle evaluation); (2) expansion of NPT membership should be our most important goal, and we should concentrate on Brazil, Argentina, Spain, South Africa, Israel and South Korea (we came back at them with Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam); (3) a proposal for a joint US–USSR statement signed “at the highest level” outlining nine points for a “universal non-proliferation regime.” In response to a point we raised, they said that they were reconsidering their position on signing the Treaty of Tlatelolco13 but that it was difficult for them. With regard to India, they agreed that the first step should be to get them to agree to full scope safeguards and they would exercise their influence in that direction. All in all, a very encouraging beginning to these exchanges. Initial Soviet Views on Indian Ocean Arms Limitations. In the first two meetings of the US–USSR working group on arms limitations, the Soviets focused their approach on three subjects: —Elimination of “foreign” military bases, both the US bases and those of US allies; the Soviets stated that neither they nor their allies have bases. They do not, therefore, define Berbera as a base. The Soviets said that bases are “the key issue.” —Reciprocal reduction of military activities—not only freezing the present level but decreasing it, as well as a total prohibition on nuclearpowered ballistic missile submarines and on aircraft carriers. —The definition of the area: the Soviets argued that a strict geographic definition is not proper because the US has permanent bases in adjacent areas while Soviet home ports are thousands of miles away. 11 Carter underlined each of the items in parentheses. 12 Igor Morokhov, Deputy First Chairman of the Soviet State Committee for Utilization of Atomic Energy. 13 The Treaty of Tlatelolco came into force in April 1969 and prohibited nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean.
