182 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement believe that in absence of renewal IMF standby, cannot count on U.S. balance of payments and budget support. Nevertheless, if issue comes to showdown which you consider GOB unlikely to win and if you judge further pursuit of issue by GOB would lead to conflict of such scope and character as to place Americans in unreasonable jeopardy, you authorized, at moment you deem tactically best indicated, to inform GOB that if it makes best possible settlement with miners under the circumstances and even if this does not provide basis for renewal IMF standby, USG will nevertheless be prepared to continue aid on a temporary basis pending total reevaluation of situation with a view to ascertaining whether any basis remains for continuation of a program Bolivia embodying balance of payments and budget support. GOB should understand of course that amount and form of aid for remainder this year and certainly in future years must be related to our estimate of GOB’s willingness and capability of pursuing sound economic practices. Dept and ICA fully mindful of heavy burden of decision which this instruction places on you. We believe however that issue is of sufficient importance to adopt policy indicated above and that since timing may be of crucial importance, there is no alternative but to place final decision in your hands. We have full confidence in your being able to exercise the judgment here required and will of course support you in whatever you decide to do. ICA concurs. Herter Acting BL–23. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs’ Special Assistant (Leddy) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1  Washington, May 8, 1959. SUBJECT Level of Assistance to Bolivia for 1959 You have asked that the Bolivian aid program be reviewed to determine whether assistance should be continued at the level of $23 million originally programmed last September for FY 1959, or whether it should be reduced to $18 million. 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files, Lot 63 D 61, “Porter-Hardy Subcommittee.” Confidential. Drafted [illegible in the original] by Leddy; concurred in by ARA, W/NSC, ICA, and the Treasury Department.
