September 1953–December 1954
837
fusal to interfere in Iran would not only be disbelieved but could be as
dangerous as refusing to stretch forth a hand to help an unstable man
walk along a precipice.
1. Army—It would seem essential that there be an organization of
preferably younger Army officers responsive to our guidance. This
would seem to me to be Target No. 1.
2. Government—Aside from the information to be obtained from
control of certain government employees, I do not see the advantage of
directing a major effort toward controlling Cabinet-level officers. The
British have apparently placed great reliance upon such measures, but
the success of this maneuver has not been very impressive during the
past four years in Iran. It is my present inclination to advise against
concentration of covert resources upon high-level government officers
since they are (a) generally undependable, (b) subject to many opposite
influences, (c) constantly changing. Naturally, I would not suggest re-
jection of any person amenable to our advice, and in fact would urge on
every occasion that we seek to further the careers of persons friendly
towards us while generally discouraging the rise of persons basically
unfriendly to us.
3. Majlis—Perhaps in contradiction to what I have said above, I
think it is desirable to support the election of certain men to the Majlis. I
do not delude myself that this would lead to the creation of any openly
pro-American group but I would suggest this as at least a secondary
target. However this leads to a larger question upon which I need your
advice. Should we encourage the creation of a party which draws polit-
ical influence from its closeness to the American Embassy? Is it to our
advantage to have a group of politicians suspected of being American
stooges? I can see some advantages and great disadvantages in an ef-
fort to encourage the creation of such a political group.
4. Potential opposition—Clearly there is a value in penetration of
communist groups, as well as having at least listening posts close to ex-
tremist groups. What attitude do you believe we should take toward
politicians and groups presently antagonistic to Zahedi? Should we
support any potential alternate to Zahedi? We would run the serious
danger of encouraging intrigue and antagonisms, and, in Iran, a land of
intrigue, I doubt that we could long keep any support of an opposition
group secret. However, and this I consider a most important point
upon which I need your advice, it seems to me that Zahedi must not be-
come our only arrow in the political quiver. Although we have never
raised the question on a high level here it is my frank belief that in any
show-down between the Shah and Zahedi, we can only side with the
Shah. We have gone already very far in the direction of becoming iden-
tified with Zahedi and I dread the day when his increasingly unpop-
