among Chile, Peru, and Bolivia on several bases. It is our understanding
that Chilean Senate’s resolution does not affect my first proposal for
division of the territory. Chile having definitely accepted a division,
however, and not having withdrawn her acceptance, it manifestly would be
most difficult for her to withdraw her acceptance should Peru now accept.
Position Peru has taken in rejecting division of the territory is that she is
unable to accept giving up by her own act a part of what she claims as her
sovereign territory. Should the territory have been lost to her through an
arbitral award or the plebiscite that would be a different matter. Although I
fully appreciate point of view taken by Peru, I feel, nevertheless, that the
present is not a time to insist on considerations which are technical and
more or less theoretical. We are now confronted by what appears to be our
last opportunity to bring about a solution of this controversy of many years’
duration which has not only embittered relations between two leading South
American countries, but has greatly reacted to the detriment of their
economic life and prosperity. Time has come when this matter should be
looked at in broad-minded manner, prejudices and antagonisms forgotten,
and every effort made to dispose finally and definitely of this question. I
feel that it can be done, and in an eminently satisfactory and permanent way
by division of the territory, especially if Bolivia be given a corridor to the
sea at Arica, corridor also to include railway.
Of course, I shall welcome any settlement satisfactory to Chile and Peru,
but the argument which has been advanced against neutralization of Tacna-
Arica is that it would almost inevitably entail rivalry between Chile and
Peru to obtain a dominant position in the neutralized state and it would
probably produce future discord and conflict while a division of the
territory by which a definite line between the two countries is established
would afford the basis for a definite settlement instead of entailing a future
rivalry. It is urged that this would be the case even more should a Bolivian
corridor exist to separate the two. This corridor might include either the
whole of the territory or only a portion of it. Such a solution as this appears
to be most statesmanlike and conducive to a settlement of existing
difficulties and to establishment of friendly relations between Chile and
Peru.
