Negotiating Channels
385
during a recess because of the urgent nature of these programs and
their far-reaching consequences.
As a result of the meeting, the Committee is of the view that the
decisions to seek an alternative government in Iran and to send
increased support to the Afghan tribal groups in Afghanistan, in differ-
ent ways, mark a crucial turning point in U.S. foreign policy.
The Committee decided that it is necessary to understand the over-
all strategy of the United States before a fully reasoned judgment
can be made concerning the wisdom or efficacy of the covert action
programs for Iran and Afghanistan. Some members were of the view
that they did not understand how these programs fitted into an overall
strategy. Indeed, the political action program was described by the
CIA as only a part of a larger policy on Iran. It is clear, however, that
such a significant decision to seek an alternative to Khomeini will set
forces in motion which the United States will not be able to control
fully. Although there is no present intention of supporting opposition
groups with military assistance or in any way encouraging the use of
violence, both of these may result because of movements now under-
way. Because of these concerns, the Committee intends to invite Secre-
tary of State Vance and Secretary of Defense Brown to meet with the
Committee in the near future to discuss with the Committee how these
covert action programs in Iran and Afghanistan fit in with our broader
foreign policy.
All of the members of the Committee, without exception, fully
support the desire of the Executive branch to work for a stable, pro-
Western, democratic Iran. The Committee is cognizant of and sympa-
thetic with the Administration’s frustration in dealing with the Revolu-
tionary Council and the Ayatollah Khomeini. The Committee is, of
course, fully in support of efforts to obtain the release of American
hostages held by Iranian students at the American Embassy in Teheran.
Some members, however, were concerned that the risks attendant to
this covert action program could place the hostages in greater jeopardy.
[1 paragraph (27 lines) not declassified]
Another point of view which was expressed, urged the develop-
ment of stable long-term alternatives to the Khomeini government
through friendly third parties such as Turkey. It was argued that Turkey
and the United States have a number of common interests in working
towards a more stable friendly Iran. Further, it was argued involving
Turkey in such an effort could lead to more support from Congress,
to better, more stable relations between the U.S. and Turkey, as well
as a stronger Turkish government.
The Committee requested the Intelligence Community to keep it
advised of the steps taken in this project. It is the particular desire of
the Committee that it should be advised of the principal figures and
