330 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 74. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, August 7, 1978 SUBJECT FY 1980–1984 Defense Program As you know, the Defense Department’s Planning, Programming, and Budgeting System is somewhat different from that used in other Departments. In particular, we make much more extensive use of a programming phase (now nearing completion) during which we settle major issues before we enter the budgeting phase during which we settle details. The programming phase addresses not only the coming year, but the next five, and it is cast in “programmatic” terms (e.g., Strategic Forces, General Purpose Forces, etc.) rather than budget category terms (e.g., Military Personnel Army, Other Procurement Navy, etc.). Last March I issued my Consolidated Guidance to the Services as the basis for the preparation of their 5-­year programs. You will recall that I sent you a 10-­page summary of its key points, and we discussed it over a luncheon with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, followed by an NSC meeting last May 10th.2 In response to that Consolidated Guidance, the Services have now submitted their recommended programs. I have reviewed them and will, during the second week in August, be discussing with them and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff modifications that I have in mind. Following that, and—­insofar as we could—­having settled the major issues of the Defense program, we will be ready to turn to the resolution of its details through the budgetary process. However, before taking that next step, I again need your guidance. This year we have extended the principles of ZBB3 to our programming process, and have prepared not one, but three complete, alternative Defense programs at significantly different fiscal levels. While I do not think you want—­or need—­to concern yourself with all the differences between those alternative programs, I think that an appreciation 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5, Defense Department: 7–8/78. No classification marking. Carter drew a line from the heading to the top of the memorandum and wrote: “Harold—NSC format best—­after I have paper for a day or so. J.” 2 Carter hosted a luncheon with the Joint Chiefs on May 10. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No minutes of the meeting were found. The NSC meeting that followed is Document 64. For Brown’s 10-­page summary of key points of the Consolidated Guidance, see the attachment to Document 63. 3 Zero-­based budgeting.
