538
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
• We recognize that the P.R.C. and we have different ideologies
and economic and political systems. We recognize that to transcend the
differences and to make our new relationship successful will require
patience, wisdom, and understanding. We harbor neither the hope nor
the desire that through extensive contacts with China we can remake
that nation into the American image.
• Indeed, we accept our differences. Normalization is an impor-
tant part of our global effort to create a stable community of diverse
and independent nations. As President Carter stated in his cable to Pre-
mier Hua Guofeng on January 1: “. . . the United States desires a world
of diversity in which each nation is free to make a distinctive contribu-
tion to . . . the manifold aspirations . . . of mankind . . . we welcome the
growing involvement of the People’s Republic of China in world
affairs.”18
• We consider China as a key force for global peace simply by
being China: an independent and strong nation reaching for increased
contact with the rest of the world while remaining basically self-reliant
and resistant of any efforts by others to dominate it.
• As Vice President Mondale stated on January 1: “We feel bonds
of friendship, but sentiment alone cannot bridge the gap between us.
What has brought us together is an awareness of our parallel interests
in creating a world of economic progress, stability, and peace.”19
The community of interest we share with China is particularly evi-
dent in Asia, where we both desire peace, stability, and nations free of
outside domination.
East, Southeast, and South Asia is one of the most important re-
gions of the world today. The economies of the area are booming; the
people are dynamic. The United States has great economic and security
interests around the rim of Asia: in Japan, South Korea, all the Pacific
islands down to the Philippines, and in Southeast Asia as well.
To protect our interests, we retain a strong military presence in the
region, we maintain appropriate weapon sales throughout the region,
and we are prepared to act on our interests should the need arise.
Few actions will contribute more to the security and stability of our
important positions around the rim of Asia, however, than a construc-
tive involvement with China. As we improve our relations with Beijing,
China will also wish to keep us involved in the region and not, as in the
past, seek to drive us away.
18 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, China, Document 185.
19 Mondale made these remarks during ceremonies at the Chinese Liaison Office in
Washington; see Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Officials See a Bright Future in New Rela-
tionship With Peking,” The New York Times, January 2, 1979, pp. A–1, A–9.
