1076  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PE–26.	
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
(Rubottom), Temporarily in Puerto Rico1

Washington, August 10, 1959, 10 p.m.
Ambassador Achilles will meet plane at Talara with Prime Minister 
and Mrs. Beltran. Beltran intends explain his “program” to Secretary2 
and you, probably along following lines:
Immediate objective is restore sound economy based on balanced 
budget, exchange and price stability, private enterprise and stimulation 
of domestic and foreign investment. Longer range but concurrently 
will seek accelerated social evolution primarily through private hous-
ing, road construction into new areas and land reform.
Immediate financial program includes:
(1) Complete stoppage of borrowing from Central Bank;
(2) Expediting tax collection; and
(3) Tightening tax enforcement.
Plans reduce expenditures by:
(1) Some reduction in government employees;
(2) Greater reduction through forced attrition; and
(3) Cutting military expenditures particularly for equipment.
Has been promised cooperation of President and armed services on 3.
Anticipates achieving exchange and price stability by mid-1960. 
Despite expected saving from above measures and termination food sub-
sidies and increased revenues he expects need one billion soles ($40 mil-
lion) to meet treasury operating expenses until then without recourse to 
Central Bank. Of this International Petroleum Co. is loaning $10 million. 
To make up balance hopes Eximbank will agree amend stabilization loan 
agreement permit Peruvian Treasury use sol proceeds (presently steril-
ized) from sale dollars borrowed from Exim.
Following cabled tonight to Achilles.3
Beltran intentions as outlined Embassy4 appear to contemplate 
significant steps towards coping with GOP economic and financial 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 823.00/8–359. Confidential; Niact. 
Drafted by Silberstein and signed by Siracusa. Assistant Secretary Rubottom stopped at 
Ramey Air Force Base in Puerto Rico en route to the Santiago Meeting of Consulation.
2 After an overnight stop at Ramey Air Force Base, August 10–11, Secretary Herter’s 
plane made a refueling stop in Talara, Peru, August 11, en route to the Santiago meeting.
3 Telegram 100 to Lima, August 10, transmitted the quoted text. (823.00/8–359)
4 In telegram 89 from Lima, August 3, the Embassy outlined the program Prime 
Minister Beltrán discussed with Ambassador Achilles, August 1–2. (823.00/8–359) This 
outline appears in the first part of the present telegram.
