254  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
with the IMF on a stabilization program. We should further indicate 
our belief that if an adequate stabilization progress is implemented, it 
should be unnecessary for Chile to add to its heavy foreign debt bur-
den.3 We should add that we are confident that if there is an adequate 
stabilization program, development credits for Chile will be forthcom-
ing from appropriate financial institutions. To demonstrate our support 
for the Alessandri Government, we should be prepared to indicate to 
the Chileans at an appropriate point in the discussions that the Export–
Import Bank would be willing to open credit lines4 to cover acceptable 
economic development projects on the condition that Chile reach prior 
agreement with the IMF on the renewal of the standby expiring next 
month and show satisfactory performance under its terms. In this con-
nection, we should also be prepared to point out the possibility of DLF 
loans.
Discussion:
The Alessandri Administration came into office in November 1958 
after a campaign in which it advocated a program aimed at correcting the 
financial disorder—­chronic inflation and balance of payments disequi-
librium—­of the Ibánez Government. Under the latter, the cost of living 
had risen by 83 per cent in 1955, 38 per cent in 1956, and 17 per cent 
in 1957, and then 32 per cent in 1958. Since early 1957 money supply 
increased by about 70 per cent despite the use of almost $120 million of 
balance of payments loans from the IMF, Eximbank, ICA, and private 
U.S. banks. During part of this period, the Chilean financial problem was 
aggravated by declining copper prices as the average price fell from 40 
cents in 1956, to 27 cents in 1957, and 25 cents in 1958. However, the basic 
causes of the inflation were the chronic fiscal deficits and the extraor-
dinary expansion of credit. The resultant internal monetary expansion 
fostered a heavy demand for imports, which despite the sharp decline in 
export income, rose to historic highs in 1956 and 1957.
During the election campaign, Alessandri attacked the large fiscal 
deficits, the use of credit for speculation, and reliance on balance of 
payments loans. He came out for a businessman’s Government which 
would restore the financial health of the country. After taking office, 
he showed some vacillation in pursuing a coherent economic program 
and soon appeared to have lost the initiative required to put forth a 
full stabilization effort. For example, one of the major complaints of the 
IMF with the Ibánez Government had been that the latter had main-
tained the peso at an excessively appreciated rate of exchange thereby 
3 The following handwritten notation by Assistant Secretary Mann appears on the 
source text: “It may be necessary to spread out installments on foreign debt which are 
bunched up at this time.”
4 We are thinking of a range of from 330 to 350 million. [Footnote in the source text.]
