820 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement pointed out that this is attempt to confuse international issue between US and China in Taiwan area with internal affair of China in exercising right of sovereignty over Taiwan and offshore islands. 7. Wang said I stated at last meeting that US did not acknowl­ edge exercise by China of sovereignty rights over Taiwan and off­ shore islands as internal matter of China. This has all more exposed my attempt confuse international dispute with China’s internal affairs. Thus, if declaration were to include ambiguous terms of my amend­ ments, even if self-­defense clause were removed from declaration, US could still accomplish its ends of seizure of Taiwan and its interference in liberation of offshore islands. 8. Wang said, furthermore in light of ambiguous attitude which my side has so far taken regarding holding of Sino-­US FonMin conferences, it threw more light on my attempt calculated at obtaining by trickery a vague declaration which would enable US to interpret China’s internal matter as allegedly being covered by scope of Sino-­US declaration and thus justifying continued seizure and obstruction of China’s exercise of sovereign right of Taiwan and offshore islands while on other hand US would procrastinate over a long period and refuse hold FonMin confer­ ence in order maintain status quo US seizure Taiwan and interference liberation offshore islands. He must say frankly that his side has seen through such design and his side would not be easily duped. 9. Wang said his side must restate: that China’s exercise sover­ eignty over Taiwan and offshore islands, which is internal matter, and international dispute between China and US in Taiwan area must be separated. It entirely matter China sovereign right and internal matter as to whatever means will be used for liberation Taiwan and offshore islands and US has no right whatsoever interfere. His side would never permit to see China’s internal affairs involved in Sino-­American decla­ ration or to make it subject of negotiations with US. 10. Wang said as regards international dispute between US and China, issuance Sino-­American declaration is only first step towards settlement and earnest efforts must be made to seek practical and fea­ sible means to achieve final settlement. His side considers FonMin conference is exactly such practical and feasible means. In view fact, that US has already resorted use of force and threat in Taiwan area, if after issuance declaration US fails take actual action to give evidence of desire expressed in declaration, then declaration itself would become scrap of paper. 11. Wang said I had said at last meeting that Dec 1 draft of his side did not cover Taiwan area. He would like remind me that during April 1954 when Chou En-­lai at Bandung made proposal that China and US enter negotiations, he specifically stated that purpose was to settle through negotiations question of easing and eliminating tensions
