1956  811
not be under any illusions that they will produce any significant release 
of Americans, as they now feel that they have struck a sufficiently good 
propaganda counterpressure on us with the issue of Chinese in United 
States prisons. And they will continue to belabor that issue as long as 
we belabor the 13. I think it possible that if I were to let up on the 13 he 
might well let up on the Chinese in United States prisons, but I do not 
know whether this would be a good idea at this time. It would only be 
good in the sense that I have always thought that the more we make an 
issue of the 13 the harder it becomes for them to release them, the more 
they become convinced that our only interest in the talks is getting the 
release of all the Americans, and the more valuable they estimate the 13 
may be to them in extracting political concessions from us.
What worries me is the inevitable day he comes along with the 
name of a Chinese in prison. I thoroughly agree with you that they 
must be making every effort in this direction. A thorough search of their 
files of United States newspapers should alone produce some names. 
I frankly do not know what we do at that point except to do our best 
to persuade the man that prison in the United States is preferable to 
returning to Communist China and when we are sure that he will say 
this, let the Indians see him and have him tell it to them.
I do not think much of the contingency press release upon prison­
ers but I am not holding up this letter to make a redraft. I will send my 
ideas along as quickly as possible.
After seeing Lindbeck’s study and reconsidering the matter from 
the standpoint of the situation at which we have now arrived, I am 
inclined to think that its publication now could do little harm as far as its 
effect on subsequent releases of the 13, and it might be a useful counter 
to Chinese charges on Chinese in United States prisons. Its sober, care­
fully balanced tone eliminates some of the objections I previously had to 
the publication of a White Paper on this subject and, in any event, I feel 
the situation is somewhat changed. I, therefore, offer no objection to its 
publication if the Department considers it would otherwise be a good 
idea to put it out now. It occurs to me that it might also help in handling 
the Foreign Affairs Sub-­committee hearings.
As far as those hearings are concerned, I can only say that I can­
not see how a publicized and inevitably sensationalized camera and 
microphone show can help at this time in obtaining any releases of 
any additional Americans, and I feel it may well hurt whatever slim 
chances they may now have. I would, therefore, suggest from my 
standpoint that the Department attempt to discourage this type of 
hearing, using my views if you think it would be useful, but not take 
any strong position of opposition. I do not think that the Department 
should open itself to any possibility of charges that it is attempting to 
suppress such information.
