1955  55
49.	
Telegram 364 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 9, 1955, 1 p.m.
364. From Johnson.
With close yesterday’s meeting we have completed presentation 
our position on civilians and next move is up to CHICOMS. I feel my 
instructions have enabled me to establish very strong position which 
has put CHICOMS on defensive and in future meetings plan largely 
to reiterate position as necessary. I believe we should stand on posi­
tion performance by CHICOMS re Americans essential to agreement 
on representation proposal and that agenda proposed by CHICOMS 
and accepted by US precludes discussion any other matter until civilian 
problem resolved.
If I get no performance on Americans I plan at appropriate time to 
suggest fairly prolonged recess “to give them time to give further con­
sideration to cases Americans” thereby reinforcing position on relation 
their performance on Americans to representation arrangement.
One of decisions we will have to make is what degree of perform­
ance on Americans we will consider sufficient for agreement on repre­
sentation. I do not believe we can or should reach this decision now.
Another decision is whether we will be willing to broaden repre­
sentation proposal to include inquiries by Indian Embassy initiated by 
“parents and relatives” in China. I expect Wang will at minimum press 
very hard for something this nature. This raises obvious problems but 
it seems to me that even under our present concept it will in fact be 
very difficult prevent or refuse “humanitarian” requests from Indian 
Embassy do this. If this case should obtain from it whatever negotiating 
advantage it gives us here, it does not seem to me this would increase 
danger of use of families for coercion as even under present circum­
stances families free write to Chinese in US. Would also think Indian 
Embassy would be very careful avoid giving any basis for charges it 
was agent for coercion. From standpoint UK protection Americans in 
China it also gives US something of much more value than present 
formulation.
I plan present list 461 American POW’s missing from Korean War 
and 11 Navy and Coast Guard personnel as first item under “other 
practical matters”.
Gowen
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–955. Confidential; Priority.
