8
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
4.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Attached is an initial summary of policy options in the area of
human rights. It pretty well covers the ground of those actions recom-
mended by members of congress and by various interest groups, and of
course, those deadlines set by law which the Administration must meet
in the near future. There is virtually nothing innovative in it, but it does
contain enough substance so that if Administration action were taken
on some or all of these options it would amount to a very major initia-
tive on the President’s part.
On rereading it, I find one major weakness which concerns South
Africa. I am very concerned that in the process of making major deci-
sions on resolving the crises in Rhodesia and Namibia, that the U.S. not
become locked into a South African policy which precludes us from
exerting major pressures on that nation. Our past support of South Af-
rica in the UN is viewed by many as our single most repugnant policy
in the area of human rights. Continuing that posture—particularly if
the violence in South Africa continues to escalate—might negate every
other human rights initiative the Administration takes. This issue obvi-
ously requires much more thought—soon.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Policy Initiatives: 1/77–10/78. No classi-
fication marking. Another copy is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
Material, Global Issues—Mathews Subject File, Box 7, Human Rights (HR): 12/75–1/77.
2 Brzezinski added a handwritten note at the end of the memorandum: “re: # 9
Could he say anything he hasn’t said in his B’nai B’rith speech? You might organize a
meeting with your interagency counterparts to discuss this memo—or to develop a pro-
gram or a PRM. Let me know by mid-next week. ZB.” Reference is to Presidential candi-
date Carter’s September 8, 1976, speech at the National Convention of B’nai B’rith, held in
Washington, wherein he commented that the United States “cannot look away when a
government tortures people, or jails them for their beliefs or denies minorities fair treat-
ment or the right to emigrate.” (Charles Mohr, “Carter Suggests That U.S. Foster Rights
Overseas: Sees Foreign Policy as Lever to Aid Others,” The New York Times, September 9,
1976, p. A–1)
