1004 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 395. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, November 24, 1980 SUBJECT Non-Proliferation Policy—Report of Gerry Smith (U) Attached are three papers from Gerry Smith which together comprise his final report to you on non-proliferation policy: —A report (Tab A) on his explorations with Europe and Japan of a possible bargain in which the US would relax its constraints on their reprocessing and plutonium programs in return for greater cooperation in dealing with problem countries. He concludes that such a deal cannot be struck “within the strict framework of the April 1977 policy.”2 (C) —A longer paper (Tab B) giving his overall assessment and recommendations on how our policy should be changed. (C) —A brief memorandum (Tab C) urging that priority attention be given to the Israeli weapons program and the negotiation of a CTB. (S) These papers cover a lot of territory, but two issues are central: (a) how to deal more effectively with problem countries, like Pakistan and Argentina, where proliferation risks are immediate or around the corner, and (b) the relevance of global constraints on reprocessing and plutonium, which affect important Allied programs, to such risks. (C) Smith believes that we have put too much emphasis on denying access to sensitive material and technology, and should focus more on proliferation motives through the resolution of disputes and by enhancing security arrangements. The alternative view, elaborated in PRM–15,3 is that where motives and technological capability coincide, proliferation will almost certainly result; motives are the most volatile and least controllable factor, and access to materials and technology the most amenable to short-term control. (C) While he acknowledges that economic developments since 1977 have strongly confirmed US arguments that reprocessing and plutonium fuels should be deferred, Smith believes that the European and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues, Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 52, Proliferation: Smith, Gerard, 8–11/80. Secret. Sent for information. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum, Carter wrote “Zbig. How best to present alternatives to next administration? J.” 2 See Document 330 and footnote 3, Document 338. 3 See Document 317.
