760 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement U/MSC “U/MSC strongly supports the State position on these paragraphs and wishes to point out in addition that the decision taken on resolving the basic split on the development of a conventional capability by US forces also has definite repercussions in terms of US military assistance policy. If the US is not to develop a conventional capability of its own, we must either take major steps to develop a conventional capability among our allies and rely on them to do the job for us, or adopt the con­ clusion that any limited war will automatically lead to general nuclear war, in which case the development of foreign forces with a conven­ tional capability is a waste of time and the taxpayer’s money, and our allies should be so advised.” IO “I attach the greatest importance to our proposed Paragraph 16, lest we end up under a nuclear umbrella that protects only bas­ tion America, all other free-­world positions having, in the meantime, eroded.” At yesterday’s meeting, Admiral Radford expressed some impa­ tience that the State Department was raising the question of the use of nuclear weapons in limited war at this time. You will recall that during last year’s review of Basic National Security Policy, Secretary Dulles reluctantly concurred in the language of the existing military para­ graphs only on the condition that they would be promptly reviewed by the Departments of State and Defense. The President directed that a review be undertaken. I think that the issue of the political and military impact of present American military posture and doctrine is a central problem facing the US in its struggle with world communism. Our influence around the world is not as great as it should be. I think it will be less next year and in the years to come unless we get away from “massive retaliation” and the type of Military Establishment which this doctrine is developing. I hope you will stress the urgent need for this policy change on the President tomorrow. The decision will be a crucial one for American foreign policy in the period ahead. Respectfully, Gerard C. Smith
