January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1107
The U.S. Mission to the United Nations transmitted the text of the
draft resolution, as tabled late on February 28, to the Department of
State in telegram 779, February 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800106–0545) That afternoon, following “tele-
phonic instructions” from the Department of State, the Representative
to the United Nations, Donald F. McHenry, met with Tunisian Ambas-
sador to the United Nations M’hamed Essafi and Jordanian Ambas-
sador to the United Nations Hazem Nuseibeh. At the meeting, USUN
reported in telegram 800, March 1, “we had successfully obtained dele-
tion of operative para[graph] 7 of the resolution when we stated that
this would enable us to vote for the resolution.” (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800106–0545) This paragraph called
upon Israel to “abide by the pertinent Security Council Resolutions
concerning Jerusalem, in particular Resolution 252 (1968) and to respect
and guarantee religious freedoms and practices in Jerusalem and other
holy places in the occupied Arab territories as well as the integrity of
places of religious worship.” In his account of this episode in his
memoirs, Brzezinski wrote that “later” on February 29, Vance had
“phoned me to say that the wording of the resolution had been modi-
fied satisfactorily and that he therefore felt free to instruct McHenry to
support it.” Brzezinski told Vance that “he should transmit the revised
text to the President or at least speak to him personally just to be sure.”
(Brzezinski, Power and Principle, page 441) No official record of this ex-
change or of Vance’s exchange with Carter has been found. Shortly be-
fore the vote, McHenry was informed that the “text of the resolution
that the Secretary had discussed with the President did not include the
wording in oper[ative] para[graph] 6 calling for Israel ‘to dismantle the
existing settlements.’” McHenry “considered it essential, therefore, to
check back,” with the Department of State and successfully obtained a
delay of the vote to noon of the following day, March 1. (Telegram 800
from USUN, March 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800106–0545)
Upon receiving “telephonic instructions” from the Department of
State on the morning of March 1, McHenry telephoned Essafi to inform
him he had been “asked by the Secretary to urge strongly [the] deletion
of the wording in operative para[graph] 6 of the resolution calling for
Israel ‘to dismantle the existing settlements.’” After meeting with the
other delegations, Essafi informed McHenry that the proposed excision
on paragraph 6 would not be accepted and suggested revisions to the
wording instead. McHenry informed Essafi that “these formulations
would create even more problems. He was instructed only to seek dele-
tion. Under the circumstances McHenry thought it was best to leave the
wording as it stood and go ahead with the vote. He said he would vote
for the resolution but would include in his statement [accompanying
his vote] a comment on this provision.” Following his meeting with Es-
