September 18–December 16, 1978 325 without knowing where and increasing activity with West Bankers which Sharaf promised to discuss with me in more detail Thursday. Jordanians keep stressing the risks in joining a process without knowing where it will lead. I think, nevertheless, it may be possible to engage Jordanians in getting West Bankers into negotiations. Many elements in Camp David Framework seem not to have been understood. West 92. Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the Department of State1 Jidda, October 18, 1978, 1537Z 7455. To INR McAfee only: please handcarry to NEA/Crawford for transmittal Eyes Only to Brzezinski for President from Saunders. Subject: Talk With King Hussein. 1. During discussion with me Oct 17, King Hussein made following intensely personal observations with deep emotion on King’s previous personal involvement in peace process that I believe you would want to have reported to you. These comments shed light on background to his current reactions to Camp David Accords. 2. At end of our lengthy conversation, during which his initial considerable reserve gradually dissipated, King said he wished to share some sensitive and intimate details with me to help in our understanding of his reserve with regard to Camp David Agreements. King then alluded to his extensive secret contacts with Israeli leaders in recent years and mentioned that the former Israeli Prime Minister (Rabin) had told him (probably in 1977) that Israel’s objective was separately to take Egypt out of the MidEast negotiating process by making a separate peace regarding the Sinai. Israel would then deal with the West Bank issue by making arrangements with the West Bank inhabitants, which King implied were much along lines of administrative autonomy suggested by Begin plan.2 King said this strategy had been reaffirmed to him by Israeli Foreign Minister (Dayan) last year. King suggested that 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 5. Secret; Roger Channel; Sandstone; Niact Immediate. In the right-hand margin of the telegram, Carter initialed “C,” indicating that he saw the document. 2 See footnote 2, Document 5.
