436 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Cheney: But there’s no consensus whether that makes any sense on our side. We have nothing in the production line. We’re in a terrible military position. Scowcroft: If we don’t do anything, they’ll stop everything. Cheney: With Peacekeeper, we’ll have 500 survivable RVs in 1992 that we don’t have now. There’s great division in the Administration. Scowcroft: There is no agreement on deMIRVing. The President: What about the cost? Cheney: DeMIRVing is very expensive. Scowcroft: By the year 2000 we don’t want just a few highly MIRVed missiles. The Vice President: Would you not deploy MX? Scowcroft: To stop the SS–18s and 24s, yes. The Vice President: We have the Midgetman, they have the SS–25. The political risk is that you won’t get either of our systems. Scowcroft: Will we be able to continue with two ICBMs? Cheney: We sold it just six months ago. Scowcroft: You sold it with a lot of assumptions about the future. Many don’t think we plan to go through with two. If Midgetman dies, then that will kill MX. We’ll just lose them now. The Vice President: Depends on how much you value shorter warning. We have longer warning now. We need to make up our minds. Scowcroft: If you buy a force for 20 years I don’t think you can count on long warning for that long. The Vice President: I never have bought the idea of a bolt from the blue. Powell: Scowcroft’s proposal of MX for 18s and 24s involves two negotiations. One with the Soviets to take an extended time and Congress which would kill MX instantly. Then we’d be left with little to trade. Baker: To get to Brent’s point we should do it after START I. We should take it to the Summit. In START II we want to do something about MIRV mobiles but do this only if we can negotiate it with the Soviets. The Vice President: If you kill rail garrison, Midgetman will be killed the next day. Baker: If we put it on the table now it will be the worst of all possible worlds. We’ll have no agreement with Congress, no START in June and we’ll be accused of being against arms control. I’m willing to make the proposal. I just disagree with the timing.
