September 18–December 16, 1978 259 was absolutely convinced that he had not committed himself to U.S. formulation. 3. He then said he wanted to read to me a draft letter from him to the President on this dispute and subsequently ask my advice on whether he should send it. The draft letter he read was as follows: Begin text. Dear Mr. President. As I promised you, upon my return to Jerusalem I checked with my colleagues, the Foreign Minister and Professor Barak, their recollection as to the contents of our discussions on the matter of the settlements at our evening meeting of September 16, 1978, in which Secretary Vance also participated. According to the minutes of this meeting, as recorded by Professor Barak, you suggested, in summing up, the following text as a commitment to be undertaken by the Government of Israel: “after the signing of the Framework and during the negotiations, no new Israeli settlements will be established in the area, unless otherwise agreed. The issue of further Israeli settlements will be decided and agreed by the negotiating parties.” As recorded in those same minutes by Professor Barak I responded to this proposed text by saying: “I shall think about it and I will write to you tomorrow.” By any standard, such a reaction cannot be construed as an acceptance. You will perhaps recall, Mr. President, that throughout our lengthy discussions at Camp David I employed a consistent vocabulary, always brief, when acknowledging acceptance of a point of agreement between us. My language of assent was always expressed with the words: “agreed,” or “accepted,” or “all-right.” The lengthiest phrase I was wont to use was: “we accept your proposal.” In the course of the meeting in question our Foreign Minister remarked that it would be preferable to formulate the issue in positive terms. He gave his opinion that during the negotiations on the establishment of the administrative council,7 and during the five-year transitional period, we would discuss with the Arabs our proposal for the admission of displaced persons within this period, as well as our plans for new settlements, also within this same period. You will remember, Mr. President, that I discussed with you our plans to establish a number of nahal settlements8 in the course of the 7 Carter underlined “during the negotiations on the establishment of the administrative council.” 8 See Document 63 for a description of the different types of Israeli settlements.
