February 1951–February 1952
71
3. Soviet propaganda since 7 March, in its daily reporting on Iran,
reveals the Kremlin’s close interest in developments there, particularly
with reference to the oil situation, the recent strikes, and public demon-
strations. Consistent with its diplomatic effort to disassociate the USSR
from events in Iran, Moscow has refrained from commenting editori-
ally on actions taken by the Iranian Government or speculating on fu-
ture developments. Soviet press and propaganda have avoided any
hint of unfriendliness towards the government or comment on its insta-
bility. Since Razmara’s assassination this propaganda has concentrated
on US–UK rivalry for Iranian oil and US–UK exploitation of Iran. The
Communists’ “clandestine” “Free Azerbaijan” radio in Baku, on the
other hand, has adhered to its previous policy of attacking the Shah,
Premier Ala, and the Majlis as pawns of US–UK imperialism and be-
trayers of the Iranian people.
4. While the Soviet Union is believed capable of invading Iran suc-
cessfully without prior warning, there has been no indication that the
USSR is preparing to take such a step at this time. Iranian military intel-
ligence, although fragmentary, constitutes the best source of informa-
tion on Soviet border activities. This source reports Soviet troop move-
ments on the Azerbaijan frontier and some additional military
activities since late February. These are probably connected with the
annual Soviet maneuvers in this area, which began earlier than usual
this year. Reports that dissident elements (exiled Azerbaijani Demo-
crats and Barzani Kurds) are on the frontier ready to invade Iran have
appeared, as is common during periods of tribal migrations and reg-
ular maneuvers. No reports of any Soviet activity on the Khorassan
sector of the border east of the Caspian Sea have been received. Soviet
military maneuvers on this section of the frontier generally begin later
than those on the Azerbaijan border.
5. Communist policy in Iran since Razmara’s assassination has
been aimed at inciting further agitation on the oil issue while keeping
Communist connections with the disturbances on a covert level. Al-
though there is no firm evidence of pro-Soviet Tudeh Party involve-
ment in the current disturbances, press reports and Iranian officials
commonly blame the Tudeh Party. The Tudeh is said to be behind the
“Organization for the Expropriation of the Anglo Iranian Oil Com-
pany” (AIOC), which, with the National Front (the ultra-nationalist fac-
tion in Parliament), has spearheaded the movement to nationalize
Iran’s oil. The Tudeh, according to Iranian intelligence reports, is also
behind the organization of the “Hayat-i-Islam,” which has been agi-
tating on the oil issue in the North. Tudeh agitators have also been re-
ported in the southern oil fields during the recent AIOC strike. Tudeh
agitation, as reported by Iranian military intelligence, showed a notice-
able increase in February in all parts of the country, but declined mark-
edly in March.
