feasible, but in regard to commerce carried on under the American flag it
seems to be clear that we cannot well decline to give protection.
4. This does not merely involve the plain treaty rights under which all the
foreign commerce with China has been established on the basis that the
vessel is controlled by its national authorities, and without which there
would be a break-up of the Customs system, which would place foreign
commerce wholly in the power of the local authorities’ arbitrary and
uncontrolled exactions. The matter involves also those dangerous realities,
rooted in sentimental considerations, that make appeal to popular feeling.
Except for persons interested financially and those who have official
responsibility, no one is likely to be excited about confiscation of mere
merchandise, even when it is glaringly illegal. A ship, however, is another
matter. Not only is a ship assimilated in many respects to the territory of its
flag, in the contemplation of international usages which are generally
accepted, but in the minds of Americans there is a feeling, and in the minds
of Chinese there is a clear recognition, that an American ship is more than
an instrumentality of commerce, that it is a symbol or an embodiment of
American interests and jurisdiction and as such, cannot, without giving
affront to our flag, be mistreated.
5. Despite the fact that the Cantonese are emboldened about the possibility
of ignoring the treaty rights of foreigners, they are evidently (see telegram
from Canton, November 13, noon) hesitating to confront this test of
criticism from foreign powers. No doubt they would force the issue were
they to attempt the test and discover a disposition on our part to yield. “Flag
incidents” would be certain to occur sooner or later, leading inevitably to
embitterment and at last to armed clashes. The only opportunity we have to
prevent such incidents from occurring is, from the outset, to take an
unmistakably resolute attitude of opposition to the course of action which
would inevitably produce them.
6. I am certain from my contacts recently with the Cantonese group that we
are dealing with men experimenting quite intelligently but unscrupulously
with the object of determining how far we foreigners, particularly American
citizens and nationals, can be driven by the apprehensions we have at
present to disregard greater possible dangers in the future. Primarily they
