1010 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement to draw up a charter which was approved by the Central Bank, and to obtain a pledge of equity capital. The draft charter has been sent to the World Bank (IBRD) for general comments, and recommendations for the selection of a foreign manager. It is before the DLF for the same purpose and, additionally, to obtain DLF funds to augment the equity capital pledged by the Paraguayans. The response of World Bank has been slow. In the case of the DLF, the Embassy has had a written commitment for credits at the ratio of 2 to 1 of loans to paid-­in capital, with the added expression that this ratio might be expanded once the bank has demonstrated a competent and creditable use of the original loan. It is the strong and immediate hope of the Embassy that the DLF move quickly to assist Paraguay in the selection of a foreign manager and that it will play a maximum and an effective part in the establishment of this bank without waiting further upon the World Bank. While the Embassy has been insistent upon a foreign manager for the bank, it now makes one Paraguayan exception, which has been approved by the DLF: Gustavo Storm, former president of the Central Bank. It is the Embassy’s conviction that this private enterprise development bank for Paraguay is of the highest priority; it is an essential and basic step to activate the productive forces of the private sector of this economy. Moreover, it is a basic step to support a continuance of stabilization program. 7. Projection Based on the assumption it is unlikely that there will be a large inflow of private capital during the next two years, and that a steady and progressive improvement in Paraguay’s economic position will continue to be a difficult task, we believe that our assistance program must have continuity. The fundamental reason for this is that we must give Paraguayan entrepreneurs the assurance that they can count on continued development loan assistance so that planning can take place in a way that will make possible the optimum utilization of manpower and financial resources. When it comes to a projection for the next two years, we offer it with a humility that rests upon an awareness that this forecast must ride in the teeth of the hurricane of change that is sweeping over the planet. Nevertheless, our recommendations for loans over the next two years would follow roughly in this sequence and in these priorities: a. To the Private Sector (1) That every effort be made to assist in the establishment of a local private enterprise development bank under the direction and control of competent and experienced foreign technicians. This bank could
