928
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
visit that realization of the national rights of the Palestinians does not
place Israel’s security or interests in jeopardy.
8. PriMin Begin said that, as the negotiations develop, we would
sort out points of agreement and disagreement about the jurisdiction of
the self governing authority and would see what can be done to give
the negotiations the push they need.
9. These two points were subjects of disagreement, but the dis-
agreement was not as sharp or tense as in the past.
10. On bilateral issues, PriMin Begin raised two points: the supply
of oil, and the stationing of forces in the Sinai. With respect to oil, Israel
had two demands: (1) a written Egyptian commitment to supply Israel
2 million tons annually; and (2) to sell this amount at the OPEC base
price—about 24 dollars a barrel. There was some disagreement be-
tween Egyptian and Israeli officials (Oil Minister Hilal and Energy
Minister Modai) on these points. Israel also seeks this supply from the
Alma field on the ground that it is now producing 1.9 million tons an-
nually at the rate of 38000 barrels per day. Our officials think that this
rate of production is detrimental to the Alma field and is causing a high
level of attrition, and that production from Alma should be reduced to
one million tons annually.
11. President Sadat agreed to provide an aide memoire to Israel to
the effect that Egypt will supply Israel with two million tons annually
without specifying the area of production from which it would come.
With respect to price, President Sadat insisted that Egypt cannot give
Israel a privileged position which would then have to apply to other
buyers of Egyptian oil. Egypt cannot discriminate between customers.
President Sadat indicated to PriMin Begin that if Egypt followed this
practice, it would incur a loss of over 600 million dollars annually.
PriMin Begin accepted the view of President Carter that the price
should be left to the market. In other words, the prices charged will be
the going prices at the time each contract is concluded.
12. With respect to the forces in the Sinai, this subject was dis-
cussed between President Sadat and PriMin Begin, and in parallel be-
tween Minister Weizman and Minister Kamal Hassan Ali. Weizman,
who was opposed to UNTSO, met with President Sadat. Since Israel is
opposed to UNTSO and is pressing for joint Egyptian-Israeli patrols,
President Sadat indicated there was a need for U.S. participation. Presi-
dent Sadat instructed General Ali to take the position that we should
follow the procedures provided for in the Peace Treaty, namely the es-
tablishment of a multi-national force, and should meanwhile resort to a
temporary arrangement as follows:
—The U.S. would supervise Zone A, either through increasing the
frequency of its aerial surveillance or through the use of representatives
of the American Military Attache Office in Cairo.
