828
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
253.
Memorandum for the Files1
Washington, February 1, 1979
SUBJECT
President’s Commission on World Hunger
The full Commission met January 31 from 9:30–5:00 under the
chairmanship of Sol Linowitz. All Commission members were present
with the exception of Bess Myerson and Jean Mayer.
The Commissioners first heard from James Grant, President of the
Overseas Development Council. Mr. Grant’s presentation entitled
“Overcoming Hunger and Malnutrition by 2000: How Doable? What
Required of the U.S.” stressed that those countries that are considered
development successes coupled economic development with provision
of basic human needs of their poorest people. He used the examples of
Sri Lanka, Taiwan, South Korea and China. He argued that economic
development should not be looked at in terms of GNP growth rates but
that a life quality index should be constructed and used as an indicator
of how developed a country is. The U.S. and other donors must provide
massive amounts of assistance to developing countries because for
many countries it is politically impossible to divert domestic resources
to the development process. He estimated that the volume of conces-
sional aid necessary by the early 1980’s is $12–20 billion and the U.S.
should provide one-third of that assistance. He said that the Commis-
sion’s task should be to develop the political will in the United States so
that concessional aid from the U.S. would be more forthcoming than at
present.
In his discussion, Grant said that 1979 was a watershed year since
there were many important international conferences focusing on
development and north/south relations such as the UNCTAD,
WCARRD, UNCSTD and the preparations for the Third UN Develop-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of International Organization Affairs/
International Development Assistance/Agriculture Division, Subject Files of FAO, US
Mission, International Food Organizations, Lot 88D305, Box 2, World Hunger, Presiden-
tial Commission on. No classification marking. Drafted by Pat McMahon, Office of Food
Policy and Programs, International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic and
Business Affairs. Copies were sent to Kriesberg (USDA) and Brewin (IO). Attached but
not printed is an October 17, 1978, memorandum for the files prepared by Edmund
Parsons (EB/OFP/FPG) describing the World Hunger Commission’s mandate, organiza-
tion, and membership.
