1000 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI argues for a U.S. willingness to be flexible on second-­order issues lest the best become the enemy of the good. The problem is that the ferocious pursuit of positions on somewhat second-­order issues (e.g., B–2 inspections, PPCM of Midgetman) has led naturally to an offer by the Soviets to concede on them in exchange for issues that may really matter (e.g., downloading, new types). Bessmertnykh offered such a “deal” in his meeting last week with Baker. Baker will say, and probably believes, that he rejected it. Bessmertnykh probably will say, and may believe, that the U.S. tacitly accepted the proposed deal when it acknowledged that the bomber issues were once again resolved, and that the “Houston package” was back on track. If we cannot and should not accept the Bessmertnykh “deal,” we also will have a tough time persuading the Soviets that they should accept all of our proposals on B–1, B–2, PPCM of Midgetman, and all of our positions on the major remaining issues (e.g., downloading, new types, data denial). The trick will be to get Baker-­the-Deal-Maker to understand that we cannot trade downloading or new types to sustain our position on bomber inspections, and to get Cheney-­the-Unwilling to express a willingness to make further, largely symbolic moves on the remaining issues in order to complete the treaty. Ideally, there would be agreement at your level about all of the issues on which the Soviets will need to come our way, and those on which we can show further flexibility. In practice, you probably should settle agreement on the broad principles, even if the result comes out sounding like contending cliches. You might start the meeting by asking Baker for a brief recap of the outcome of his discussions with Bessmertnykh on START, specifically on the question of what kind of “deal” Bessmertnykh offered, and the implications of our rejection of its terms. You then might kick off the discussion by making the following points: — The President said we should make every effort to complete START by the end of the month. — That is not a deadline that requires us to make whatever concessions are necessary to reach an agreement. — It is a recognition that if we do not wrap up START very soon, there is a good chance that we will not be able to complete the treaty for a very long time, if ever. — Our guidance to Reg and his team is simple: hang tough on the core issues where we have no more flexibility, but negotiate hard and be willing to make tradeoffs within that framework in order to complete START by the end of February if possible. Downloading Reg tabled the U.S. downloading proposal in his recent meeting with Obukov. The Soviet side did not directly, much less extensively,
