860 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 208. Memorandum From Smith (S/P) to Herter1 Washington, October 29, 1959 SUBJECT Force Cuts Discussion with DOD on October 24, 1959 I have read the memorandum of the conversation which you had on October 24 with Secretaries Anderson, McElroy and Gates about the possibility of force cuts abroad. Having given a good deal of attention for some years to the subject matter of that conversation, I thought that a few observations might be of some use. I gather that the real argument for force withdrawals is based on economic pressures and that the military arguments given are more or less rationalizations. If economic factors require us to weaken American military influence abroad, I think it is most important that we not fool ourselves by rationalizing such retraction as being warranted by the military situation. Secretary McElroy is reported as having commented “. . . that as long as the US was committed to the principle that any war with the Soviet Union was general war, the need for NATO defenses diminished.” You are aware that the principle relied on by Secretary McElroy has in the past several years come under increasingly heavy fire. Almost two years ago Foster Dulles on a number of occasions told the Secretary of Defense and the President that he believed this principle was obso­ lescent and that we should be developing a new strategic concept and military posture to implement it. The drift of Secretary McElroy’s thinking seems to be that it is in the US security interest to more and more depend on the total war nuclear deterrent. For example, Secretary McElroy is reported as saying that there is a need to modify the shield and sword concept. This can only mean that he favors a modification in the direction of the “trip-­wire” concept which requires fewer conventional forces and places a heavier deterrent burden on the general war strategic bomb­ ing capability. The NATO military authorities believe just the opposite. They are pressing for a buildup of the shield forces. This problem is directly related to your efforts during the past year to reduce America’s dependence on the total war threat and to restore some balance in our military establishment. As a result of your efforts, 1 Source: Effect of force cuts on foreign and defense policy. Top Secret. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, Military and Naval Policy.
