654 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV road mobile, the air mobile, and the submarine mobile deployment modes. He said that these systems are soft and that they achieve their survivability by hiding in very large deployment areas. The other class of mobile systems which he referred to as “confined-­mobile systems” included multiple silos, the track mobile system, and the horizontal MPS system. He pointed out that these systems are deployed in a very limited area, and are therefore required to be very hard. He went on to compare the verification difficulties encountered with each of these systems. He said that the confined-­mobile systems were an advantage for verification in that one knew where to look for them, though seeing the missiles in these systems required opening them up for verification. He then remarked that the full-­mobile systems can pose trickier verification questions—­and that submarine launchers are verifiable only because they are so large that they can be easily seen during construction and when in port. (C) The President then asked if B–52s are required to be visible under the SALT II agreement. He was told that there are no such constraints, and that these systems are often under cover—­they are monitored as they were built and deployed, and through the use of COMINT. The President noted that this was an interesting point, and then asked what the problem was with the covers that had been placed over the Minuteman silos. Secretary Brown answered that the basis of the Soviet objection was that these covers might be hiding a change in the size of the silo. (TS) Dr. Perry continued his explanation of verification problems by noting that the problem with the vertical MPS system is that the launcher is very small and difficult to see into, thus raising suspicions that there might be a missile in every silo. He contrasted this system with the track mobile system by pointing out that track mobile would use a very large locomotive type launcher that is easy to count. (S) Frank Press remarked that we could still hide extra missiles in the trench. Bill Perry responded that the current SALT limits are not based on limiting missiles, but rather on limiting launchers, and that the trailer erector launchers used in the trench system are too large to allow extra ones to be hidden. Frank Press responded that a single TEL could nonetheless launch extra missiles. Bill Perry agreed but said that the same thing was true for silos. (C) The President then asked about the MPS system using horizontal shelters. He asked if we could deploy 200 missiles in such a system, on the surface, and completely within DOD land. Secretary Brown responded yes. The President said that he hadn’t heard of this system before, and went on to note that, provided we had hard points within which to hide the missiles, it would seem that the need to have a trench
