1955  123
may not be entirely clear how you can best exploit it, if at all in your 
talks with Wang.
Ed Martin is due here today and we hope that he will have a chance 
to talk to the Secretary this afternoon.
You are certainly getting a better press here now. The American 
press sees clearly the failure of the Chinese Communists to match our 
position on unrestricted right of return of nationals. You are getting a 
sympathetic press and there seems no longer to be any feeling that you 
are less out-­giving to the press than is Wang Ping-­nan.
I might mention, not for any use by you, but merely that your back­
ground may be as informed as possible, the fact that we are undoubt­
edly paying quite a stiff price in Taiwan for these conversations. There 
has been a subtle but none the less perceptible decline in morale and 
inclination to follow through with full energy and cooperativeness on 
various programs there. The MAAG, ICA and CAS missions in Taipei 
have all felt this and to some extent have been handicapped by it. There 
is a let down which we must hope will be temporary. The informed 
people in the Government, of course, know in considerable detail of 
your instructions and the progress of the talks. They know that they are 
not going to be let down but this assurance apparently does not extend 
to the Legislative Yuan, the press and the general public. Even those 
who know that we are not going to undermine their interests at Geneva 
feel that the mere fact of the talks improves the status of the Chinese 
Communists and betters the prospects of success in their campaign for 
general acceptance as the only Chinese Government. Foreign Vice Min­
ister Shan is here on a brief visit. He has received further assurances 
from us. Just to show the trend of the thinking of our people in Taipei, 
the following is quoted from a letter received from Bill Cochran our 
Charge at Taipei, while Karl Rankin is on home-leave:
“Saigon’s 3 August 5 (585 to Dept.) reports considerable uneasi­
ness there as regards the Ambassadorial talks in Geneva. This, added 
to the bad effects caused here, raises in my mind the question: will 
the benefits obtained from the talks outweigh the damage done to 
the confidence of our real, fighting friends (as distinguished from our 
fair-­weather friends, the fence-­sitters, and the amici hermaphroditi who 
aren’t sure what they are) in our resolution, persistence, and depend­
ability. If not, won’t we have lost something more valuable than we 
have gained?—­for we can never satisfy the avidity of the neutralists for 
concessions on our part.”
The Secretary has been informed of the message of appreciation con­
veyed in your letter of August 12. He in turn is pleased at the way you 
are handling the negotiations. You have undoubtedly carried out your 
instructions to apply unremitting pressure to Wang at the August 16 
meeting. We feel that he is on the defensive on the basic issue, despite all
