nothing in the Procès Verbal that injects any new element into the situation as far as Peru is concerned. The insistence of the Peruvian Government on the modifications will make it necessary to re-open negotiations with Bogotá and Rio thus making it impossible to sign the Procès Verbal by March 3. You will please explain to him again the desire if possible to bring about this amicable settlement before I leave office on March 4, which means the Procès Verbal must be signed not later than Tuesday afternoon, March 3. In case all Governments were in agreement it had tentatively been arranged to sign on Monday afternoon at 4 o’clock. Should the President feel that he can instruct Señor Velarde to sign the Procès Verbal it will be appreciated if instructions to that effect could be sent on Sunday in order that it may be signed on Monday. In a telegram to the Peruvian Ambassador sent yesterday, which was superseded by instruction above mentioned, Señor Salomón informed Velarde it would be contrary to the Peruvian constitution to recommend to Congress the approval of the treaty. Should this contention again be advanced you will call attention to the statement made to you by Minister for Foreign Affairs reported in your No. 6, February 27, noon, that should Colombian–Peruvian treaty be modified as he suggested “the Peruvian Congress, he felt sure, would ratify the treaty in 15 days and that the Peruvian Executive Government would use all means in its power to bring that about.” If the Executive can make the recommendation in one case there would appear to be no constitutional reason why it cannot do it in the other. You may also point out that the agreement of the Executive as provided in the Procès Verbal to renew its recommendation of approval would appear to be an undertaking well within the province of the Executive and in no manner interfering with the prerogatives of the legislative branch whereas the third modification suggested by the Peruvian Government that “consideration of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress would be resumed” is a definite undertaking on the part of the Executive for the legislative branch. You will please state to President Leguía that the Department is making this last effort to bring about a friendly agreement between the three countries concerned and that it would very much regret to have to inform Brazil and Colombia that the Department’s good offices had been unfruitful because of the apparent disinclination of Peru to accept the friendly suggestion proposed. HUGHES
