728  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The President next observed that in effect what we have to do is to 
bribe the Congress by agreeing to the restriction of imports in order to 
induce Congress to agree to extending the Trade Agreement Acts.
Secretary Anderson commented on an interdepartmental study 
of our trade policy. He believed that we ought to take a look, indus­
try by industry, to try to calculate the gains and losses in the light of 
our current trade policy. Once such a painstaking examination had 
been made, continued Secretary Anderson, there ought to be a broader 
consideration before the study was made public. Specifically, Secretary 
Anderson recommended that the findings of the interdepartmental 
study should be looked at by the National Advisory Council (NAC) 
in the light of our balance of payments situation and the out-­flow of 
American gold and dollars. There had been a very significant change 
with respect to our balance of payments situation even since 1956. In 
most of the highly developed foreign countries at the present time, as 
well as in a number of less well developed countries, there had ceased 
to be any such thing as a dollar shortage. Altogether they held some 
sixteen billions of our dollars at the present time. To these facts must 
be added commercial balances, the cost to the U.S. of maintaining sol­
diers and other U.S. Nationals abroad, and payments made abroad by 
American tourists. The total result was that the U.S. is confronted by 
a consistent balance of payments running against us. The acid test of 
a sound economy and of a sound currency as well, was the balance of 
payments situation. In fact, what we are now tending to do is to have 
the U.S. finance European exports. These European countries should 
themselves be urged to take some of the same measures we take to 
finance our own exports. Secretary Anderson said that he was not 
really concerned at all at present about encouraging the export of U.S. 
capital to the Western European countries. They were doing very well. 
He was, however, concerned about Asia and Africa.
Secretary Anderson went on to say that if the balance of payments 
disparity continues for any considerable number of years, we in the 
U.S. would be in for real trouble. We have bitten off rather more obli­
gations than we can chew even in the opinion of some foreign experts. 
In conclusion, Secretary Anderson repeated his request that the results 
of the interdepartmental study be examined in the light of our whole 
policy.
The President inquired whether in effect Secretary Anderson was 
advocating higher U.S. tariffs. Secretary Anderson replied in the nega­
tive but said he was advocating that we cut down on our U.S. expendi­
tures in certain foreign countries.
Mr. Dillon, the Acting Secretary of State, commented that the State 
Department fully recognized the seriousness of the balance of payments 
problem. We could not continue running a deficit indefinitely. He also
