288
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
80.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Preliminary Views on the Conduct of the Egypt-Israel Negotiations in
Washington
Major bilateral issues between Egypt and Israel have been re-
solved and, while the negotiations will take some time because of the
care and detail involved, it should not be difficult for the two sides to
move steadily to agreement on the precise terms of a peace treaty. In
our role as participant and chairman of the talks we face no obstacles as
serious as those at Camp David on this aspect, although there are a
couple that have not been discussed and there will be snags where our
own intervention will be important in moving issues to resolution.
The main issues we face in the talks opening October 12 are:
(a) how to engage the two sides in discussion of West Bank/Gaza
issues, if possible reaching further agreement on at least some issues, so
as to improve the prospects for Jordanian and Palestinian participation
in West Bank/Gaza negotiations; and (b) related to this, whether the
Egyptians will at this stage try to reintroduce some link between imple-
mentation of their Treaty with the agreement on the West Bank/Gaza.
Organizing the Talks on Bilateral Issues
Our own approach to the Egypt-Israel peace treaty, as you know,
envisages a fairly short basic treaty text supplemented by two annexes
that spell out (a) the withdrawal and security aspects, with an accom-
panying map, and (b) commitments to peace in specific terms. Even if
the two sides decide to approach it differently from the point of view of
a Treaty text, the basic division of work we have sketched out appears
logical. This would suggest that the talks could, very soon after open-
ing, break down into 3 working groups that would work on (a) the
basic Treaty text; (b) a military annex; and (c) an annex detailing com-
mitments to peace and normalization of relations. (The Israelis have
signaled their wish to proceed first with the commitments and normali-
zation of peace aspect; we assume they can be talked out of this since
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 4, unlabeled folder. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by
Sterner on October 6. Sterner also initialed the memorandum. The initials “CV” are
stamped at the bottom of the first page indicating that Vance saw the memorandum.
