Covert and Overt Operations
879
White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
Hedley Donovan
Lloyd Cutler
NSC
Gary Sick
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Secretary Muskie opened the meeting by reviewing for the PRC
an options paper for an Iran strategy over the next two months (Tab
B)2 and a proposed memorandum to the President reporting the recom-
mendations of the PRC.3 Some participants expressed doubt that the
course of action would succeed in achieving the release of the hostages;
however, all agreed that the strategy proposed was necessary as a first
step toward developing the contacts and channels of communica-
tion required for further progress. After some minor revisions, the
PRC unanimously recommended approval of the memorandum at
Tab A. (C)
Approve4
As Amended
The bulk of the discussion related to the question of possible trials
of the hostages. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that it may be useful to have
a trusted intermediary on his own raise with or suggest to the Iranians
a possible resolution of the crisis involving a swift trial and immediate
expulsion of the hostages in no more than 48 hours. Although we
should continue to stand by our public and private position of Novem-
ber 1979 that we would respond to trials by an interruption of Iranian
commerce,5 we should also recognize that some form of trials may
2 Tab B, an undated paper prepared in the Department of State, “Strategy for Iran—
the Next Two Months,” is attached but not printed. Tab B also included the U.S. Position
Paper, Document 137. The undated paper summarized the May 8 strategy (see Documents
278 and 279) and listed developments since then. It also noted that “fanfare surrounding
the alleged Bakhtiar-backed coup” had increased hostility toward the United States since
Iran believed it had “detailed and convincing evidence” of U.S. support for Oveissi and
Bakhtiar. The paper concluded that results of the May 8 strategy were limited because
Iran was preoccupied with its own internal power struggle. The last half of the paper
discussed future scenarios and U.S. options. (See footnote 8, Document 332) In a July
31 memorandum, Sick informed Brzezinski: “You do not need to read it.” (Carter Library,
Brzezinski Donated Material, Box 10) The CIA concurred with the paper’s judgments
but believed that it was “virtually certain” the Majles would opt for trials. (Undated
memorandum by NESA; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central
Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box
18, Folder 9: PRC Meeting—1 Aug 80 Iran)
3 Tab A, the proposed memorandum, is printed as Document 332.
4 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and wrote “See Notes” in the right
margin. Carter’s notes on the memorandum are in the annotation to Document 332.
5 See Document 52.
