688 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 2. Wang replied from notes taken during my statement that he had listened to my statement this morning, but failed note any new con­ structive remarks in it. He very much regretted that arguments which he had repeatedly refuted in course of talks had again been raised. 3. Wang said on his part it had always been their stand that talks should make positive steady progress. He didn’t see how points raised by me, which unacceptable their side, could lead talks forward. He did not see any difference between points advanced this morning and those presented at last meeting. He had already given his comments on points raised last meeting. He would like make further comments now. 4. Turning to prepared statement, Wang said at last meeting I had lauded allegedly good record of US in world affairs and stated that in Korea US demonstrated restraint and lack aggressive intention. He had already indicated their views on this at that time. He would again point out that version given me grossly at variance with facts. 5. Wang said US performance in Korea and on Chinese territory as witnessed by Chinese people in past and at present time points entirely different record. US started war of aggression against Korea in June 1950 and ordered its armed forces to push towards Yalu and Tumen Rivers. Security of Chinese nation was greatly threatened and Chinese people could not stand idly by. Chinese people could not but rise in self-­defense. 6. Wang said US at same time as its aggression against Korea also used threat and force against China in Taiwan area. Since intrusion US Seventh Fleet into Taiwan Strait, Chinese province of Taiwan fallen prey to direct aggression of US. 7. Wang said US has established naval and air force bases on ­Taiwan and stepped up equipping of Chiang Kai-­shek clique, turning Taiwan into base of contemplated invasion of mainland. Such is matter of fact well known to all. Is there slightest grain in this performance which could be presented as restraint and lack aggressive intent? 8. Wang said Taiwan Chinese territory. Even US had assumed sol­ emn pledge this effect. It matter of fact that Taiwan and Penghu turned over to then Chinese Govt. on Oct 25, 1945. This fact also acknowledged by US in White Paper published by State Dept. It indisputable matter of fact that new China has succeeded to China’s entire territory and sovereignty. 9. Wang said as US has used force and threat against China in Taiwan area China has every justification to repel such aggression in exercise right of self-­defense in its own territory. Nevertheless, China still willing seek for settlement this dispute between China and US by peaceful negotiations without resorting force.
