Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 397 versa. Change has begun to ameliorate the climate of distrust, increasing prospects that the sides will be prepared to reduce and restructure their forces. Furthermore, change is bringing greater openness. This has resulted in the East accepting improved verification measures and has enhanced the quality of our overall intelligence assessments and warning, thus helping also to reduce tensions. The effects of rapid change were quite evident at the Wyoming Ministerial, which was the best meeting of its type I have seen. The Soviet side demonstrated much greater common purpose than before. More striking, however, was watching Soviet diplomats openly debate the future of their own country in front of Westerners. Our arms control should help political change Such happenings should remind us that our arms control efforts have played an important role in accelerating political change in the East. A Soviet journalist recently told me that the Western presence in the Soviet Union has helped to break down the “state security mentality” within the Soviet Union. The people of the Soviet Union are now asking of their own bureaucrats, “If you can show these things to Americans, why can’t you show them to us?” He had in mind the Stockholm Agreement on-­site observers, INF inspectors, Perimeter- Portal Monitoring at Votkinsk, the Carlucci visit which included entering the cockpit of a Blackjack bomber and the like. And we are doing more. A number of specific Western positions in CFE are designed to enhance the security of East European states, less against any threat posed by the West than against that posed by some of their own allies, including the Soviet Union. These include our approach to the sufficiency rule, stationed forces, notifications and inspectors. Under our approach to CFE the Soviet Union could not intervene as easily in Poland or Hungary given the new balance of forces, the extensive notifications that would be required for movements of forces, and the Western inspectors accompanying their troops. In Poland, Solidarity members are just now beginning to focus on the arms control question, but they clearly see the importance of some CFE measures as a means of guaranteeing their political freedom. In Hungary, where leaders are undertaking a major reevaluation of Hungary’s relationship to the Warsaw Pact, the issue of maintaining sufficient flexibility under CFE to accommodate new relationships is emerging. All of this, while creating greater uncertainty about the future and bringing with it a certain amount of instability and risk, nevertheless presents us with major opportunities and a strong position in the CFE negotiations. These developments will demand that we consult closely, not only with our Western European allies, but increasingly with the more independent Eastern European nations.
