Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Aaron: The danger is however that Congress might just change the law only to deal with IMET and not give us a broader waiver. Muskie: There would certainly be no point in having to go to Congress twice if we could avoid it. Owen: But would you not be able to explain to them what we are trying to do? Muskie: If we go and ask for a waiver of the Symington Amendment this will be seen as a major signal of increased US involvement with Pakistan. Are we ready to take that step? Brzezinski: What do you think the chances are of Congress cooperating with us? Muskie: It would depend on how hard we attempt to sell it. We would have to make the contingency of Soviet pressure seem real and serious. This would be the Tonkin Gulf Resolution of the Middle East. Brzezinski: But let’s look at it the other way around. What would the response be if the Soviets were to crush resistance in Afghanistan and successfully intimidate Pakistan? Newsom: We can help Pakistan without lifting the Symington Amendment if the Saudis are prepared to pay the bill in an emergency. We have the airlift authority as we have used in Thailand. Muskie: But the Saudis are pressing us to increase our aid to Pakistan. Will they help us out if it means that we can avoid increasing our aid because of their help? Saunders: The Saudis would be likely to help us if there were a real emergency, but it would be harder to get their assistance if we were simply trying to fend off a future Soviet action. Newsom: We have to accept the fact that we will get no help from the Pakistanis in this area in terms of their moderating their nuclear program. Aaron: Are there perhaps ways to diminish the image of a major commitment and the symbolic qualities? Congress after all was prepared to act earlier; could we not go back to them in September to take a “modest step”? Perhaps we could provide some continuing role for Congress if we were to take further steps in waiving the Symington restriction. Muskie: The environment has changed. It would have been easier in January but now Congress is less concerned about a Soviet attack on Pakistan and more worried about US involvement. They remember that “modest steps” led us into Vietnam. Brzezinski: But we are already in July now and moving on towards August. Perhaps in the near future you and Harold Brown could start consultations quietly explaining that the post Olympic period may
