First Responses 151 possible. I said I could not yet promise when an answer might be possible on the other matters that he raised. David D. Newsom3 3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 58. Memorandum from the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 24, 1979 SUBJECT Seizure of Documents in Tehran This responds to your November 22 memorandum to the Secretary.2 The attached paper3 summarizes the information available November 23 about the Tehran Embassy documents under Iranian control. None of the working files of the Chargé, the Political Section, the Economic Section, the Defense Attaché Office (DAO), and Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) were destroyed. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 35, Subject File, Iran Cables & Memos 11–12/79. Secret; Sensitive. A handwritten note by Carter reads: “Zbig, Prepare to explain as best we can. C.” 2 Not found, but apparently the memorandum formalized Carter’s request for information on the seizure of documents in a handwritten note on the Summary of Conclusions of the November 20 SCC meeting. His note reads: “Cy—summarize for me possible damaging documents seized in Tehran which may be revealed to world. Prepare explanation to be released when necessary.” (Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 106) In a November 26 memorandum, Brzezinski asked Sick to “impress upon Hal [Saunders] the urgency of this matter.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 35, Subject File, Iran Cables & Memos 11–12/79). 3 Attached but not printed. In a note attached to another copy of this memorandum and report, Suddarth wrote: “Based on this memo, virtually all our business seems to have been compromised in the Tehran takeover. RS.” (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978– 1981, Lot 81D154, Iran; Captured Documents)
