Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 1, 1978 SUBJECT Your Request for a Memorandum Detailing Policy in Eastern Europe Reg2 passed on your request to him and Bill Quandt for a memo on policy in the two areas. Reg asked that I handle Eastern Europe separately. 1. Stages of U.S. Policy Toward Eastern Europe. Since January 1977 there have been three stages in U.S. policy. Initially there was a period of caution as the new administration began a general policy review. From January until the beginning of September, no new initiatives with any of the East European countries were undertaken, although previous European relationships were maintained. A more active and decisive stage became evident toward the end of the summer of 1977. The PRM–9 review of European issues included a section on Eastern Europe, and the final PRC meeting on that aspect of European policy was held at the end of August. The President signed PD–21 on September 133 which set the administration’s policies—we would seek to work with East European governments to enhance their international independence and increase the degree of internal liberalization. In concrete terms this policy involved continuing to give preferential treatment to Poland and Romania, improving relations with Hungary through returning the Crown and negotiating a trade agreementunder appropriate conditions,but relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and the GDR would remain limited until there is some progress in either independence or liberalization although steps might be taken to put relations with these three countries on a more normal basis. Since the enunciation of that policy one year ago, our efforts have been focused on carrying it out. The highlights have included the President’s visit to Poland, the granting of $500 million in CCC credits to Poland for the purchase of U.S. grain, returning the Crown of St. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 16, PD– 21. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent for information. Larrabee initialed the memorandum for King. 2 Reginald Bartholomew. 3 See Document 16.
