1956 655 has caused here we are taking no chances of your not having it. It is possible that it will either be mentioned by Wang or will influence the Chinese Communist tactics in some way. In any event it would be well for you to know what it says. Judge Phleger remarked on Saturday undoubtedly the article would receive close study in Peiping. He felt that it would probably have an influence on Peiping moves although it could not be predicted what the influence would be. It might well have something of a restraining and sobering effect, although the possibility of a different reaction could not be ruled out. Mr. Robertson, Judge Phleger, Bill Sebald and I all agree that we cannot agree to any deletion of the provision for individual and collective self defense from a renunciation of force declaration. Your instructions as now drafted reflect this position. It seems clear to us that Wang’s strategy is to tie our hands in the Taiwan area by getting us to renounce the right of self defense there. Then, by Chinese Communist reasoning, there would be no occasion for them to exercise any right of self defense in an “international” dispute and they could deal with the Chinese Nationalists as a domestic insurrectionary element the same as they would with an insurrection in Fukien Province. My reaction to Wang’s request that the talks be opened up, is that it indicates something of a turning point. I take it as a major decision probably growing out of Wang’s reported consultation in Peiping. While it may have been something of a bluff, they had to be prepared for the possibility that we would call the bluff. It could mean that despite our not calling them they are prepared to make a unilateral move, although it may be significant that today, four days after Wang made the threat, there is still no public statement out of Peiping. At the least, Wang’s move would seem to indicate that the Chinese ­Communists no longer have any real hope of getting what they want out of these talks. They undoubtedly expect to get a relaxation of the trade controls but figure that it will fall in their laps without their having to negotiate for it at Geneva. I dislike our being put in a posi­ tion of seeming to want secret negotiations and seeming to fear pub­ licity as to what is going on in the talks. It is the supposed secrecy that has led to the misunderstanding of the talks which has hurt us, especially in the Far East. Our public position at a later stage could be harmed by an insistence now on preserving the private nature of the talks. However I concede that no further progress would be possi­ ble if we abandon the private nature of the talks. The opposing posi­ tions would be instantly frozen. However, it is a question whether any further progress will be made anyhow. The clincher argument for trying to continue the private character of the talks is that the chance of protracting the talks for a while longer is certainly better if neither side goes to the public.
