68 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement C. The Underdeveloped and Uncommitted Countries 47. Most of the peoples of the underdeveloped countries have one primary political and social aim; they want to modernize their coun­ tries. They are not greatly concerned with what we regard as the evils of Communism. What we regard as the advantages of democracy and cap­ italism are associated largely in their minds with the evils of colonialism. The methods of Communism, judging by the great success they have had in the USSR and appear to be having in Communist China, often appear more relevant to their problems than the methods of democracy and capitalism. 48. Most of these countries are undergoing social and economic revolutions in which the methods and the leaders of the past are under attack or being cast aside. Many of them are unstable politically and socially; some are coming increasingly under authoritarian control. Many are also interested in increased military strength and prestige, and thus frequently threaten regional stability. All have grave economic problems. Population growth frequently exceeds the growth of the economies; Western civilization, with its improved standards of health, has sometimes brought greater poverty. There is a widespread lack of capital and a shortage of administrative and technical skills. In some countries the indigenous Communist movement is weak, in others it is strong, but in nearly all there are serious internal divisions based upon class, religious, ethnic and other factors. 49. The world has witnessed during the past fifteen years the rapid emergence of many new and often very populous states. The process has not much farther to go. There are still a number of important areas in Africa which will probably gain statehood during the next five to ten years, but the big increase in the number of sovereign states has already occurred. The uncommitted and underdeveloped world is a problem, not so much because there are still people under colonial control as because so many people have so recently emerged from such control. 50. Most of the leaders in the new countries of Asia and Africa look upon the US and USSR as engaged in a world power struggle which is of no direct concern to them, except as it might engulf them or as they might use it to advance their economic development. These peo­ ple tend to believe that the safest and most advantageous course for them to pursue is one of neutralism. The USSR is generally playing to this belief by making no ostensible efforts to recruit them into its camp. Offers of foreign aid have been made without apparent strings, and indigenous Communist movements—­where they are significant—­ have appeared more nationalist than pro-Soviet. The US, on the other hand, has appeared to them as opposed to neutralism and as attempt­ ing to force them into the Western alliance system. This many of them interpret as an effort to prolong colonial sponsorship and authority and
