Human Rights 17 meeting was cordial and there was a good exchange of information and views. On January 13, Congressman Fraser held an informal meeting to discuss ratification of the international human rights instruments. I and other representatives from the Department who attended pointed out some of the problems which will have to be faced in submitting these to the Senate. Indochinese Refugees—The flight of refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos continues. There are now almost 80,000 refugees in Thailand and more than 2,000 Vietnamese who escaped by small boat with temporary safehaven in countries around the periphery of the South China Sea. We are providing financial support (More than $11 million in 1976 and $10 million planned for 1977) to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) program of care and maintenance for those in camps. We also plan to participate in the UNHCR international resettlement effort by admitting up to 100 “boat case” refugees per month plus dependents under the conditional entry provisions of the immigration act. But first the Government of Hong Kong must be persuaded by us and the UNHCR to permit those selected for admission to the U.S. under this program to be given centralized final processing in Hong Kong. With such approval, we will begin moving approved refugees without dependents as soon as U.S. private voluntary agencies find sponsors, and will move refugees with dependents as soon as non-preference numbers are available. Alternative plans to the use of Hong Kong are also under consideration in the event we get a turndown. Admitting Soviet Refugees from Italy—The “drop out” rate in Vienna of Soviet refugees with exit permits for Israel has continued to hover for some time near 50 percent. Since many of these refugees wish to come to the United States, this has resulted in a mounting backlog (now about 3,000) of such refugees in Rome, where they apply for immigration to the U.S. To cope with this at our recommendation the Attorney General on January 13 approved use of the “parole” provisions of the immigration act. The program is supported by Jewish resettlement agencies and on Capitol Hill. Not included are those Soviet refugees who had previously proceeded to Israel and subsequently went to Rome with hopes of immigrating here. These are not considered refugees since they could return to Israel without persecution. Haitian Asylum Seekers—Haitians are the most numerous single group of asylum seekers. Our advisory opinions to INS recommend against granting asylum to most, on the grounds that they seek economic betterment and would not suffer persecution if returned to Haiti. In January, responding to a recommendation from the Subcommittee on Immigration of the House Judiciary Committee, we sent an officer to Miami and to Port au Prince for a review. With the agreement of the
