Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I trading partners. We need access to facilities and resources. We need the support of others in helping to achieve peaceful alternatives to regional conflicts. We need political support—whether it be in resisting terrorism in Iran or aggression in Afghanistan. But we cannot expect the cooperation and support of others on issues of importance to us if we are unprepared to offer concrete support on matters of importance to them—particularly their own economic development and social progress. Isolation would be only one consequence. Declining American aid, and declining American influence, would also help the Soviets exploit internal instability—in Nicaragua, in El Salvador, and in many other places where the Soviets are prepared to exploit tensions to expand their power and to limit Western influence. Nothing that I know of the American people suggests to me that they want to give the Soviets this kind of free ride. I believe the American people want their nation to resist Soviet expansionism—not only militarily but by helping other nations defend their freedom and feed their people. I believe the American people want their nation to be actively involved in the world. Finally, the decline of American aid and influence would hamper our efforts to settle dangerous disputes and build peaceful, democratic solutions. Let me give you an example. Over the past 3 years, many in the Congress fought bitterly against President Carter’s Rhodesian policy. President Carter—courageously and almost alone—insisted that the United States actively support Britain’s effort to bring a democratically elected government to Rhodesia. Fortunately President Carter prevailed against bitter opposition. In fact, his refusal to compromise prematurely on Rhodesia helped bring to an end a bloody civil war in that country. The result has been good for the people of Zimbabwe and bad for the Soviets, who sought to exploit turmoil there. Consider another case. We have been trying for a year and more to strengthen the center in Nicaragua to help moderates there resist extremist solutions. Every time we tried to appropriate the funds necessary to support our efforts in Nicaragua, the effort was defeated. Finally, Congress has acted to make possible $75 million needed to fulfill our commitment.3 But in the delay, we suffered a loss of credibility. The 3 The administration had proposed $75 million in aid for Nicaragua in November 1979 as part of a broader assistance package to Central America and the Caribbean. During a May 19, 1980, White House briefing for members of Congress, the President noted that the Senate had, that day, approved the supplementary development allocation
