752
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
trading partners. We need access to facilities and resources. We need
the support of others in helping to achieve peaceful alternatives to re-
gional conflicts. We need political support—whether it be in resisting
terrorism in Iran or aggression in Afghanistan. But we cannot expect
the cooperation and support of others on issues of importance to us if
we are unprepared to offer concrete support on matters of importance
to them—particularly their own economic development and social
progress.
Isolation would be only one consequence. Declining American aid,
and declining American influence, would also help the Soviets exploit
internal instability—in Nicaragua, in El Salvador, and in many other
places where the Soviets are prepared to exploit tensions to expand
their power and to limit Western influence. Nothing that I know of the
American people suggests to me that they want to give the Soviets this
kind of free ride. I believe the American people want their nation to re-
sist Soviet expansionism—not only militarily but by helping other na-
tions defend their freedom and feed their people. I believe the Amer-
ican people want their nation to be actively involved in the world.
Finally, the decline of American aid and influence would hamper
our efforts to settle dangerous disputes and build peaceful, democratic
solutions.
Let me give you an example. Over the past 3 years, many in the
Congress fought bitterly against President Carter’s Rhodesian policy.
President Carter—courageously and almost alone—insisted that the
United States actively support Britain’s effort to bring a democratically
elected government to Rhodesia. Fortunately President Carter pre-
vailed against bitter opposition. In fact, his refusal to compromise pre-
maturely on Rhodesia helped bring to an end a bloody civil war in that
country. The result has been good for the people of Zimbabwe and bad
for the Soviets, who sought to exploit turmoil there.
Consider another case. We have been trying for a year and more to
strengthen the center in Nicaragua to help moderates there resist ex-
tremist solutions. Every time we tried to appropriate the funds neces-
sary to support our efforts in Nicaragua, the effort was defeated. Fi-
nally, Congress has acted to make possible $75 million needed to fulfill
our commitment.3 But in the delay, we suffered a loss of credibility. The
3 The administration had proposed $75 million in aid for Nicaragua in November
1979 as part of a broader assistance package to Central America and the Caribbean.
During a May 19, 1980, White House briefing for members of Congress, the President
noted that the Senate had, that day, approved the supplementary development allocation
for Central America. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, p. 942) The President signed
into law the authorizing legislation for the Special Central American Assistance Act (H.R.
6081; P.L. 96–257) on May 31.
