Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI —Would be constructive step in US-Soviet relationship and could improve prospects for accomplishment of other US bilateral objectives with the Soviets. —Due to likelihood of protracted negotiations, would permit accomplishment of some planned US weapons testing objectives. Disadvantages —Could be criticized for permitting continued testing, particularly if negotiations were protracted. —Alternatively, if negotiations were completed quickly, could preclude completion of any remaining US weapons test objectives. —Similarly, the Soviets might exploit the situation by announcing an immediate moratorium and calling for the US to halt testing, thus making it difficult for the US to continue testing. B. Negotiations with Cessation of Testing This option is essentially the same as option A, except that we would seek a time-limited bilateral moratorium on testing during the negotiations. Advantages —It would restrain the Soviets from improving their nuclear warheads or correcting possible deficiencies during a possibly protracted period of negotiations. —It would be widely supported internationally as clearly demonstrating US and Soviet good-faith commitments to fulfill their nonproliferation treaty pledge to end nuclear testing. —It would strengthen US efforts to dissuade India and other nations from further testing. Disadvantages —It would preclude completion of certain planned strategic and tactical weapons tests programs. —During the period of the moratorium, we would be limited to national means of verification only, thereby increasing the risk of clandestine Soviet testing at low yields. —If prolonged, a moratorium could result in loss of skilled personnel from the US weapons program, as well as funding reductions by the Congress. In that case, subsequent failure to achieve a permanent CTB and resumption of testing by both sides could leave the US at a disadvantage. C. Phased Approach The primary difference between this option and Option A above is that this option would defer CTB negotiations for perhaps two years to provide for a deliberate linking of the various steps required to reach any CTB with satisfactory progress on a wide variety of other arms control measures and demonstration of Soviet commitments to a stable US/USSR national security relationship.
