World Hunger and Food Policy
655
conditions generally, and by food-related decisions by national
leaders—especially by those in charge of centrally planned economies.
Demand for food clearly is on the rise, but precisely how far and
how fast it will go is problematical. Uncertainty over demand naturally
complicates forecasts about the ability of food supply to keep pace.
In physical terms, there is great potential for dramatic food pro-
duction increases in the LDCs. The wide gap in per acre yields between
farms in the developed and developing countries can be narrowed by
increased incentives to producers, expanded investment in technology
and fertilizers, and more intensive cultivation.
But there also are considerable political, economic, and cultural
impediments to increased production. These include the high cost of
energy and fertilizer, inefficient land tenure patterns, disincentives to
farm production caused by national policies aimed at keeping food
prices down in urban areas, and reluctance by national leaders (who
tend to equate development with industrialization) to expend limited
resources on agriculture. In some instances, (e.g., Indonesia) poor agri-
cultural practices such as deforestation and overgrazing are resulting
in immediate production increases, but they are threatening the basic
ecosystems upon which food production depends and are likely to
have severely counterproductive consequences in the long run.
Technology and climate figure heavily in the outlook for supply,
especially over the long term. New food production techniques, such as
those using hydroponics and single-cell proteins, eventually could be
of great importance if proven technically, economically, and estheti-
cally feasible. A change in world climate that impacted negatively on
traditional food sources, however, might more than offset any techno-
logical gains. Climatologists hold widely varying opinions on the direc-
tion, pace, and permanence of climate change, and there is no con-
sensus about the interaction of natural and man-made causes. Most
knowledgeable observers agree, though, that it would be unwise to
count on an indefinite continuation of the climate of the last half cen-
tury or so, which has been unusually stable and favorable for
agriculture.
Food supply in any given year will also depend on the size of
carry-over stocks. Generally strong world agricultural performance
over the past couple of years has made some stockpiling possible, but it
has also helped dissipate an international sense of urgency about the
future. With immediate sufficiency in production breeding compla-
cency about long-term trends, prospects for the establishment soon of
an international grain reserve (or even an international system of na-
tionally held reserves) are not particularly promising. Stockpiles, there-
fore, probably will continue to be held mainly on an ad hoc and transi-
tory basis.
