776 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tons under the FAC, as shown in Table 2.7 Of course, if grain prices rise above projected levels, this FAC commitment would require that the U.S. increase its budget outlays for food aid rather than reduce the quantity below this level. For each 10¢ per bushel increase in the price of wheat and corn, food aid costs for FY 79, which would be the first full year of the Convention, would increase by about $16 million. However, if grain prices do rise, budget outlays for farm income support now anticipated for FY 79 would fall sharply. This recommendation has been considered by the Working Group on Food and Agricultural Policy and is concurred in by all members present. DECISION8 Second, I recommend that, if useful in obtaining the contributions of other countries toward the 10 million ton target, the U.S. negotiator should be authorized to offer that the U.S. would increase its contribution above 4.47 million tons so that the U.S. share would be no less than 50% of total contributions—up to a maximum U.S. contribution of 5 million tons. In other words, if the contributions of other countries exceed 4.47 million tons, the U.S. would match these contributions on a ton-for-ton basis until the 10 million ton target is achieved. Such a conditional offer would provide an incentive for other potential donors to increase their contributions. In making this offer, the U.S. would first assure that its Currency Use Payments (CUPs)9 for certain Title I agreements would not make those agreements ineligible under the FAC. In this way, almost all of our current Title I agreements could be counted toward fulfillment of our FAC contribution, as shown in Table 2. Currently programmed food aid quantities and budget outlays for FY 78 and FY 79 should also be adequate to meet a commitment of 5 million tons under the FAC, although the exposure to potential increases in budget costs would be correspondingly greater. The commodity coverage of the FAC will be negotiated. If rice or other commodities are included in the FAC, it will be easier for the U.S. to meet this 5 million ton commitment, as shown in Table 2. 7 Table 2A, “Quantity of P.L. 480 Wheat, Coarse Grains, and Products for FY 77, FY 78 and FY 79,” and Table 2B, “Quantity of P.L. 480 Wheat, Coarse Grains, Rice, and Products for FY 77, FY 78 and FY 79,” are attached but not printed. 8 The President checked his approval and initialed this recommendation. 9 Public Law 480 Title I agreements permit recipient countries to purchase commodities on a long-term repayment plan. However, the law’s provisions also specify that partial payment—in local currencies—must be made by the recipient nation in order for it to receive Title I commodities. Currency Use Payments enable the United States to fund Embassy operations and other projects within the recipient country, without committing U.S. dollars.
