International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
471
the U.S. and the Soviet Union. Commodity agreements are of more use
to developed than to developing countries. I don’t think my consumers
and taxpayers should be asked to contribute to the well-being of large
developed countries rather than poor LDCs.
I am extremely dissatisfied with the way in which examination of
stabilization of export earnings has been handled so far. The common
fund and commodity agreements mean large rich countries get more
benefits than poor countries. The great majority of LDCs derive no ben-
efit whatsoever. This is what I feel. We will say this in international fora
about this approach.
I also repeat that I find the language on COMECON too friendly.
Trudeau: You speak from the heart, but you also speak for a lot of
us.
Carter: We should say we deeply regret the failure of COMECON
to assist developing countries.
Trudeau: On the point above, the common fund and STABEX, we
are all growing impatient with the failure to find methods to achieve
this objective. We all want to transfer resources to LDCs. But when we
gave lots of bilateral aid there was a great deal of overlap and
confusion.
On the common fund, LDCs want to stabilize prices and price in-
creases. If third world countries rely on one commodity, they face very
real problems. People may use less sisal, but we can’t be blamed for
that. We should use the time between now and the next Summit to
clarify our objectives and not mix in the common fund, Lome, etc. The
774 always try to do everything at the same instant. The LDCs want
something because it sounds good.
Callaghan: I support Pierre’s point about the risk of countries
going from multilateral to bilateral aid. We can influence governments
a bit when aid is bilateral but very few changes are made as a result.
The common fund idea has changed a lot since 1974 and 1975. It now
has become a political necessity.
Schmidt: I acknowledge that although it will not help 90% of
LDCs.
Callaghan: We must maintain our position on the common fund
until the developing countries move, but when they do, it would be ad-
visable for us to support the second window. If the price is to give in on
the second window and some direct contributions—if that is required
to get it out of the way, we should move at an appropriate moment.
4 Reference is to the Group of 77, or G–77, the developing countries group estab-
lished at the conclusion of the first UN Conference on Trade and Development in 1964.
For the Lome´ Convention, see footnote 6, Document 24.
