September 1953–December 1954
785
would do all possible to encourage the British to reach an equitable oil
settlement.2
3. The oil question still holds paramount position in the immediate
welfare of Iran. The Zahedi government has begun a propaganda pro-
gram to soften the Iranian public for a re-opening of oil negotiations
with the British. It is too early to predict the chances for an early settle-
ment, although preliminary discussions are now taking place between
U.S. and U.K. oil experts in Washington.
4. Persistent reports in the latter half of the month indicated that
the Qashqai tribes were preparing for open conflict with the gov-
ernment forces provoked by the issuance of an ultimatum for Mos-
sadeq’s release. However, Qashqai leaders have assured U.S. officials
that while winter migrations had started earlier than usual, the
Qashqai’s have every intention of remaining at peace with the present
government. There were rumors also that the Qashqais had joined
forces with the Tudeh Party and at the precise time that the Iranian Air
Force was to have made a token show of power over the city of Shiraz
in Qashqai territory, more than 80 per cent of the Iranian Air Force
planes were put out of action for several weeks by direct sabotage com-
mitted by Tudeh members of the Air Force personnel. The Qashqai
leaders subsequently admitted Tudeh overtures to them, but denied
that they had agreed to any Tudeh alliance.3
5. Throughout the month, the Zahedi government has continued
vigorous anti-Tudeh repressions by weeding out known members on
government payrolls, by strenuous efforts of the security forces against
known Tudeh members and their facilities, and by strong propaganda
measures.
6. As reported last month, the change of government has resulted
in greatly improved CIA contacts in government and military circles.4
Consequently, CIA capabilities have become greatly enhanced both in
terms of short-term political action programs designed to support the
existing government and in terms of long-range programs designed to
2 General Abbas Farzanegan had a series of meetings in Washington September
21–23 with Acting Secretary Smith, General Lemnitzer, Harold Stassen, and Herbert
Hoover, Jr. In these meetings, Farzanegan thanked U.S. officials for their support of Gen-
eral Zahedi and the $45 million emergency aid package. He informed these officials that
the Iranian Government believed it would require additional aid. U.S. officials impressed
upon Farzanegan that it would be very difficult for them to assemble an aid package for
Iran over and above the emergency aid package already extended. A report of the
meeting with Smith is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.5
MSP/9–2153. Farzanegan’s meeting with General Lemnitzer is ibid., 788.5 MSP/9–2353.
The meetings with Stassen are ibid., 788.5 MSP/9–2353, and with Hoover, ibid.,
888.2553/9–2353.
3 See Document 324.
4 See Document 308.
