476 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II In conclusion, I would note that the proposals set forth above do not entail a net expansion of functions. Rather, they bring together in one entity a number of functions that are currently being performed disjointedly but which must be coordinated if they are to be performed effectively. If you agree with the proposal, it will be necessary for you to discuss it with Lucy. 145. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, May 16, 1978 SUBJECT Human Rights and the IFIs Two issues which surfaced at your lunch with Tony Solomon and Fred Bergsten deserve further attention: the allegation of inconsistency between our bilateral assistance programs and our voting record in IFIs; and the question of whether we should ever oppose IFI loans which meet the basic human needs criteria. The record to date on the “inconsistency” charge is attached for your use in future such conversations, or perhaps distribution to the Interagency Group. You will note that the best possible face is put on things, especially military transfers. Nonetheless the overall record is a good one and we should call attention to it. The question of whether we ever should oppose basic human needs loans is more difficult, and controversial within this building. All agree that we usually should support such loans. But HA believes that we should leave ourselves the option of sometimes opposing them. This might sometimes be done to disassociate ourselves from the inhumane excesses of a particular regime (e.g., Argentina) or because of our past identification with a major human rights violator (e.g., Chile). HA makes a distinction between abstaining and voting no on IFI loans, 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 3, TL 5/16–31/78. No classification marking. Drafted by Walker on May 11. Walker initialed for Derian.
