National Security Policy 361 C. Sea Forces 1. Fleet Missiles Will the increased use of missiles in the fleet permit reductions in numbers and types of aircraft and carriers? With cruisers and other vessels having a missile capability in the fleet, does the number of carriers needed for air defense, air attack of land installations and other carrier attack missions diminish? 2. Nuclear Powered Fleet Does a second nuclear carrier commit the Navy to planning for an all nuclear task force? How much improvement in effectiveness and economy results from the use of an all-­nuclear task force? Since carriers are organized as units of a task force and cannot operate alone, do nuclear carriers of high speeds and long endurance require other ships in the force to have the same performance? 3. Eagle Missile In view of the Navy’s growing AA missile capability in ships of the fleet is the Eagle missile and associated aircraft development neces­ sary? Is this program redundant? 4. Bullpup v. White Lance Can one of these tactical air missiles be developed for use by both the Navy and Air Force? IV. GENERAL MILITARY SUPPORT A. General Discussion This section does not include any items of general military support except those which clearly involve technical issues. For example, the possible economy that might result from a reduction of mobilization reserve procurement is not discussed. B. Research and Development Should an adjustment be made in the direction of more research and less development? Only a very small part of the total research and development budget goes into research, especially basic research. There are several kinds of military research: 1. Basic fact-­finding concerning natural phenomena. Examples are meteorology, solid state physics, and radio astronomy. 2. Inventions of components and devices of obvious utility to exis­ ting or foreseeable weapon systems. Examples are transistors, infra-­red detectors and new rocket fuels. 3. Analytical studies of possible weapon system developments, utilizing all available scientific facts and guidance as to the objective to be achieved. The studies of the Nike-Hercules and Bomarc, in advance of their actual development, are typical of this type of research.
