996 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1959–1964 THE PROBLEM To review significant developments affecting the USSR’s internal political situation, economic, scientific, and military programs, rela­ tions with other Bloc states, and foreign policy, and to estimate proba­ ble Soviet policies and actions over about the next five years.2 SUMMARY OF THE ESTIMATE PROBABLE TRENDS IN SOVIET EXTERNAL POLICY 1. Over the last year Soviet policy toward the West has veered from extreme provocation in connection with the Berlin issue to a warmly expressed willingness to seek new avenues of accommodation through negotiation. We believe that, fundamentally, this change of tone is derived from tactical considerations and that the principal objectives of Soviet policy vis-­a-­vis the West remain unchanged. The Soviet leaders currently show great confidence that the trend of events, in what they continue to think of as an inevitable struggle with the non-­Communist world, is in their favor. Their rate of economic progress, their scien­ tific and space successes, their advances in missile development, their estimate of the political tendencies in the underdeveloped countries (despite setbacks in some areas) all suggest to them a growing shift in world power relations favorable to the Communist cause. These con­ siderations as seen by the Soviet leaders permit their policy to be less rigid than formerly. From the position of strength which they believe they now have they see themselves as able not only to engage the West vigorously on disputed issues when they wish to do so, but also to relax tensions when expedient without any imputation of weakness. They consider themselves able at the same time to pursue their programs of internal development, including the betterment of living standards and the furtherance of rapid economic growth. 2. We believe that, over the next five years, neither a policy single-­ mindedly directed at eliminating East-­West tensions nor a policy of pressure with a steadily belligerent tone is likely to be followed by the USSR. We expect to see elements of both pressure and detente com­ bined and varied as tactical advantage may suggest. For the nearer future the present emphasis on negotiation and accommodation seems 2 The reference to a five-­year period is approximate. The estimates on the Soviet economy carry through 1965, to conform to the Soviet Seven-­Year Plan. Judgments on many other matters pertain to periods of less than five years, and, particularly on political questions, are intended for the most part to apply for the next year or two. [Footnote is in the original.]
