1056
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the Department of State and the National
Security Council3
Washington, undated
NON-PROLIFERATION
ISSUE FOR DECISION
No policy decisions on Latin American non-proliferation ques-
tions appear to be required at the present time.
ESSENTIAL FACTORS
1. Nuclear Cooperation
We have indicated on several occasions—in the President’s April
14 OAS speech,4 at the April meeting of OPANAL5 (the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco implementation organization), and at the July meeting of the
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC)6—that we are in
favor of expanding our nuclear cooperation with Latin American
states, not only on a bilateral basis and through the IAEA, but also
through Latin American regional institutions.
Few Latin American states have significant nuclear energy pro-
grams. While we have supplied power reactors to Brazil and Mexico,
our bilateral cooperation to date has largely involved the transfer of re-
search reactors and fuel to a limited number of recipients, including Ar-
gentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela, and no requests for
the transfer of power reactors are pending. We would be prepared in
the future to conclude agreements for cooperation with additional
Latin American states, provided they can accept the non-proliferation
constraints that will be required by pending legislation. Future cooper-
ation with Argentina and Brazil will be influenced by the outcome of
current disagreements with both countries over their desire to acquire
sensitive fuel cycle technologies and their failure to adhere either to the
NPT or the Treaty of Tlatelolco.7 (Our strategy for dealing with Argen-
3 Confidential.
4 See Document 410.
5 See Document 411.
6 Not found.
7 Brzezinski discussed the issue of trying to get Argentina and Brazil to sign the
Treaty of Tlatelolco or the NPT in an August 3 memorandum to Vance. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron,
Box 5, Brazil, 9–12/77)
