Arms Control and Disarmament  1657
464.	 Telegram Supnu 401 From Geneva1
Geneva, April 29, 1959, noon
Supnu 401. Paris for the Secretary. On basis Tsarapkin performance 
yesterday, it appears that Soviets will probably move quickly to reply to 
questions we have posed on Khruschev-Macmillan proposal and that 
their answers may be clear and to the point. They have already stated 
flatly that in context of quota agreement they are prepared to drop 
veto and requirement for commission decision on dispatch inspection 
teams. They have indicated that agreement on criteria which would 
qualify events for inspection will not present major problem. They have 
bought concept of permanent inspection teams. They will probably be 
prepared negotiate on composite inspection teams. They have opposed 
idea that quota should have relationship to number of unidentified 
events and have stated clearly that they thought size of quota was a 
political decision. They might, however, make point that if we feel so 
inclined there is nothing to prevent us from basing our “political” posi­
tion on size of quota on “technical” factors of number of unidentified 
events and capabilities of system. In sum it begins to look as if Soviets 
will shortly demonstrate that they have really adopted Macmillan plan 
and will be in position to stress this in their propaganda. Accordingly 
we are quickly approaching point where we will have to decide what 
US position on Macmillan approach is to be.
In considering Macmillan approach Department may wish give 
thought possibility of adding to quota suggestion provision for peri­
odic revision quota number. In first two years of actual operation of 
treaty time taken to construct control posts and to bring them into 
operation will mean that there will be relatively few events in any case 
which would justify inspection under criteria as presently contained 
Annex I. For the first two years of treaty size of quota is therefore not of 
major practical importance. If there were provision for periodic review 
of quota number and agreement on annual quota for succeeding year, 
and if moreover this provision were so phrased as to provide basis 
for withdrawal from treaty if agreement not reached USDel believes 
­Macmillan approach might be more palatable. In separate telegram 
USDel is sending illustrative draft of type of review provision which 
might be considered.
1 Source: Soviets seem to adopt Macmillan quota proposals. Secret; Priority; Limit 
Distribution. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/4–2959.
