1118
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Ambassador here—but efforts of GOM and OPANAL thus far have not
been successful.
4. Gros opined that any renewed efforts to encourage Cuba to ad-
here to Treaty will probably have to await both completion of Latin
American ratifications and “political changes” in Washington (that is,
improved U.S.-Cuban relations). Gros confirmed earlier reports that
Mexican President Lopez Portillo had raised Tlatelolco with Fidel
Castro during latter’s May visit to Mexico. According to Gros, Castro
was not receptive and Tlatelolco was omitted from Joint Communique´
at his insistence.
5. Regarding NPT Review Conference, Gros said that no reactions
have yet been received to OPANAL’s solicitation of Latin American
(LA) views. Gros said that LA representatives will probably meet in
January or February to elaborate common position for Review Confer-
ence, including concrete suggestions for better implementation of NPT
Article IV (peaceful nuclear cooperation) by nuclear-weapon states.
Gros remarked that Soviet Ambassador is meeting with him this week
because of Moscow’s concern that LA states might seek to denounce or
undermine NPT at Review Conference—a concern Gros apparently
does not share.
6. Turning to LA nuclear organizations, Gros said that he is consid-
ering seeking to work out an agreement between IANEC (the OAS
Inter-American
Nuclear
Energy
Commission)
and
OPANAL—
whereby function of former would be limited to technical/scientific
questions, while latter would have monopoly in political field. (Com-
ment: Key GOM arms control figure Ambassador Sergio Gonzalez
Galvez remarked to Gerard Smith in May that IANEC is excessively
oriented toward Brazil, Argentina and Chile (see Ref A). Gros’ effort to
work out agreement presumably parallels GOM’s effort to maintain
primacy of OPANAL in LA nuclear affairs.)
7. On conventional arms control, Gros expressed pessimism over
prospects for Mexican initiative—given unsettled LA political situation
following Nicaragua.4 (Drafted by Jon Glassman.)
Lucey
4 Reference is to the July 16 resignation of Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza
Debayle and the assumption of power by the Sandinistas on July 19.
