1352
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment been low key and secret, but this channel was no longer pos-
sible. (S)
The Foreign Minister reiterated his point that there was no need for
a special effort to hide the strategic dialogue. On the contrary, during
his recent visit to Egypt, he had concluded that the more the Egyptians
realized the closeness of US/Israeli relations, the better Egyptian rela-
tions would be with both countries. (S)
Ambassador Evron amplified by noting that the U.S. and Israel had
differing assessments of the impact of some outward forms of their as-
sociation. Peace became a reality only when Sadat concluded that the
U.S. could help deliver Israel eventually. Israel believed that U.S. sensi-
tivities about Arab reactions to more open strategic cooperation with
Israel were a little exaggerated. If the Arabs interpreted U.S. lack of en-
thusiasm as the beginning of a withdrawal, that would be dangerous.
The two countries could prove that this was not so by doing what many
Arabs suspected them of doing anyway. Why not, therefore, make part
of this strategic cooperation more open? (S)
The Secretary replied that he had been the first American Secretary
of Defense to visit Israel and General Jones would be the first Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to visit Israel. This kind of talk and continual
reassurance, however, was not really necessary. The U.S. did not intend
to turn away from Israel; Israel knew this. In fact, the two countries
were so close that some kinds of formal detailed arrangements were
not really necessary. Under Secretary Komer added that actually the U.S.
was doing more with Israel but because it was also doing more on the
Arab side, this had changed Israel’s perception.4 (S)
The meeting ended cordially. (U)
4 Talks designed to “revitalize” the “strategic dialogue” between the United States
and Israel took place between McGiffert and Zippori December 4–5. In a December 8
briefing memorandum to Muskie summarizing the discussions, which focused primarily
on developments in the Iran-Iraq war and the situation in the Gulf, Saunders wrote that
the talks were “useful and friendly, and the Israelis went away clearly pleased that these
talks have been resumed and regularized at a higher political level than was previously
the case.” The Israelis raised the subject of joint U.S.-Israeli military contingency plan-
ning, suggesting the two countries could “cooperate in meeting potential threats to secu-
rity” in the Middle East, but were told that it was not the U.S. “intention to enter into con-
tingency planning at this time.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P810005–0807)
