Hungary 457 150. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Hungary1 Washington, October 26, 1977, 0044Z 255571. For Ambassador. Subject: The Crown of St. Stephen. 1. During their October 1 meeting at UNGA the Secretary, in accordance with the Presidential Directive/NSC–21, informed Hungarian Foreign Minister Puja of our willingness to return the Crown and asked you to work out the details of the return with Puja.2 2. You should seek an early appointment with Puja to work out the transfer scenario.3 In your talks you should keep in mind the following essential conditions: —That various segments of the Hungarian public, including the Roman Catholic Cardinal Primate, participate in ceremonies in which the Crown is returned. —That the Crown will be displayed publicly and appropriately in an historical location not associated with the Communist Party on a permanent basis. —That the Crown will be treated with respect. In addition, we wish to arrange a ceremony which will emphasize the national, religious and cultural nature of the Crown. We will seek to underline the fact that the American people are returning to the Hungarian people a national treasure which rightly belongs to the Hungarians. We would plan to secure a public statement from the Hungarian Government to the effect that Hungarians from all over the world are welcome to visit Hungary and view the Crown. 3. Our detailed guidance for your scenario talks follows: A) Place of return—Budapest. The USG transported the Crown and regalia from Europe and believes it fitting to effect the return in Hungary. B) US delegation—The President, as Chief of State, will appoint a senior USG official to head the American delegation. We will ask distinguished Senators and Representatives to be participants, as well as a senior State Department official. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840070–0726. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Gerth; cleared by Andrews, Luers, Vest, and Tarnoff; and in S/S approved by Nimetz. 2 See Document 147. 3 In an October 7 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tarnoff outlined the Department’s proposed scenario for the return of the Crown. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77)
