National Security Policy  191
Agency; the Director, International Cooperation Administration; the 
Special Assistants to the President for Information Projects (Item 1), for 
National Security Affairs, and for Security Operations Coordination; 
the Naval Aide to the President; the White House Staff Secretary; 
Mr. Howard Furnas, Department of State; the Executive Secretary, NSC; 
the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion of the meeting and the 
main points taken.
[Omitted here are agenda items 1–5.]
6. US–USSR BALLISTIC MISSILE DEVELOPMENTS
(NSC Action No. 1833)
In introducing the subject, Dr. Killian indicated that it was essentially 
a comparison of developments in the Soviet ballistic missiles program 
with our own U.S. ballistic missiles program. This was primarily a tech­
nical study, but the conclusions that he was about to produce were based 
upon sound technical judgments. The study was essentially an analysis 
of Soviet tests since 1954 of ballistic missiles in the various ranges, in 
comparison with U.S. experience in developing and testing similar mis­
siles. Among the conclusions thereupon presented by Dr. Killian, there 
was one to the effect that in the field of the shorter-­range ballistic missiles 
the Soviets had a larger variety of types and ranges than did the United 
States. With respect to both the intermediate range ballistic missiles and 
the intercontinental ballistic missiles, the Soviet Union was approxi­
mately a year ahead of the United States. There was also a suggestion of 
greater mobility for the longer-­range Soviet ballistic missiles. ICBMs may 
be transportable by railroad. If so, this would indicate that the Soviets 
had developed a storable liquid fuel for their ballistic missiles.
Dr. Killian added that this general situation stemmed from the 
fact that the Soviets had inaugurated their ballistic missiles programs 
so much sooner than had the United States, rather than from the fact 
that the U.S. program was itself behind schedule. Dr. Killian then asked 
Dr. Kistiakowsky to provide the technical back-­up and details behind 
these conclusions.
In his report, Dr. Kistiakowsky used two charts. The first was 
entitled “Guided Missiles Test Ranges”; the second, “Soviet Ballistic 
­Missiles and Satellite Firings Since 1954”.
Following Dr. Kistiakowsky’s report, Dr. Killian added two 
conclusions.
The President commented that he had just read in the papers that a 
high official of the Defense Department had spoken in opposition to the 
creation of a civilian space agency. The President inquired whether this 
could be true. General Cutler identified the Defense Department offi­
cial as Mr. Roy W. Johnson (Director of the Advanced Research Projects 
Agency in the Pentagon).
