1955 595 obstructions their departure, as well as offer assistance in effecting return. Yet U.S. has made known it cannot give any assistance to Indian Embassy that regard. 8. Wang said U.S. side claims Indian Embassy can only communi­ cate with Chinese nationals after individuals have put in request. 9. Wang said though PRC side does not agree this interpretation, in circumstances since U.S. side adopting such interpretation PRC side can only treat British Charge on parallel footing. 10. Wang said and now U.S. side expresses dissatisfaction with sit­ uation which has been created solely by U.S. side. This is nothing but making a nonsensical fuss. 11. Wang said it only PRC side which entitled raise protest. If U.S. side wishes alter this situation it must first provide complete list names addresses Chinese in U.S. 12. Wang said in second place American prisoners held in Chinese prisons are those who have breached law. During period they are serv­ ing sentences they not entitled to request return. To speak of obstruc­ tion to departure is even more out of question. 13. Wang said however as PRC side has stated Chinese Government reviewing these cases accordance Chinese legal procedures as well as taking behavior individual into account and will then decide measures to be taken towards them. 14. Wang said it is matter of fact that China has in accordance its own statement already taken concrete steps and is carrying on review­ ing work. 15. Wang said China has even made available to the prisoners full text agreed announcement and has lent hand to British Charge in dis­ tributing notices these people concerning agreed announcement. 16. Wang said in the event of individuals making request British Charge is also assisted to communicate with and interview them. 17. Wang said I could not deny that letters from these people asking British Charge for assistance have all been permitted to be forwarded. 18. Wang said during term of their sentences American prisoners’ outgoing communications of course must be handled according to reg­ ulations laid down by competent Chinese authorities. 19. Wang said however other side this matter is that U.S. side never informed PRC side as to exactly how many Chinese imprisoned in U.S. nor has Indian Embassy been given list, so it has no means of making check. Indian Embassy also finds no way extending assistance to such persons. Such situation is unequitable. 20. Wang said now that U.S. side has raised question of Americans who have breached laws PRC side demands U.S. should first submit list of Chinese imprisoned in United States.
