1268  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
The President talked also about Communism in Venezuela and 
although he recognized quite readily that the Communists are active, 
and that they infiltrated very successfully during the Provisional 
Government regime, he said that steps have been taken and will be 
continued to keep them under control. He pointed out that there are 
no Communists at high levels in the Government, that the Communist 
Party has not been included in any political conferences sponsored by 
the Government and that they themselves have been protesting their 
exclusion. He recognized that in the University the Communists are 
active and dangerous but said (very confidentially) that plans are being 
made now to have another person elected Rector in July of this year 
who will take a much stronger stand against the Communists than 
has the present Rector. The President expressed satisfaction with the 
change in the newspaper field and pointed out that the Capriles pub-
lications are now carrying anti-Communist articles. He said that the 
Communist Youth Conference which has been discussed will not be 
held in Caracas; he has issued instructions that no visas be given to any 
prospective delegates. He said also however that he has issued instruc-
tions that the so-­called Anti-Communist Conference under the lead-
ership of Prieto Laurens not be permitted to be held. Betancourt has 
known Prieto Laurens for many years and he considers him an adven-
turer who has seized upon the anti-Communism banner for his own 
self-­serving purposes, He recalled that on one occasion when he was 
passing through Mexico, while he was in exile, Prieto Laurens said that 
he would bring Lombardo Toledano3 to the airport to see Betancourt. 
Toledano did not come to the airport. Betancourt’s inference seemed to 
be that at the time Prieto Laurens was trying, unsuccessfully, to build 
himself up in Toledano’s eyes.
Ambassador Sparks mentioned that he had heard rumors of a 
possible meeting here on May 1 of Latin American labor leaders inter-
ested in organizing a labor federation from which the United States 
and Canada would be excluded. The President indicated that he also 
had heard these reports, but he said nothing of this kind was going to 
happen here. He said the AD labor leaders have no intention of leav-
ing CRIT.
Ambassador Sparks reviewed for President Betancourt the con-
tents of Embtel 625 concerning the Venezuelan position on Trujillo 
3 Vicente Lombardo Toledano, Mexican labor leader and unsuccessful popular 
party presidential candidate in 1952.
