4  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
nuclear wars, and that it was very difficult to assess what the Soviet 
attitude was. Moreover, there was general agreement that the Soviet 
attitude was likely evolving from a point where they believed 
that limited nuclear war was impossible, to one where at least some 
Soviet decision-­makers might consider it possible to control a nuclear 
exchange. It was also noted that the U.S. policy always has been that 
tactical nuclear war was possible, and indeed, that the United States 
might make first-­use of nuclear weapons if it were losing a conven-
tional conflict in Europe or Korea.
In response to Governor Carter’s third question, Mr. Blechman 
reviewed current U.S. strategic programs and developments in Soviet 
strategic capabilities. Other members of the group supplemented the 
discussion.
Following a short recess, Governor Carter asked for a five minute 
brief on the SALT talks. Mr. Brown noted that the purpose of the talks 
was to achieve equivalence without building new weapons and that 
SALT I had resulted in an ABM Treaty and an Interim Agreement on 
offensive weapons; each of which he described in detail. Mr. Brown 
then discussed the Vladivostok Agreement3 and described the present 
impasse in negotiations toward implementing that agreement.
Governor Carter asked if the Soviets really wanted an agreement. 
The consensus of the group was that indeed they did, but only on 
favorable terms. Mr. Slocombe emphasized that questions of verifica-
tion, especially for cruise missiles, were very important ones.
3. General Purpose Forces. This portion of the discussion was intro-
duced by Mr. Vance. He emphasized that questions of the general pur-
pose force structure involved a basic assessment of the purposes of U.S. 
foreign policy, of the roles the armed forces served in support of that 
policy, and of the nation’s vital interests. He highlighted the following 
areas:
a) Europe—­the key question is what kind of war, particularly what 
duration of war, NATO should plan to fight.
b) The Middle East—­because contingency planning for what 
the United States might have to do in defense of Israel was not well 
advanced, this was an area that needed concerted planning effort. The 
questions are what kinds of forces would be needed to help defend 
Israel, and to what extent those forces would have to be additional to 
forces already maintained for European requirements.
3 Reference is to the November 1974 meeting in Vladivostok between President 
Ford and General Secretary Brezhnev, in which the two leaders outlined an agreement on 
the limitation of strategic arms (SALT II) to replace SALT I, set to expire in October 1977, 
that would last until December 31, 1985. The basic framework included a cap of 2400 
aggregate launchers, of which 1320 were MIRV missiles. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, 
vol. XVI, Soviet Union, August 1974–December 1976, Documents 83–95.
