Covert and Overt Operations 877 jani two days earlier, the main concern of which had been the hostage problem, told me that Rafsanjani had told him that the question would be submitted to Parliament soon. This will depend first of all on how long and with what consequences the domestic power struggle (prime minister and subsequent formation of a cabinet) will drag on. Kaiser 330. Memorandum for the Record by the Chief of the Near East and South Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (Cogan)1 Washington, July 31, 1980 SUBJECT President’s Tasking of State Department for an Update on Options Being Developed in the Hostage Crisis Other than a Rescue Mission 1. You will recall that at a meeting at the Pentagon on 23 July the question of [less than 1 line not declassified] designed to create a means to infiltrate equipment and personnel into Iran, was discussed (see para 4 of the attached Spot Report). During the discussion Major General Vaught and Brigadier General Odom were informed that in CIA’s view a policy-level decision was necessary to permit us to explore this possibility because if a meeting were to be arranged [less than 1 line not declassified] between [less than 1 line not declassified] the US Ambassador [less than 1 line not declassified] should be briefed. General Odom said he would seek such a policy decision. 2. We subsequently learned from General Odom that word had come back from the President that he did not approve exploring this option and that he wanted a review of everything that is being done in the way of planning a second rescue mission. However, in a followup conversation on 31 July, General Odom provided an important and quite different clarification of this matter. He explained that what had happened was that the President, rather than approving the [less than 1 line not declassified] proposal, had instead decided to task the State 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 14, Folder 1: C–372 Iran 01 June–31 July 1980. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
