Non-Proliferation
929
other negotiations. Sensitive political problems remain to be solved in
South Africa and Argentina, but we will continue a dialogue aimed at
getting safeguards on all of their facilities.
2. Restraints on Sensitive Transfers
The informal assurances we received from the Germans and the
French of a de facto moratorium on new agreements to transfer repro-
cessing facilities bolster the Guidelines, which call for restraint in ex-
port of sensitive technology. Efforts to extend restraints retroactively to
the FRG/Brazil deal have failed so far but the Brazilian projects them-
selves are shaky. [2 lines not declassified] Elements of the Brazilian scien-
tific community are pushing for modifications of the agreement. We
have repeatedly spelled out our views against reprocessing. Now that
the French are seeking to modify their contract to transfer a repro-
cessing facility to Pakistan, and are pressing the Germans to follow suit,
the Germans are more isolated. Until after the French elections10 we are
reluctant to press the French on what “modifications” they will actually
agree to with Pakistan. Should simple co-processing be involved we see
little non-proliferation benefit.
We will urge the French to continue their efforts to convince the
Germans of the regional security implications of Brazil’s having a re-
processing capability. Mutual deferral of reprocessing in Argentina
and Brazil will be sought: in Brazil, we plan to focus our efforts on Pres-
ident Geisel’s successor, who will not be as personally committed to the
deal; Argentina has indicated privately that it would consider deferring
its own reprocessing plant only if Brazil were to do so. We have said
that we would consider providing heavy water production technol-
ogy that Argentina wants only if it deferred reprocessing, as well as
adopted full-scope safeguards.
Planning on how to control the diffusion of sensitive centrifuge
and other enrichment technology is now underway, and we will con-
sider various institutional frameworks to ensure control of the front
end of the fuel cycle.
3. Incentives
We are working to implement foreign aspects of the spent fuel
storage policy Secretary Schlesinger announced last October.11 Several
10 The French legislative elections were scheduled for March 12 and March 19.
11 The proposal, which was actually first announced by Schlesinger’s aide John
Ahearne during an October 18, 1977 press conference, would allow the U.S. Government
to “acquire and store the spent nuclear fuel that’s piling up at the nation’s utilities.”
(“President Proposes U.S. Acquire and Store Spent Nuclear Fuel,” Wall Street Journal, Oc-
tober 18, 1977, p. 19)
