928  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
in US whose return being prevented, and give clear accounting all 
these persons. My authorities must not only keep an eye on American 
offenders in China who have been sentenced according to law and 
who now serving prison sentences in China, while altogether ignor­
ing fact Chinese in US still being prevented from returning. Such an 
attitude this problem entirely not conducive progress our discussions. 
My authorities so far had not given slightest accounting ­Chinese in 
US prisons.
11. Wang said as regards medical records Mr. Kanady and 
Mrs.  Bradshaw, he had told me his authorities would make inquiry 
about availability their medical records. Now informed me Chinese 
Red Cross had investigated. Medical records Kanady available and will 
be forwarded ARC through Chinese Red Cross. However, Mrs. Brad­
shaw had been receiving medical care on own outside prison; therefore, 
his authorities did not have medical record.
12. I said he had again spoken this morning of proportion between 
total number Chinese students in US and number who have returned 
to their country, and related this to proportion of number Americans 
in his country who had returned. He had related that to our Sept 10 
announcement and stated situation not satisfactory his government. 
I had previously pointed out this type proportioning entirely false. 
Our agreed announcement did not say that if two-­thirds of Americans 
in China returned to US, US then will force two-­thirds of Chinese in 
America return his country. It did say all those who desire return will 
be permitted do so. It does not say one-­half, two-­thirds, or nine-­tenths 
of those who desire return, it says all who desire return. Says not only 
they be permitted return, but return expeditiously as of Sept 10 last 
year. Test of performance therefore whether in fact in each country all 
who desire return permitted do so and no obstruction offered their 
return. We both knew that of Americans we talking about before and at 
time our agreed announcement, 13 still not returned. They indisput­
ably people who desire return. We also knew prior to and at time issu­
ance our announcement, his interest was with respect Chinese students 
in US. We both knew that up to time talks began some of those—very 
small number—were forbidden by my government return his country. 
Also knew that at time talks began, measures against these students 
entirely withdrawn, so that any of them who desire return can. In spite 
all statements made here and made publicly by his government, we 
both knew that third power arrangements, established at his request, 
confirm situation. Thus far in the more than 7 months passed there has 
not been brought to our attention a single case in which US has not 
fully carried out terms of agreed announcement. No amount of words 
or charges can obscure these facts.
