1955 549 to the United States were entitled to do so and pledged itself to adopt “further appropriate measures” so that they could “expeditiously exer­ cise their right to return”. The Agreed Announcement also provided that Americans in the Peoples Republic of China who believed they were encountering obstruction in departure might request representations by the British Charge d’affaires on their behalf. The United States made a parallel declaration with respect to the right of Chinese in the United States to return to the Peoples Republic of China if they desired which provided for Chinese to appeal to the Indian Embassy if they believed their departure was being obstructed. Of the nineteen Americans still held in prison in Communist China following the issuance of the Agreed Announcement, only five have been released to date. The United States is continuing to press at Geneva and through the British Charge d’affaires at Peiping for early release of the remainder. The failure of the Chinese Communists to ful­ fill their commitment to allow Americans to return “expeditiously” is causing the United States Government serious concern. The United States places no restrictions on the departure of Chi­ nese from the United States. The Department knows of no Chinese who claims his departure is being obstructed and the Indian Embassy has so far made no representations concerning any such case. Under the second item of the agenda, the Chinese Communists asked for the removal of the United States economic embargo and agreement to talks at the Foreign Minister level. The United States asked for a Chinese Communist declaration renouncing force, and an accounting for 450 military personnel missing from the Korean War, and concerning whose fate we have evidence that the Chinese Commu­ nists might have knowledge. Discussion has centered around the renunciation of force item. The United States has proposed that both parties make similar dec­ larations renouncing the use of force generally, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area. The purpose is to remove the threat of war in the Taiwan area. The Chinese Communists have indicated a willingness to make a general renunciation of the use of force, but so far have adamantly resisted our efforts to get them to apply this to the Taiwan area. They insist that the Taiwan question is domestic and refuse to consider any curtailment of their freedom to use mili­ tary force if necessary to impose their control over Taiwan. They have demanded the withdrawal of United States forces from the Taiwan area. The United States is continuing its effort to bring them to modify this attitude. With reference to the proposal for a conference at a higher level, the United States view is that the ambassadorial level is the appropriate
