658  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Secretary Vance said that he agreed with much of the Vice Presi-
dent’s argument, but he felt that we should definitely eliminate the 
MPS system. The President said that the appropriate thing to do would 
be to say that we are going to proceed with a verifiable land-­based sys-
tem, and that this approach would enhance stability and eliminate the 
Soviet counterforce advantage, and that it would also enhance the pos-
sibility of deep cuts later on. (C)
Secretary Vance asked how this would solve the MPS problem. 
The President noted he’d been against MPS on verification grounds all 
along, and that MPS was simply not verifiable. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that the President’s posture should have 
three elements: (1) that we were going to proceed with a verifiable land-­
based deployment mode, (2) that we were going to proceed with the 
largest missile allowed under the SALT II agreement, and (3) that we 
would resolve the question of exactly which basing mode we would 
use within several weeks. He suggested that it might be useful not to 
preclude MPS before the Summit—­it might be possible to trade MPS for 
some sort of a concession from the Soviets. He noted that MPS can be 
eliminated as something desirable for us on a number of grounds. He 
went on to suggest that the President surface this posture with Senator 
Nunn, and that the Vice President talk to those on the other end of the 
political spectrum about this posture being necessary for SALT III. (C)
Secretary Vance said that he really disagreed with the idea that you 
can simply gut it through on the MPS issue. He said he wasn’t sweating 
the possibility of leaving this system in play for another seven days, 
but that going much longer would be a mistake. Secretary Brown com-
mented that if we hold off until after the Summit to eliminate the verti-
cal MPS system, we risk accusations that we gave the system away. (S)
Frank Press said that we would not know that much more in several 
weeks, and wondered if we wouldn’t be better off by proceeding with 
the idea of Minuteman III on trucks which would buy us enough time 
for a more careful study of the basing mode question. Secretary Brown 
responded that this would be seen as simply waffling the issue. (C)
The President said that unless unforeseen circumstances arise, he 
proposes to go ahead with the full size MX. He said, however, that he 
wanted to reveal his decision in his own way, and that he would like 
for the people in the room to concentrate on how to present the deci-
sion to the Soviets, and to the public. He said that he would like them 
to evolve the best possible approach to briefing the Senate, and that 
he wanted to brief all kinds of Senators—­that he was not interested in 
separating them into different groups. Thus he must understand the 
arguments that would appeal to both sides. He gave several straight-
forward examples of the sorts of arguments that might be used, and 
noted that we would have to decide what to tell the Soviets if anything,
