1126
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Whatever we do along the above lines with the Palestinians or
with Begin and Sadat, we must tell the key Saudis as well as Hussein in
depth what we are doing.8
4. As soon as we know where we are going this spring, we must
tell the Europeans soon in order to fend off initiatives that might cut
across our efforts. Our friends and allies will be highly skeptical that we
can succeed in our negotiations, but they will probably stand back as
long as a serious effort seems to be taking place. If we were to engage
the British with the Palestinians, this would keep them constructively
engaged.
5. If we are not going to go beyond the point where serious discus-
sion is stalled and if we are prepared to let serious negotiations go into
neutral for the remainder of 1980 and then to resume them in earnest in
1981, we would want to decide that as early as possible so we could po-
sition ourselves to use the prospect of movement in 1981 to fend off
such initiatives as the Europeans may mount or as the Arabs may bring
to the Security Council on the Palestinian rights resolution. We would
also want to bring about a suspension in the most constructive way
possible with the intent of resuming negotiations early in 1981.
8 Vance underlined this sentence.
351.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State1
Cairo, March 20, 1980, 1257Z
6278. Subject: Letter From President Sadat to Prime Minister Begin.
1. (S-entire text).
2. I was summoned on short notice to see Vice President Mubarak
at 1100 local today. Purpose of meeting was to provide us with the text
of a letter dated March 17 from President Sadat to Prime Minister Begin
(para 3 below) which Mubarak told me he will be giving to Israeli Am-
bassador Ben Elissar later today. Mubarak stressed that GOE has no re-
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 3,
Mid-East, 4/79–12/80. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Tel
Aviv and the White House. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received
in the White House Situation Room. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right-hand corner
of the telegram, indicating that he saw it.
