Czechoslovakia
293
99.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Czechoslovakia1
Washington, October 8, 1977, 0111Z
242479. Subject: The Secretary’s Conversation With Czechoslovak
Foreign Minister Chnoupek on October 6.
Participants
US Side:
The Secretary
Nicholas G. Andrews (notetaker)
Czechoslovak Side:
Bohuslav Chnoupek, Foreign Minister
Jaromir Johannes, Ambassador to the US
Eduard Kukan, Counselor in Washington
Mr. Suja, Chef de Cabinet to the Foreign Minister
Mr. Kovarik, interpreter
1. Summary: Chnoupek said US-Czechoslovak relations have not
moved substantially forward in five years and the main problem is the
claims/gold issue. The new views conveyed by Ambassador Byrne are
very different from the previous ones and Chnoupek wondered if the
Ambassador was speaking officially. The Secretary said we wish to
improve relations and cited claims/gold and Czechoslovak treatment of
US journalists and the Charter 77 group as matters which have brought
about the present situation. He assured Chnoupek that Ambassador
Byrne is authorized to try to resolve the claims issue and has the full
confidenceandsupportoftheUSG.HementionedthevisitoftheDeputy
MinisterofForeignTradeandtheCultural/ScientificAgreementasposi-
tive steps and Chnoupek agreed. Chnoupek said he would meet again
soon with Ambassador Byrne. He presented the Czechoslovak view on
human rights. The Secretary said the US is not approaching the Belgrade
Conference in a spirit of confrontation but in order to review seriously
theextentof progress achievedandtodiscuss new initiatives. Chnoupek
warned thatif the human rightsarea issingled out for debate, a construc-
tivedialogue would be impossible. He said the Czechoslovak delegation
is prepared for a constructive discussion. End summary
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770368–0619.
Confidential; Exdis; Priority. Drafted by Andrews; cleared by Luers; approved by Ander-
son. The meeting took place in New York at the annual meeting of the UN General
Assembly.
