rendered valuable service. While this province belongs peculiarly to the
States, yet the promotion of education and efficiency in educational
methods is a general responsibility of the Federal Government. A survey of
negro colleges and universities in the United States has just been completed
by the Bureau of Education through funds provided by the institutions
themselves and through private sources. The present status of negro higher
education was determined and recommendations were made for its
advancement. This was one of the numerous cooperative undertakings of
the bureau. Following the invitation of the Association of Land Grant
Colleges and Universities, the Bureau of Education now has under way the
survey of agricultural colleges, authorized by Congress. The purpose of the
survey is to ascertain the accomplishments, the status, and the future
objectives of this type of educational training. It is now proposed to
undertake a survey of secondary schools, which educators insist is timely
and essential.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
We have laid out a public building program for the District of Columbia and
the country at large running into hundreds of millions of dollars. Three
important structures and one annex are already under way and one addition
has been completed in the City of Washington. In the country sites have
been acquired, many buildings are in course of construction, and some are
already completed. Plans for all this work are being prepared in order that it
may be carried forward as rapidly as possible. This is the greatest building
program ever assumed by this Nation. It contemplates structures of utility
and of beauty. When it reaches completion the people will be well served
and the Federal city will be supplied with the most beautiful and stately
public buildings which adorn any capital in the world.
THE AMERICAN INDIAN
The administration of Indian affairs has been receiving intensive study for
several years. The Department of the Interior has been able to provide better
supervision of health, education, and industrial advancement of this native
race through additional funds provided by the Congress. The present
cooperative arrangement existing between the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
the Public Health Service should be extended. The Government’s
