532
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The institute will have its headquarters in Washington with field
offices in Taiwan. It will provide the full range of commercial and other
services that have been previously provided through official channels
to businessmen, both from the United States and from Taiwan. In your
private business dealings on Taiwan, you may freely contact the insti-
tute’s staff for advice or can deal directly with local firms and the au-
thorities there. In short, we see no change necessary in the way private
American business has been conducted on Taiwan up to now. Exim-
bank loans, OPIC [Overseas Private Investment Corporation] guar-
antees, and other important arrangements will continue.
With these new arrangements in place, we expect Taiwan to con-
tinue to prosper. Taiwan’s dynamic economic growth is one of the most
impressive stories of the last decade; it is now our eighth largest trading
partner, and per capita income is among the highest in Asia.
As anyone who has studied the issue can attest, normalization of
relations with Peking was not an easy step to take. The difficulties
always argued for themselves, and further delay was always an in-
viting option for any President. But we all recognized that sooner or
later we would have to move. As I have already said, failure to try to
move forward would have left us in danger of moving backward—at
great cost to our global position. By the time we took the decisive step,
every other member of NATO, our two treaty partners in ANZUS
[Australia and New Zealand], and Japan had long since recognized the
P.R.C., as had most other nations of the world. They were ready for our
action—and most of them, including all the members of the Association
of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), applauded it.
When we acted, we did so in a way that enhances significantly the
prospects for stability and peace in Asia and the Pacific. We acted in a
way that will move us toward our objective of a stable system of inde-
pendent nations in Asia and that will also increase the chances of main-
taining a stable equilibrium among the United States, Japan, China, and
the Soviet Union.
The United States will continue to play an active role in order to
maintain that stable equilibrium. For reasons of geography, history,
and economics, we are as much a Pacific nation as an Atlantic nation,
with deep and abiding national interests in the region. We will main-
tain balanced and flexible military forces in the region, as the recent
successful conclusion of the base agreements with the Philippines so
clearly demonstrates. And we will not hesitate to act, as required, to
protect our vital national interests.
The rapidly expanding relations between our two nations in sci-
ence, trade, and exchanges require the kind of structure that diplomatic
relations can provide. It will allow a much freer exchange between our
cultures. And with full relations, we are in a far better position to en-
