318
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Kashani said long ago he was visited by a Mr. Dooher who asked
his help in bringing Razmara to power. He said he told Mr. Dooher the
United States would be making a mistake to bring Razmara forward
and this had proved to be so. He said that 20 days before Qavam came
in he had evidence of Anglo-American joint action to that end and that
such action had been a mistake, too.
At this point I said it was not true that the United States had as-
sisted in bringing Qavam into power and that I could assure him that
the United States did not interfere in the internal affairs of Iran. I said
we had no advance information of Qavam’s coming to power. I said,
however, if he wanted to discuss political and diplomatic questions
they should be brought up with you, the United States Ambassador,
and these were not my field of responsibility.
When this was translated to Kashani, he dropped the subject (a
little to my surprise) and political matters were not again discussed.
The conference turned completely to a discussion of the Point 4 pro-
gram and plans for the economic development of Iran. Several things
stand out as very pointed impressions of this conference. These are:
(1) Ayatollah Kashani, though elderly, is vigorous and alert.
(2) Ayatollah Kashani seems to be isolated. He is surrounded by
his own relatives and a few mullahs, and almost no one else seems to be
on intimate terms with him.
(3) Ayatollah Kashani has sublime faith in his religious leadership.
He believes that this gives him extraordinary power of leadership in
Iran. I believe that he has no doubt that he could rally the people for or
against almost any other institution or influence.
(4) Ayatollah Kashani and his intimate followers have little con-
ception of what goes on outside relatively narrow circles. They know
little of the Western world or of the Eastern world outside their
homeland.
(5) Ayatollah Kashani does not seem to be an unfriendly person or
lacking in warmth and seems to have an underlying compassion for the
poor peoples of Iran.
As we talked, Ayatollah Kashani said he hoped that Point 4, the
programs of which I had carefully explained to him from A to Z, would
do something “Really substantial” for Iran. He thought a big dam in the
river near Isfahan and a dam on the Karun would be good ideas and
would meet his specifications. He asked me how much I thought such
dams would cost. I told him I could give him only the barest horseback
opinion but through familiarity with the work of the Bureau of Recla-
mation of the United States, in which I had served for many years, and
as a result of a fairly good reconnaissance of the Karun River made ear-
lier this year, I thought 200 to 250 million dollars would be required to
