September 18–December 16, 1978 437 layed. If Israel will agree to this, we will endeavor to persuade Sadat to agree. —We would seek inclusion in the joint letter of a specific target date for West Bank/Gaza elections. This could be either six months from signing or we might suggest a specific date such as September 17, 1979 (the first anniversary of Camp David), which will probably be about nine months after the Treaty comes into force. —We would raise with the Israelis once again Egypt’s requirement (which Sadat’s letter mentions) that Israel carry out at least some of the unilateral gestures to improve the atmosphere for West Bank/Gaza negotiations that Sadat asks for in his letter, and which earlier Dayan told us were not out of the question. Sadat mentions lifting officially the ban on political activities, granting amnesty to political prisoners, and admitting some displaced persons back to the West Bank and Gaza on the basis of family reunification. We would not, however, make any of these a sine qua non for proceeding with the Treaty. After an initial round with the Israelis and Egyptians here, I would recommend you phone and send written messages to both Sadat and Begin, telling them what you believe is needed from each of them to resolve this issue, along the foregoing lines. Additionally, with Sadat we will have to talk him out of his fixation about putting Gaza on a separate track from the West Bank. This makes little sense even from the standpoint of his own interests, and the Israelis in any case will not agree to it. A Possible Fallback If the foregoing proves more than the Israelis can accept, or too little for Sadat, or both, we may face a period during which negotiations are suspended while both sides reflect on the consequences of a stalemate. We would then need to reach a judgment on when and in what way we should try to break the stalemate. We could try a different kind of approach, which in effect constitutes a fallback to the one outlined above, as follows: —We would take the position that the U.S. needs to have an understanding with Egypt and Israel on the agenda for the West Bank/ Gaza negotiations in order to complete the exchange of notes on this subject. This need not be embodied in the joint note or be given formal standing as a Treaty document but should be something that we can convey to Sadat as an understanding we have reached with Israel on how to proceed. In proposing a side understanding on the agenda, we would be seeking enough that would be concrete so that Sadat could be persuaded to step back from his most extreme demands, but that at the same time would not commit Israel to substantive positions on the agenda items. The purpose would be to make clear what issues will be
