Afghanistan 7. We believe that the Soviet actions since Pavlovskiy’s departure indicate that Moscow decided to act to save its position. Steps such as securing an enclave against future contingencies for evacuation and providing protection to Soviet citizens could not be perceived by the Soviets as “doing” anything about the situation. Indeed, such actions are more consistent with a lack of decision. In view of the prognosis, they amount to conceding to the probability of losing out and merely covering the exit. Even if the enclave were for the purpose of ensuring an entrance point for troops, merely holding an enclave would not change the deteriorating situation which created the potential need for troops. In effect, doing nothing more than holding an enclave against the potential need to land troops would make it likely that sooner or later the enclave would have to be used for just that purpose. “Wait and see” does not appear to be the objective of the course indicated by the recent Soviet actions. 8. “Doing something” about the situation means, in effect, ensuring that the next time the DRA forces, with Soviet help, undertake a large offensive against the insurgents they will not be forced to give back their winnings. This requires more military forces than the DRA can muster at present. Someone must hold the cities, main centers, airfields, and keep the roads open. Military forces are required to ensure the security of Kabul, both from revolts from within and from attacks by the insurgents. One of the reasons for the military failure and eroding morale of the Afghan armed forces to date is that they cannot accomplish all these things and to the Afghan troops there must appear little prospect that they ever will. 9. Another step toward rectifying the situation would be to produce a more effective, cohesive regime in Kabul. If nothing else, this would alleviate somewhat the drain on Afghan military strength in the countryside caused by the need to keep a large “Praetorean Guard” in Kabul. This suggests that ultimately Amin will have to go. His replacement, however, is unlikely to be chosen on the basis of his acceptability to the insurgents. He would still be “Russian-installed.” What the Soviets are likely to seek is someone who can pull together the Marxist factions and various groups among the political and military leadership. This would enable the Afghan Marxists and their Soviet allies to concentrate on the insurgency. 10. For undertaking these objectives, the immediate need is efficient military forces. By their actions, the Soviets have indicated they are willing to take the large political step of putting their own combat units into a foreign country. Why should we shrink from estimating that they would be willing, once having taken this step, to use their troops in a way and in an amount that could benefit their long range position?
