Chapter 4, February–April 1990  575
walked back agreements that had been reached in Moscow and were 
reflected in the agreed elements of common ground. We understood 
that, unless we could resolve the range question on a satisfactory basis, 
the whole package deal could not be considered agreed. But, to be 
frank, our view in Moscow was that we had agreed on all issues except 
for range. The Secretary then quoted from the Joint Statement to this 
effect: “On ALCMs, agreement was reached on all remaining issues 
with the exception of the range threshold.”
Rather than go over the previous discussions, the Secretary sug-
gested that our experts engage on ALCMs and SLCMs. Range was a 
difficult issue for the U.S. We had had long discussions in Moscow. We 
understood the Soviet government’s position, but it was our feeling 
that we had moved a great deal from 1500 km to 800 km—­a change of 
700 km.
Shevardnadze thanked the Secretary for his comments. He sug-
gested that they make more specific comments on the sides’ positions 
after the experts had worked on these problems. But before that he 
wanted to lay out the Soviet position on SLCMs. Taking into account 
the agreed elements of common ground from their Moscow talks, the 
Soviets proposed a package solution:
— Limitations would apply only to nuclear armed SLCMs with a 
range greater than 600 km.
— All existing long-­range SLCMs would be considered to be 
nuclear-­armed.
— Future nuclear SLCMs would be distinguishable from non-­
nuclear SLCMs on the basis of functionally related externally observ-
able differences.
— There would be a ban on nuclear-­armed long-­range SLCMs 
which are MIRVed.
— The sides would proceed from the assumption that the maxi-
mum number of long-­range SLCMs permitted would not exceed 600. 
This level would be recorded in a provision of the treaty.
— In addition to the agreed exchange of data on types of surface 
ships and submarines equipped with SLCMs, the sides would also 
exchange information on the numbers of SLCMs that a surface ship 
or submarine of a given type was equipped to carry. These maximum 
numbers also would be recorded in the treaty or in the negotiating 
record.
— Verification would be based on measures to be agreed as pro-
vided in the 1987 Washington Summit Joint Statement.
In this respect Shevardnadze recalled that in the Secretary’s office,2 
he had recalled that Joint Statement. The Soviets believed that 
2 See Document 97.
