Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX leadership, a test of political stability, and a driving force for change throughout society. No longer able to coast along on the momentum of past policies, assumptions, successes, or foreign borrowing, the leadership is having to face the hard and politically controversial economic facts of life. And that has meant admitting the need for austerity, structural change, and more open discussion of the roots of and remedies for present economic ills. This in turn has focused attention on etatist political and economic interests, the Party’s relevance to solving the country’s economic problems, and reformist pressures for a shift of economic decision-making authority upward to the Federal authorities at the macro-economic level and at the same time, outward from the Republics to individual enterprises. —The quickening of domestic political life. The need to define new power relationships following Tito’s death would in any case have led to an intensification of political life in Yugoslavia, but the urgency of its economic problems and the lessons of Poland have pushed this process further and faster than one might earlier have anticipated. Individual, institutional, and social actors are scrambling to protect or enlarge their piece of the political and economic action as well as to define the future. In the process, a new critical spirit has emerged in all major areas of Yugoslav life. Thus, since Tito’s death, the political landscape has been enlivened by open debate on economic policies, criticism of past leadership errors, calls for more open decision-making, attacks on corruption and mismanagement, petitions for greater political and literary freedom, pressures for reform, and increase assertiveness in the press and cultural field. 5. In short, two broad but closely related debates—one economic, the other political—have emerged between “reformers” who accept the need for change and “conservatives” who fear it. On the economic side, the issue is how to respond to economic challenges and to rationalize economic decision-making without undermining existing authority, self-management concepts, and the delicate ethnic and Federal- Republican power balance. Whether and how to avoid excessive trade dependence on the East is a further issue of growing concern. On the political side, the issue is where to draw the line between constructive and hostile criticism and whether the emerging debate can best be controlled through repression or through participation in it. 6. For now, the “reformers,” centered primarily in the State apparatus, the technical intelligentsia, and academic clearly have the advantages.6 They have pushed through an economic program based on
