994
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
leadership, a test of political stability, and a driving force for change
throughout society. No longer able to coast along on the momentum
of past policies, assumptions, successes, or foreign borrowing, the lead-
ership is having to face the hard and politically controversial economic
facts of life. And that has meant admitting the need for austerity,
structural change, and more open discussion of the roots of and reme-
dies for present economic ills. This in turn has focused attention on
etatist political and economic interests, the Party’s relevance to solving
the country’s economic problems, and reformist pressures for a shift
of economic decision-making authority upward to the Federal authori-
ties at the macro-economic level and at the same time, outward from
the Republics to individual enterprises.
—The quickening of domestic political life. The need to define new
power relationships following Tito’s death would in any case have led
to an intensification of political life in Yugoslavia, but the urgency of
its economic problems and the lessons of Poland have pushed this
process further and faster than one might earlier have anticipated.
Individual, institutional, and social actors are scrambling to protect or
enlarge their piece of the political and economic action as well as to
define the future. In the process, a new critical spirit has emerged in
all major areas of Yugoslav life. Thus, since Tito’s death, the political
landscape has been enlivened by open debate on economic policies,
criticism of past leadership errors, calls for more open decision-making,
attacks on corruption and mismanagement, petitions for greater politi-
cal and literary freedom, pressures for reform, and increase assertive-
ness in the press and cultural field.
5. In short, two broad but closely related debates—one economic,
the other political—have emerged between “reformers” who accept
the need for change and “conservatives” who fear it. On the economic
side, the issue is how to respond to economic challenges and to rational-
ize economic decision-making without undermining existing autho-
rity, self-management concepts, and the delicate ethnic and Federal-
Republican power balance. Whether and how to avoid excessive trade
dependence on the East is a further issue of growing concern. On the
political side, the issue is where to draw the line between constructive
and hostile criticism and whether the emerging debate can best be
controlled through repression or through participation in it.
6. For now, the “reformers,” centered primarily in the State appara-
tus, the technical intelligentsia, and academic clearly have the advan-
tages.6 They have pushed through an economic program based on
6 In telegram 418 from Belgrade, January 21, the Embassy reported Eagleburger’s
meeting with
Federal Assembly
President Dragoslav
Markovic. Markovic told
Eagleburger that the Yugoslav Government was “determined to press ahead with a
democratization of society and to improve economic efficiency.” (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D810030–1097)
