International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1073 and obtaining Presidential concurrence. Therefore, we request your endorsement of the attached strategy and your approval for us to work with AID to obtain endorsement by OMB and final concurrence by the President. We have worked closely with Alex Shakow who concurs with this approach.4 Recommendation: That you indicate your approval of the attached 10-year International Water Decade strategy and program and your concurrence for us to work with AID in obtaining the additional Administration support required.5 4 Attached but not printed as Tab B is a September 1 action memorandum from Shakow to Gilligan. 5 There is no indication as to whether Benson approved or disapproved the recommendation. 320. Editorial Note Beginning in October 1978, the Department of State Bulletin serialized three articles written by Coordinator of Population Affairs Ambassador Marshall Green and his Special Assistant Robert A. Feary and assisted by Department of State demographer Lydia K. Giffler. Entitled “World Population: The Silent Explosion,” the articles outlined the central issues of population growth and global responses to the problem. Part 1, published in October, provided a brief historical overview of the population explosion, postulated as to the distribution of the world’s population by 2000, and discussed the implications of classical demographic transition theory. (Department of State Bulletin, October 1978, pages 45–54) The second installment of “Silent Explosion,” printed in the November issue of Department of State Bulletin, explored the negative consequences of rapid population growth upon the world food system, national economies, social services, the environment, and internal and external politics: “The overpopulation problem is most often viewed in broad economic, social, and political terms. But it is fundamentally a problem of the frustrations, deprivation, and suffering of millions of individual human beings, predominantly in the developing countries. Millions of women are caught up in a cycle of endless childbearing, wasted health,
