Non-Proliferation 1. (Secret—Entire text) 2. With respect to issue on NPT RevCon which we understand will be subject of discussion by principals this morning, following is input from US NPT RevCon Del. 3. We believe the NPT RevCon is in serious danger of ending in well-publicized disarray. The more militant G–77 Delegations, especially Mexico, Sweden, and Yugoslavia, are continuing to take an uncompromising line.2 4. It is our shared judgment that only hope for a satisfactory substantive outcome lies in a compromise final document retaining a number of constructive formulations on safeguards and peaceful uses, avoiding unacceptable language on Israel but reflecting various strongly held views on major arms control issues and going some way toward meeting main non-aligned objectives. In the latter category we believe we can within present guidance handle all but the: (A) Moratorium on nuclear testing; (B) Working groups in Committee on Disarmament on CTB and nuclear disarmament; and (C) Interim compliance with SALT II. Moratorium is clearly not acceptable and many non-aligned, even militants like Ambassador Fonseka (Sri Lanka), understand this. Nuclear disarmament working group is not of the highest priority according to Fonseka and might not be pressed if other desiderata are achieved. Although we obviously could not accept a formal interim commitment on SALT II compliance in final Conference document, this is an issue on which our position is strong because of our stated policy and because of adamant Soviet opposition to any commitment prior to ratification of SALT II. This leaves a CTB working group as the only conceivable area of US flexibility. 5. What we are requesting is contingency authority to accept— if necessary and sufficient to achieve an acceptable Conference outcome—language calling on the CD at its next session to establish an ad hoc working group, with an appropriate mandate, on the question of a CTB. Such language would make clear that the precise mandate or terms of reference for such a working group would have to be worked out by consensus in the CD, and would specify that the CD’s work should not interfere with the trilateral negotiations. Moreover, any such formulation would only be accepted if agreed to by the other tri-
