Non-Proliferation
993
1. (Secret—Entire text)
2. With respect to issue on NPT RevCon which we understand will
be subject of discussion by principals this morning, following is input
from US NPT RevCon Del.
3. We believe the NPT RevCon is in serious danger of ending in
well-publicized disarray. The more militant G–77 Delegations, espe-
cially Mexico, Sweden, and Yugoslavia, are continuing to take an un-
compromising line.2
4. It is our shared judgment that only hope for a satisfactory sub-
stantive outcome lies in a compromise final document retaining
a number of constructive formulations on safeguards and peaceful
uses, avoiding unacceptable language on Israel but reflecting various
strongly held views on major arms control issues and going some way
toward meeting main non-aligned objectives. In the latter category we
believe we can within present guidance handle all but the:
(A) Moratorium on nuclear testing;
(B) Working groups in Committee on Disarmament on CTB and
nuclear disarmament; and
(C) Interim compliance with SALT II.
Moratorium is clearly not acceptable and many non-aligned, even
militants like Ambassador Fonseka (Sri Lanka), understand this. Nu-
clear disarmament working group is not of the highest priority ac-
cording to Fonseka and might not be pressed if other desiderata are
achieved. Although we obviously could not accept a formal interim
commitment on SALT II compliance in final Conference document, this
is an issue on which our position is strong because of our stated policy
and because of adamant Soviet opposition to any commitment prior to
ratification of SALT II. This leaves a CTB working group as the only
conceivable area of US flexibility.
5. What we are requesting is contingency authority to accept—
if necessary and sufficient to achieve an acceptable Conference out-
come—language calling on the CD at its next session to establish an ad
hoc working group, with an appropriate mandate, on the question of a
CTB. Such language would make clear that the precise mandate or
terms of reference for such a working group would have to be worked
out by consensus in the CD, and would specify that the CD’s work
should not interfere with the trilateral negotiations. Moreover, any
such formulation would only be accepted if agreed to by the other tri-
2 In telegram 11709 from Geneva, September 2, the Mission noted “the G–77 has
sought to broaden the issue” of the NPT to include prohibiting “even seemingly legiti-
mate civil nuclear cooperation with South Africa and Israel” because “it ‘indirectly’ con-
tributes to their nuclear weapons capabilities.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D800417–0703)
