402 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The action in c above, as approved by the President, subsequently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense for appropriate implementation, in consultation with the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobiliza­ tion, as to c (1) above, and with the Secretary of State as to c (2) above. 2. FALLOUT SHELTER IN EXISTING FEDERAL BUILDINGS (NSC 5807; NSC 5807/1; NSC Actions No. 1882, 1948–­b, and 2015; Memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, subject, “Measures to Carry Out the Concept of Shelter”, dated November 5 and 18, and December 4, 1958) Mr. Gray briefed the Council on this subject. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s briefing note is filed in the Minutes of the meeting and another is attached to this memorandum.) A draft Record of Action and copies of a letter from Mr. Hoegh and Mr. Stans to Mr. Gray (attached) were distributed. Mr. Stans explained that a program of building shelters would not be started at this time, but it was proposed to make $2 million avail­ able for research and the building of prototype shelters. The President wondered whether a strong ground floor in a building such as a public garage could be used as a fallout shelter. In reply to a question from Mr. Dulles, Governor Hoegh indicated that under our policy the use of funds was authorized for installing fallout shelters in new Government buildings under construction. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed a joint memorandum on the subject (cir­ culated at the meeting) by the Director, Office of Civil and Defense ­Mobilization, and the Director, Bureau of the Budget, prepared pursu­ ant to NSC Action No. 2015–­b. b. Agreed that, as an additional measure to provide some Federal example in the area of fallout shelter, the present program of shelter research and prototype construction should be broadened to provide specific emphasis on such research and prototype construction in exist­ ing Federal buildings. NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, sub­ sequently transmitted to the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, and the Director, Bureau of the Budget for appropriate implementation; and incorporated in a revision of NSC 5807/1, circu­ lated as NSC 5807/2. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] Marion W. Boggs
