94 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement that there are certain military applications of outer space activities, such as reconnaissance and communications. The President went on to question any action to put the Minuteman project in the Air Force. He thought that there is developing more and more reason to have a separate long-­range missile force. Mr. McElroy saw certain logic in having this project in the Air Force, because of the close operational tie to other strategic bombardment activity. He said he, too, felt that the trend is toward a single strategic attack force, which would include non-Air Force elements such as POLARIS. Mr. McElroy next asked as to the title for the civilian head of the Service—­whether he should be called a Secretary of the Service, or an Under Secretary of Defense for the Service. The President thought that if his duty can be tightly defined, it would be well to make him a Secretary. However, if Congress tries to pull authority away from the Secretary of Defense, then in order to make clear his control, it would be preferable to make these individuals Under Secretaries. Mr. McElroy said that the group thinking is exactly in line with the President’s suggestion on this matter. He thought that by having them as Secretaries they could take a great deal of the burden off his shoulders, for example, in testifying before Congress. In discussion of the further steps to be taken, the President asked for a brief statement to be prepared of the reasons why reform of the organization is required. This should bring out the things that must be eliminated. There should then be a statement of objectives and of principles. It should also be stated that we are not prepared to write a bill in its entirety on all phases of the matter, but that we are ready to start hearings at an early date. The President stressed that the message should bring out with great clarity the neces­ sity of organizing for top efficiency—­for getting maximum results from the tremendous resources that are being put into our military establishment. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA
