Haiti  765
HA–15.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the 
Department of State1

Port-­au-Prince, July 8, 1959, 7 p.m.
10. Foreign Minister Mars sent me note dated July 8 to say GOH 
instructing Ambassador Bonhomme officially request U.S. help pre-
serve its neutrality and territorial inviolability during present Caribbean 
­crisis.2 Bonhomme authorized inform Department GOH making its 
port and airports available to permit U.S. armed forces patrol Haitian 
waters and air space since Haiti does not have material resources with 
which protect itself from invasion (Embassy telegram 6).3 GOH making 
request pending OAS collective action re-­establish peace in Caribbean 
and for purpose remaining out of quarrel presently diving certain mem-
bers American family and permitting Haiti once again clearly demon-
strate its support principles non-­intervention.
GOH has no objection to publicity this demarche. Note by pouch.
I aware our firm policy of collective action through OAS to pre-
serve peace of hemisphere and reluctance our part undertake unilateral 
action which might give rise to old cry of big stick diplomacy. However, 
the fuse is burning fast and the powder keg in this part of Caribbean 
may blow up before we can get effective collective action through 
OAS or proposed MFM.4 Haiti is clearly peace-­loving state with no 
aggressive designs on anybody and I feel we could make good case for 
prompt effective action to protect her shores from threatened invasion. 
Knowledge on part of would–be invaders we have set up protective 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.5/7–859. Confidential; Priority. 
Repeated for information to Habana and Ciudad Trujillo.
On July 2, the Dominican Republic had requested the assistance of the Organization 
of American States following the landing of revolutionary expeditions in its territory. 
For additional information, see Document DR–8, for documentation relating to the 
Fifth Meeting of Consultation of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, held 
at Santiago August 12–18, 1959, Chile, to consider rising tensions in the Caribbean, see 
Documents CH–23; CR–24; PR–11; VE–34.
On July 8, Ambassador Drew reported that Foreign Minister Mars had informed 
him that the Haitian Government was extremely concerned about reported Cuban and 
Costa Rican preparations for an invasion of Haiti preliminary to a renewed attack on the 
Dominican Republic. (Telegram 8 from Port-­au-Prince; 738.00/7–859)
2 On July 9, the Embassy at Port-­au-Prince transmitted to the Department of State the 
text of Foreign Minister Mar’s note of July 8 in despatch 9. (738.5/7–959). The note from 
the Haitian Embassy to the Department of State, dated July 9, is filed under 738.00/7–959.
3 Telegram 6 from Port-­au-Prince of July 7 contained a report emphasizing the scar-
city and poor state of Haitian military equipment. (738.5/7–759)
4 Reference is to the Fifth Meeting of OAS foreign minister held at Santiago, Chile.
