120
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
30.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, May 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Response to your request for possible Presidential action to show concern over
recent steel price hikes
At your request I have pulled together potential steps which you
might take to put pressure on the domestic steel industry to reduce
their recent price hikes.2 Memoranda for you, done at my request, are
attached from Chairman Schultze (Tab A) and Ambassador Strauss
(Tab B).3 Both of these memoranda make the following points:
—While your leverage as President on the steel industry (other
than through jawboning) is limited in the international trade area, there
are some actions which could be taken.
1) Tariff Reductions under The Trade Act must be negotiated.
Tariffs for major steel products are already very low and are not pres-
ently an effective barrier against imports even at this time. The United
States would receive little practical benefit in return.4 Nevertheless, an
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
Box 284, Steel/Chrome (CF, O/A 24) (4). No classification marking. A stamped notation
reads: “The President has seen.” Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page and wrote
“Stu.”
2 On May 6, the Republic Steel Corporation and the Youngstown Sheet and Tube
Company announced that they would raise their steel prices by 6.8 percent to 8.8 percent.
On May 9, the United States Steel Corporation, the largest steel producer in the United
States, announced that it would raise selected prices by an average of 6 percent. The fol-
lowing day, the National Steel Corporation also announced a 6 percent average price in-
crease. On May 10 and 11, the Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company and the Republic
Steel Corporation, respectively, announced that they would reduce their price increases
to the 6 percent range. On May 12, three more companies, including the Bethlehem Steel
Corporation, announced that they too would raise selected steel prices by 6 percent.
(Gene Smith, “Two Steel Companies Lift Prices Sharply; U.S. Agency Critical,” The New
York Times, May 7, 1977, p. 1; Gene Smith, “U.S. Steel to Lift Prices an Average 6%,” The
New York Times, May 10, 1977, p. 41; Gene Smith, “National’s 6% Price Increase Follows
U.S. Steel Move,” The New York Times, May 11, 1977, p. D1; Gene Smith, “6% Steel Price
Rise Prevailing; ‘Voluntary’ Move Hailed by U.S.,” The New York Times, May 12, 1977,
p. 1; and “Bethlehem and 2 Others Join Rise In Steel Prices by 6% for June 19,” The New
York Times, May 13, 1977, p. D5)
3 Both tabs are attached but not printed. Tab A is a May 12 memorandum from
Schultze to Carter. Tab B is a May 13 memorandum from Strauss to Carter.
4 In his May 13 memorandum to Carter, attached at Tab B, Strauss asserted that
while it would “be relatively easy to negotiate” a trade agreement involving the reduc-
tion of U.S. steel tariffs, “unless there were reciprocal benefits to the United States we
would be under serious criticism by the Congress for giving up negotiating leverage in
the multilateral trade negotiations.”
