426 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI announced candidates for resolution at the next Ministerial), although some undefined political tradeoffs across these unrelated issues in the context of a “productive” Ministerial always are possible. It is doubtful that we could get more than minor moves from the Soviets on SS–18s as part of an ALCM deal. An ALCM agreement, however, could provide a convenient vehicle for a political tradeoff with the SLCM issue. Thus, if the Soviets were prepared to accept some variant of our current approach (e.g., politically binding SLCM limits that could be changed at three year intervals combined with future discussions about alternative approaches to SLCM verification), that willingness could be linked to resolution of the ALCM issue. The major drawbacks of such an approach are that it would require us to be willing to make such changes in our current SLCM position now, and it would make more difficult, if not foreclose, the prospects for more radical solutions to the SLCM issue over the coming months. Provided agreement could be reached along the lines described above, on balance we would not recommend deferring resolution of the ALCM issue in order to incorporate it into some larger START tradeoffs during the end game. Bob Blackwill concurs.3 Tab A Paper Prepared in the National Security Council Staff4 Washington, December 18, 1989 ALCMs U.S. and Soviet Positions The U.S. has consistently opposed tight constraints on ALCMs and other bomber weapons in START. The original U.S. position did not directly limit these weapons, constraining them only indirectly through an overall limit on the number of heavy bombers. We have argued that bomber forces should not be treated the same as ballistic missiles because they are less destabilizing (i.e., they cannot carry out a short warning first strike), they face formidable Soviet air defenses that would not be constrained by START, and they have far lower readiness rates. 3 Blackwill initialed over his typed name. 4 Secret.
