International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
349
—Protectionism in other countries would be given a powerful
fillip and would be justified by the steep and “unfair” decline in the
dollar.
—Our domestic objective of steady, stable growth at home would
be undermined. Business confidence would erode, the stock market
would sag, inflation would intensify as the dollar price of US imports
rose and induced a further rise in the prices of US domestic goods that
compete with imports, capital outflow could become feverish, and in-
terest rates would rise.
—Economic activity abroad which is on a rising trend would be
depressed as uncertainty about the economic outlook intensified and
gloom became contagious.
—Depressed economic activity in the developed countries, which
the increase in the price of oil would exacerbate, would hurt devel-
oping countries whose import costs would rise while their earnings fell
off.
—The US would be blamed for converting a slow but steady re-
covery to a world-wide recession.
—Furthermore, the dollar is not only a major trading currency but
the world’s most important reserve asset. The US would be accused by
oil-exporting countries, the non-oil LDCs, and many developed coun-
tries who hold all or a substantial portion of their reserves in dollars, of
serious mismanagement of its affairs that had caused severe losses in
the value of their reserve assets, inadequately compensated by interest
payments on the dollar. The accusation would be all the sharper be-
cause the US has resisted efforts by others to strengthen the SDR as an
alternative reserve asset.
—The dollar costs of our military establishment overseas would
mount. The rising budgetary burden of maintaining these forces would
face us with difficult decisions: to curtail domestic social programs, to
retrench on our defense expenditures, or to increase our budgetary def-
icit with adverse effects on domestic inflation.
—US leadership of the Western military and political alliance
would be undermined. The weight of the US in the world economy is
so great that our major allies perceive themselves as helpless to protect
their own interests in the face of US drift. Leadership requires decisive
action. In its absence, recriminations will intensify and cooperation
with our major allies, on which our strength and security ultimately de-
pend, will weaken.
