Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI we had in effect to face the same problem with Puerto Rico. He said that transitting nuclear material was still permitted according to our interpretation but de Guiringaud said that under certain circumstances he understood that that interpretation could be changed and this would present a problem for France. President Giscard said that he would not authorize the shipment of sensitive material to Pakistan but that this matter presented great difficulties for him internally. The Pakistanis are pressing for deliveries under the contract and he wished to avoid any explanation of this problem at the present time. He recalled that an offer had been made to the Pakistanis to build a different kind of plant which would involve only co-processing and that these discussions were in effect continuing. He said that if he was asked if this problem had been discussed with us he would say no. The President said that it appeared Desai had been informed of this French position and President Giscard confirmed that this was the case. The President also reported that Brazil was now having second thoughts about its reprocessing plant which they now saw as too expensive and perhaps not very effective. He said that this was a real turning point and we should take advantage of it. The meeting ended at 4:30 p.m. 362. Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 13, 1978 Dear Zbig: I believe it is essential that the President approve these shipments of highly-enriched uranium to Europe quickly. All of these cases represent US commitments to existing projects. They are not new commitments which our policy seeks to avoid. As you know, the Europeans are extremely sensitive to any signs that the US is using its nuclear fuel as pressure to achieve US objectives in INFCE or to force them to renegotiate the US–EURATOM Agreement. While I have tried to assure the
