474 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Over the last year our efforts have been directed primarily at reducing our large current account deficit and strengthening the dollar. The depreciation of the dollar should make our exports cheaper and imports more expensive. When the pipeline is drained of earlier orders, this change in relative prices should have some impact on our trade balance. However, it could be several years before the full impact is felt. Meanwhile no progress has been made and none is expected this year. The current account deficit for the first quarter of 1978 was running at an annual rate of $28 billion, almost twice the 1977 deficit, and no large improvement is in sight. The dollar is hovering around its all-time low with regard to the Mark and the Yen, and it probably will sink further. Our campaign to improve our current account position and strengthen the dollar, aside from allowing the dollar to float, has had five major elements. We have: —Encouraged foreign governments to stimulate their domestic demand, expecting that this would suck in more imports. —Attempted to gain passage of an energy bill to begin the protracted process of reducing our dependence on imported oil. —Tried to persuade foreign governments to reduce barriers to foreign goods, including ours. —Begun the effort to develop a national export policy designed to expand our exports. —Announced an anti-inflation program and have assigned a high priority to it. My purpose is to scrutinize each element and suggest what additional measures should be taken. Economic Activity Abroad To date we have been unsuccessful in our efforts to bring about increased economic activity in our major trading partners. The rate of economic growth in the US in 1977 was greater than that of Japan and more than twice that in all the other Summit countries. The first quarter data suggest that the disparity in economic growth may be diminishing somewhat, in part due to a less bouyant US economy. However, there is little evidence pointing to a sharp upturn in economic activity abroad. If Schmidt and Fukuda deliver on their promises at the Summit, economic activity in Germany and Japan could pick up. We should keep a close watch and maintain the pressure on the surplus countries to expand domestic demand. Energy Bill Our efforts to date to gain passage of the energy bill have flopped. One of the key features of the bill, the COET, appears no nearer passage
