672 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII The Pakistanis have promised additional aid if the exile groups form a viable, united resistance effort, and they reportedly plan to support at least one nationalist group that has already demonstrated aboveaverage leadership and fighting abilities. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) —The Afghan government claims the Chinese are providing arms and training for Afghan insurgents, but we have been unable to document such aid. [less than 1 line not declassified] some assistance has been moved across the Afghan-Chinese border to insurgents in Badakhshan Province, [5½ lines, classification marking, and codeword not declassified] —The Iranians have provided little material aid to the insurgents, although some humanitarian aid has been given to refugees on the Iranian side of the border. Afghan [7½ lines, classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified] —Aid from other Middle Eastern states has also been limited. The Saudis reportedly have provided money for rebel arms purchases, but insurgents inside Afghanistan claim that much of the funds has lined the pockets of Pakistani intermediaries and Afghan exile leaders. The insurgents reportedly have requested arms from Egypt [1 line, classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified] —Exile leaders have apparently purchased some small arms in Western Europe through arms dealers [6½ lines, classification marking, and handling restriction not declassified] The insurgents almost certainly will continue to try to avoid pitched battles with Soviet or Afghan government forces. They have not been deterred by the Soviets, however, and if anything the insurgency may be more pervasive than at any time since it began. In order to achieve a measure of success against any large-scale Soviet assault they require a continuing supply of weapons, mines, and ammunition. [less than 1 line not declassified] the single most effective Soviet weapon has been the MI–24 helicopter, and few Afghans have weapons to combat them. A shortage of antitank weapons has also hampered nationalist operations. ([classification marking not declassified]) To this end, the insurgents would appear to benefit most from the introduction of man-portable, easy-to-operate weapons such as the Soviet SA–7 or the US REDEYE surface-to-air missile, heavy machine guns, antitank weapons such as the French MILAN or the US LAW, and nonmetallic antitank mines. Coordination of insurgent assaults could be improved with the delivery of additional communications equipment; some insurgent groups have set up effective tactical nets when they have had the equipment. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) The insurgents have a continuing need for money, medical supplies, food, and clothing. Gas masks or other antidotes against chemical
