Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I term Band-aid money.” We must look at long-term goals. How much money for an international consortium? How much program money? How far do we go into the short-term economic program? “We got to $900 million before cut off and we didn’t make a dent,” said Fascell. REPRESENTATIVE LONG said when somebody throws himself on your doorstep, do something. It is surprising they survive at all. Egypt is the most harem scarem country I know. We are inviting the Egyptians to eat up the seed corn. Then Representative Long said that the two nuclear reactors for Egypt ought to be cancelled. PRESIDENT CARTER said that the request for nuclear reactors for Egypt and Israel had been left over from the previous Administration and were being reviewed but he gave no indication of how he would act as a result of the review. Rather, the President stressed the current situation in Egypt in terms of the need for food commodities and aid, “I consider it to be a crisis.” The President said that Dr. Kissinger’s achievement was to break Egypt away from the Soviets, and more and more Saudi Arabia is taking a tremendous interest in the Middle East. The President said he is asking Dr. Brzezinski to evolve a comprehensive four-year goal for our foreign policy.4 “I want to know where we will be in the Middle East, China, Cyprus and all the major issues.” He told the Congressmen he will make them aware of these goals and the preparation of these goals. He said such a compilation would “help me to express our common purposes and what we want to achieve.” DR. BRZEZINSKI explained that the four-year goals in the past have always been statements of broad generalities but “we are trying to make these goals more specific with a little more deliberation and specificity.” REPRESENTATIVE WILLIAM YOUNG asked Secretary Vance if Foreign Minister Fahmy asked for additional funds. VANCE said yes, but that to reply rapidly it would have to come from the aid program that had already been approved. SENATOR BROOKE said that President Sadat has his priorities and that granting of immediate commodity aid would be a symbolic move. 4 During the transition period, Brzezinski had suggested that it would be useful for him to assemble for Carter “a briefing book containing the four-year goals of his Administration in the area of foreign policy.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 52) Carter approved this suggestion and announced at a January 12 meeting with members of Congress that Brzezinski and the NSC Staff would undertake the preparation of such a document. According to the minutes of the January 31 Cabinet meeting, Brzezinski indicated that the NSC Staff members were currently “working on a four-year foreign policy statement of goals, with recommended sequences and timing of US action in pursuit of
