Afghanistan
745
279.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Chairman of the Special Coordinating Committee on
Intelligence (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Possible Increased Aid to Afghanistan Freedom Fighters
1. It may be possible to use Pakistan’s close intelligence connection
with Iran to increase the flow of weapons to the Afghanistan fighters.
Pakistani Intelligence Chief General Akhtar has made several veiled
references to connections with his Iranian counterparts. He has refused
to identify this link or provide any elaborating data, but he recently
provided one example of its use. We provided intelligence to the Paki-
stanis on a bloody Soviet offensive in the heavily Shi’ite areas of central
Afghanistan. The intent was to place the material in the Islamabad
press at the time of the Islamic Conference. Time factors made this
impossible, but General Akhtar, acting on his own, used the material
to prepare a report for his Iranian contacts on the suffering of Shi’ites
in Afghanistan.2
2. The Pakistanis are presently receiving all the weapons that they
can distribute through their mechanisms. It is possible that the Paki-
stanis, through their Iranian links, could arrange for the delivery of
additional weapons to fighters in western Afghanistan. We propose to
suggest to General Akhtar that he approach his Iranian contacts and
offer to fly Soviet weapons to Iran for onward distribution in Afghani-
stan. The weapons could be flown directly from Islamabad to airfields
in eastern Iran on the C–130’s to be loaned to Pakistan. Neither the
origin of the weapons nor our role in their procurement would be
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
President or Brzezinski Only File, Box 88, PA—Very Sensitive: 1–6/80. Secret; Sensitive;
[handling restriction not declassified].
2 An intelligence information cable prepared in the CIA reported on a meeting
between Zia and Qotbzadeh at the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers in Islamabad,
May 24. Regarding Afghanistan, Qotbzadeh was quoted as saying: “some appeasement
time in delaying tactics” would be required in dealing with the Soviet Union, and that
the Soviets had intimated to Iran that they could cause trouble in Baluchistan, which,
Qotbzadeh told Zia, neither Iran nor Pakistan could afford. In response to Zia’s assertion
that the Afghan insurgency was gaining strength, Qotbzadeh said that Iran would
increase its support of the insurgents by 30 percent in June. Both Zia and Qotbzadeh
agreed that at some point their respective countries would have to talk with the Karmal
regime, but doing so should be delayed as long as possible given the possibility that
the Afghan Government would collapse within the next two months. (Department of
Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Pak Support for Insurgents)
