CONCLUSION
It is apparent that we are reaching into an era of great general prosperity. It will
continue only so long as we shall use it properly. After all, there is but a fixed quantity
of wealth in this country at any fixed time. The only way that we can all secure more of
it is to create more. The element of time enters into production. If the people have
sufficient moderation and contentment to be willing to improve their condition by the
process of enlarging production, eliminating waste, and distributing equitably, a
prosperity almost without limit lies before us. If the people are to be dominated by
selfishness, seeking immediate riches by nonproductive speculation and by wasteful
quarreling over the returns from industry, they will be confronted by the inevitable
results of depression and privation. If they will continue industrious and thrifty,
contented with fair wages and moderate profits, and the returns which accrue from the
development of our natural resources, our prosperity will extend itself indefinitely.
In all your deliberations you should remember that the purpose of legislation is to
translate principles into action. It is an effort to have our country be better by doing
better. Because the thoughts and ways of people are firmly fixed and not easily
changed, the field within which immediate improvement can be secured is very narrow.
Legislation can provide opportunity. Whether it is taken advantage of or not depends
upon the people themselves. The Government of the United States has been created by
the people. It is solely responsible to them. It will be most successful if it is conducted
solely for their benefit. All its efforts would be of little avail unless they brought more
justice, more enlightenment, more happiness and prosperity into the home. This means
an opportunity to observe religion, secure education, and earn a living under a reign of
law and order. It is the growth and improvement of the material and spiritual life of the
Nation. We shall not be able to gain these ends merely by our own action. If they come
at all, it will be because we have been willing to work in harmony with the abiding
purpose of a Divine Providence.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
