March 27–December 31, 1979 869 264. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, June 16, 1979, 0048Z Tosec 50033/154608. For Secretary Vance from Saunders. Subject: Response to Israeli Query on U.S. Participation in Negotiations. 1. (C) Entire text. 2. For Mitchell: Following is the text of the response we propose to make to the Israelis on the U.S. role in the coming negotiations. The Israeli note2 to which we are responding is in para 16 of Tel Aviv 12823, which we are repeating to you. Sam Lewis after discussions3 with 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790271–0802. Confidential; Immediate; Stadis. Drafted by Saunders; cleared in draft by Strauss and Leonard and cleared by Richard Castrodale (S/S–O); approved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv and Cairo. Vance was in Vienna with Carter for the U.S.-Soviet Summit and the signing of the SALT II Treaty. 2 Sent June 14. The note, believed by Lewis to have been “vetted (or perhaps drafted) by Begin” and distributed to the press on June 14, stated the Israeli Government’s position on U.S. participation: “Egypt and Israel undertook commitments in the Camp David Agreement and in the joint letter from President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin addressed to President Carter. These commitments are to be scrupulously carried out by both parties. In the Camp David Agreement, it is stipulated: ‘The U.S. shall be invited to participate in talks on matters relating to modalities of implementation of the Agreement and working out of the time table for carrying out of the obligations of the participants.’ In the aforementioned letter, dated 3/26/79, it is stated: ‘This letter also confirms our understanding that the U.S. Government will participate fully in all stages of the negotiations.’ This, therefore, is the United States’ role. Nothing shall be detracted from or added to these definitions.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790269–0287) 3 Lewis met with Begin, Dayan, and Burg in separate meetings on June 14. Begin requested that the U.S. Government respond “very urgently” to Israel’s request for a statement on how it viewed the U.S. role in the negotiations. In a conversation described by Lewis as “very depressing,” Dayan stated that Rosenne had made a “stupid mistake” in using the term “observer” at Alexandria and emphasized that “no one disagreed that we [the United States] should be a full negotiating partner.” However, Dayan added, if the United States were to be a “party” in the “formal sense, this would indeed require a revision of the Camp David Accords.” In conclusion, Lewis commented to the Department: “The fundamental idiocy of the way the Israeli negotiating team and structure has been put together will put an enormous boulder in the road no matter how we try to ignore it. Dayan himself is determined to stay out of it to the maximum extent possible, since he cannot accept or agree with the way in which the GOI is approaching both the organizational side and the substance.” Lewis added that Dayan “regretted very much the fact that at Alexandria there was so little private contact between the American and the Israeli delegations, and that the Israelis all felt an intangible but very real atmosphere of coolness between the delegations.” Lewis noted that the “atmospheric issue” needed U.S. attention, since the Israelis “already are deeply suspicious that the U.S. and Egypt have mapped out the game plan together in a direction which is very contrary” to their “desires and purposes.” (Telegram 12917 from Tel Aviv, June 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790270–1209) Lewis met with Burg earlier in the day, where among the issues discussed was the appearance of an article in the Israeli newspaper Ma’ariv, alleging that Leonard had been “unfriendly” to the Israeli delegation and that the United States had “tried to dominate” the talks, charges Burg dismissed as “totally fallacious.” (Telegram 12823 from Tel Aviv, June 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790269–0287)
