568 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement In mathematics, many fields of physics, and a few fields of chemistry, fundamental research appears to be comparable in quality to that per­ formed in leading nations of the West. In some fields, Soviet scientists are among the best in the world; their potential for wholly new discov­ eries must be considered equal to that of Western scientists. 87. Space program.9 The establishment of the Interagency Commission for Interplanetary Communications, announced by the USSR in April 1955, indicated the existence of a program with manned interplanetary travel as its stated ultimate objective. The pro­ gram is supported by extensive Soviet research efforts in a number of related fields, including rocket propulsion, electronics, meteorology, space medicine, astrobiology, astrophysics, and geophysics. Activities to the present appear to be directed toward the collection of scientific data and experience to provide the basis for future space programs, and to advance basic knowledge in the above fields. Since some satel­ lite vehicles have probably employed basic ICBM hardware and some future space vehicles may also utilize ICBM components, the two pro­ grams are to some extent complementary. 88. Soviet successes with ballistic missiles and earth satellites point to a considerable capability for early accomplishments in space. We believe that the USSR is presently capable of orbiting earth satellites weighing on the order of 5,000 pounds, of launching lunar probes and satellites and of launching planetary probes to Mars and Venus. Its space program could also include: surveillance satellites and recover­ able aeromedical satellites (1958–1959); “soft landings” by lunar rock­ ets and recoverable manned earth satellites (1959–1960); a manned glide-­type high altitude research vehicle (1960–1961); earth satellites weighing as much as 25,000 pounds and manned circumlunar flights (1961–1962). While each individual achievement appears feasible as to technical capability and earliest date attainable, we doubt that the USSR could accomplish all of these space flight activities within the time periods specified. 89. Communist China has announced its intention to launch an earth satellite, and there are indications that Chinese personnel are studying rocket technology with Soviet assistance. The Chinese would value highly the political and propaganda gains resulting from a launching, and we believe that an attempt in China is a possibility within the next year or so. Using Soviet equipment, and with Soviet direction throughout the project, the Chinese Communists could prob­ ably perform a successful earth satellite launching in about one or two 9 For a more detailed discussion of the Soviet space program, see NIE 11–5–58, “Soviet Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles,” 19 August 1958 (TOP SECRET). [Footnote is in the original.]
