1955  575
29. I said insofar as Americans in Wang’s country concerned, in 
spite of terms of agreed announcement and arrrangements made for 
UK carry out functions, 14 Americans still detained.
30. I said insofar as lists are concerned, Wang would recall that at 
first meeting I gave him list all Americans we had grounds for believing 
were prevented from leaving. That list compiled with great effort by 
my government.
31. I said insofar as efforts his government or Indian Embassy 
determine status Chinese in U.S., Wang would recall announcement 
referred only to those who desired return. I would repeat my statement 
that any Chinese in U.S. who feels obstructed from returning is free 
communicate any way he desires with Indian Embassy. This in addi­
tion freedom communicate with Wang’s country.
32. I said after agreed announcement was issued, I had carefully 
outlined measures taken assure every person covered fully informed of 
its terms. In addition 70,000 copies agreed announcement were being 
posted in post offices throughout U.S. Thus not slightest possibility any 
Chinese in U.S. not fully informed his rights under announcement. Any 
Chinese has full freedom exercise those rights. In spite of all this, no sin­
gle case called to attention U.S. Government of obstruction to departure 
for Wang’s country or any country of his choice.
33. I said this contrasts sharply with situation Americans in Wang’s 
country. Wang had spoken of not entangling item one and item two of 
agenda. I had no desire entangle these subjects, but to my regret desire 
Wang’s government fully and promptly carry out agreement has inev­
itably entangled subjects.
34. I said it was difficult consider another announcement or public 
statement except in light of how previous statement carried out. Before 
agreeing on further statements there must be full confidence between 
us that any agreement will be carried out. For this purpose I made 
statement this morning. If we were to make progress there must be this 
understanding and confidence between us. My government is anxious 
there be progress and in interest of progress has instructed me make 
clear our feeling concerning implementation our first agreement.
35. Wang replied he agreed progress in regard further statement 
will depend on manner in which previous agreement carried out. He 
wanted point out, however, that proposal for second statement origi­
nated with U.S. side. He felt there was no ground for making imple­
mentation previous agreement prerequisite for further statement. We 
had reached agreement item one concerning return civilians and so far 
as his side concerned agreement all along faithfully carried out. Since 
beginning talks, 41 Americans left China, including American civil­
ians and number of Americans released as result of lenient measures
