1956  773
suggested. It frankly just had not occurred to me that Wang would find 
this self defense clause objectionable or that he would make issue of it.
72. I said I certainly had no intention or desire to build it up into 
issue, but Wang had insisted on doing so. Again, Wang had just said 
he considered this matter of substance. How else could I interpret his 
statements than as substantive demand on his part that US renounce 
its views regarding merits of our disputes. I had nothing more to say.
73. Wang replied that I had termed my amendments to his draft as 
very small changes, but he did not think they were very small changes. 
He considered them to be still insisting on my original position. He did 
not consider them amendments in true sense of word. They were rather 
a form of insistence on my original position.
74. Wang said I had stated that in making these changes I did not 
intend build up issue over self-­defense clause. If, as I stated, it not my 
intent to build up into issue, then he didn’t see why I had insisted on 
this issue.
75. Wang said I had also said that it not my intent demand or require 
prerequisite. In view of fact that self defense clause had become issue 
between us and constitutes prerequisite on US part, this self defense 
clause had become obstacle to progress of talks.
76. Wang said it was to be hoped that at next meeting I would be 
able put forth suggestions and opinions that would help progress of 
talks.
77. Wang said if I had nothing else, he would like bring up 
another matter. On my assent, he read prepared statement saying that 
­Chinese side had at very start these talks submitted complete list of all 
­Americans in prison in China. They had all along been concerned with 
status of Chinese in prison in US. In spite of repeated requests that we 
submit list Chinese in US prisons, US side not only failed submit such 
list but declared it had no knowledge of Chinese in prison.
78. Wang said he had long ago pointed out that that assertion did 
not tally with facts. According information offered by returned Chinese 
there actually many Chinese unjustifiably kept US prisons. He would 
again call my attention to question of Chinese in US prisons and would 
appreciate explicit answer from me.
79. Wang said he failed see why my side had thus far not taken any 
appropriate measures in regard to these imprisoned Chinese, nor could 
he understand why US so far refused provide either their side or Indian 
Embassy with information about these people, or why US would not 
permit Indian Embassy advise these imprisoned people of contents of 
agreement between China and US of September 10, 1955. Under such 
circumstances, how could Indian Embassy be expected fully carry out
