3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
34
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
on human rights, but he was fearful that it would be very difficult for
the Soviet leaders not to become highly upset and not to view this as an
attempt to interfere in their domestic affairs. He quickly dropped the
subject, indicating that he was not instructed to discuss it with me, that
he preferred not to do so, and that he had already communicated yes-
terday to the State Department all that he was instructed to communi-
cate on that subject.5 He merely added that he hoped that the atmos-
pherics in the U.S.-Soviet relationship would not be adversely affected
with negative effects on such tangibles as the SALT negotiations.
5 See Document 10.
12.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
February 25, 1977
Dear Mr. President,
I have carefully studied your letter dated February 14, 1977.2 I
want to talk bluntly about our impression and thoughts it evoked. As I
understand, you are for such straightforward talk.
The statements of a general nature in support of peace and cur-
tailing arms race contained in the letter are certainly consonant with
our own aspirations. We are definitely for working towards the ulti-
mate elimination of nuclear weapons, and even more, towards general
and complete disarmament under an effective international control.
However, the movement toward these lofty goals will by no means
be expedited but on the contrary it will be hindered if we, first of all, do
not treasure what has already been achieved in that direction over re-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 69, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR): Brezhnev–Carter
Correspondence: 1–2/77. No classification marking. Printed from an unofficial transla-
tion. Carter recalled in his memoirs, “Brezhnev’s tone changed to harshness in his second
message on February 25. His primary objection was to my aggressive proposals on nu-
clear arms limitations—advocating much deeper cuts than had been discussed at Vladi-
vostok in 1975—but he also expressed strong opposition to our human-rights policy. He
seemed especially provoked by my corresponding with him and at the same time
sending a letter to Sakharov, who was considered by the Soviet leader to be ‘a renegade
who proclaimed himself an enemy of the Soviet state.’” (Keeping Faith, p. 146)
2 See Document 7.
