Covert and Overt Operations Information reaching us indicates that the condition of the former Shah is serious. We have not received any information forecasting the progress of his illness and we are not in a position to make any judgment ourselves in this regard. Our ability to provide information on the state of the health of the former Shah is limited by the absence of any direct contact with him. Although we are in touch with Egyptians who are informed on the state of the Shah’s health, there is necessarily a delay in receiving this information and we are not in a position to evaluate it accurately. Because of these limitations, we do not believe that private information on changes in the state of his health will reach us necessarily sooner than press reports. We will attempt, however, to keep the Swiss Embassy informed of any significant changes. (FORAMBASSADOR LANG: If Ghotbzadeh asks you about attendance at the funeral, you may say that you understand that Ambassador Atherton would attend if President Sadat decides on an official funeral and the Diplomatic Corps are to attend.)3 3 See Document 308. 313. Editorial Note On July 9, 1980, an attempted coup against the Iranian Revolutionary Government unraveled. The original plot was for 12 pilots with their F–4 and F–5 planes to defect to Iraq, but the plot grew in scope. Ultimately, it included units of the Iranian Air Force, ground forces, members of radio and television organizations, and tribal leaders including from the Qashqai. The plot called for Iraq to create an incident at the border between Iran and Iraq as a diversion under which Air Force supporters would bomb the Tehran Air Base, Mehrabad Airport, the home of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and Pasdaran headquarters and training centers. Ground forces would take over the airport and radio and television stations, then broadcast material, including a speech from Ayatollah Kazem Shariat-Madari, saying opponents of the coup were anti-Islamic. After 72 hours, control of Iran would pass to Shahpur Bakhtiar, the former Prime Minister and leader of the exile opposition group, the National Resistance Movement of Iran. Bakhtiar himself, the extent of whose role in the coup is unclear, moved the coup from its original August 13 date to July 10, and then again to
