Afghanistan
489
but such a reaction was disappointing in view of the critical threat
posed by Soviet aggression.4
5. A further concern, said Agha Shahi, is fear of Indo-Soviet alliance
against Pakistan. He had learned on good authority that visit to Moscow
by Indian defense team (sent by caretaker government) had resulted
in firm Soviet offer of $2 billion in arms. Pakistan wanted to reach an
understanding with Indira Gandhi on response to Soviet expansion,
and GOP had authorized Lord Carrington to convey this view to Indian
Government.5 He felt Soviet military aid offer could go a long way to
explain pro-Soviet statement made prior to UN General Assembly vote
on Afghanistan which should have dictated a negative Indian vote on
resolution. Indian Government now backing down somewhat only
because of massive UN vote against Soviets. In any case, overtures to
India had been made. Ambassador Bajpai had brought message from
Indira Gandhi accepting President Zia’s congratulations on her election
and proposing visit to Islamabad by Indian Foreign Secretary early in
February. Proposal had been accepted.
6. In response, I said that “preliminary reaction” would be immedi-
ately transmitted to Washington. In regard to doubts that Foreign
Advisor expressed there would be ample opportunity to discuss mat-
ters further. Ambassador Hummel would be returning to Islamabad
around Jan 21 and as he was aware, Deputy Secretary Christopher
would be paying a visit in very near future. There should be no doubt
at all regarding American resolve in face of Soviet aggression. Pakistan
should not expect unanimity of views in American press on situation.
There would, of course, be comments critical of Pakistan Government
among reports of huge number of journalists already assembled in
Islamabad. More could be expected out of Tehran and we had just had
report foreign journalists in Kabul being expelled and many of those
would no doubt come here. In long run, however, Pakistan should
expect to benefit from world attention being focussed on Soviet aggres-
sion, and I thought it would be particularly beneficial to have plight
of Afghan refugees given full publicity. In any case, there should be
no confusion over what free press may or may not say and U.S. Govern-
4 An intelligence memorandum prepared [text not declassified] for the Secretary of
Defense, January 16, addressed the Pakistani reaction to the U.S. aid offer. The memoran-
dum relayed comments by Pakistani Air Chief Marshall Shamim, a “Zia protégé and
supporter,” who “welcomed the prospect of US military aid for Pakistan, but cautioned
that such assistance would be perceived by the population as a show of support for Zia
and the Martial Law Administration (MLA). Since Pakistanis, including the all-powerful
army officer corps are ‘fed up’ with the MLA, Shamim acknowledged that US aid could
have a negative impact and would inhibit the emergence of a democratic political system
in Pakistan for another 5 to 10 years by bolstering Zia’s position.” (Washington National
Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–82–0217B, Box 14, Pakistan, 1 Jan–16 Apr 1980)
5 See footnote 6, Document 145.
