774
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
be in a position to give a more detailed response to some of the elements
in the letter.
The Secretary went on to mention two points in particular which
concerned him in the report of Gromyko’s reply: (1) we continue to
have difficulty with the Soviet view that the principal aggression comes
from Pakistan. It remains our view that the principal aggression is that
created by the Soviet invasion. In any case, we would like to see both
the Soviet aggression and any intervention from abroad brought to
an end. (2) Gromyko emphasized at length his objection to what he
apparently understood the letter to suggest, that a government should
be established in Afghanistan acceptable to the neighbors of that coun-
try. This was a misunderstanding: what the letter said was that a
government should be set up in Kabul which was acceptable to the
people of Afghanistan. He added that this could be done “with the
prompt withdrawal of all Soviet forces from Afghanistan,” emphasiz-
ing that the word “with” had been carefully chosen.
Dobrynin asked how the word “with” was to be understood, and
whether it could be a significant departure from the word “prior,”
which he had understood to represent the US position. The Secretary
replied that this could be a matter for discussion. [In view of the
problem of translating “with,” which had arisen at the Gromyko-Wat-
son conversation, Dobrynin was asked what Russian word had been
used in the copy of the letter sent to him by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. He replied: “nariadu s,” which conveys the proper sense of
simultaneity.]3
The Secretary emphasized forcefully that so long as Soviet troops
continued to occupy Afghanistan, this fact would continue to be a
matter that affected our vital interests, and it would also be a barrier
to the establishment of an independent and non-aligned Afghanistan.
His letter, he said, had been worked out carefully with the President
in the hope that it would open the way to a solution of the problem
that would meet both Soviet and American interests fairly, and would
remove this unfortunate and dangerous problem.
Dobrynin said he thought a solution could be found which would
meet both Soviet and American security interests.
Dobrynin said that Gromyko had asked him to obtain any further
clarification possible on what the American side had in mind in refer-
ring to “some transitional arrangement.” The Secretary replied that he
had reference to the point in this regard which the President had made
at his press conference on Feb. 13;4 he did not propose at this stage to
3 Brackets are in the original.
4 See footnote 2, Document 212.
