Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1157
has been reached regarding the rule that will apply to such an ICBM or 
SLBM, the number of warheads that will be attributed to such an ICBM 
or SLBM shall be the maximum number of reentry vehicles with which 
an ICBM or SLBM of that type has been flight-tested. The number of 
new types of ICBMs or SLBMs with a front section of a fundamentally 
new design shall not exceed two for each Party as long as this Treaty 
remains in force.
(c) The number of reentry vehicles with which an ICBM or SLBM 
has been flight-tested shall be considered to be the sum of the num-
ber of reentry vehicles actually released during the flight test, plus 
the number of procedures for dispensing reentry vehicles performed 
during that same flight test when no reentry vehicle was released. A 
procedure for dispensing penetration aids shall not be considered to be 
a procedure for dispensing reentry vehicles, provided that the proce-
dure for dispensing penetration aids differs from a procedure for dis-
pensing reentry vehicles.
(d) Each reentry vehicle of an ICBM or SLBM shall be considered 
to be one warhead.
(e) For the United States of America, each heavy bomber equipped 
for long-range nuclear ALCMs, up to a total of 150 such heavy bombers, 
shall be attributed with ten warheads. Each heavy bomber equipped for 
long-range nuclear ALCMs in excess of 150 such heavy bombers shall 
be attributed with a number of warheads equal to the number of long-
range nuclear ALCMs for which it is actually equipped. The United 
States of America shall specify the heavy bombers equipped for long-
range nuclear ALCMs that are in excess of 150 such heavy bombers by 
number, type, variant, and the air bases at which they are based. The 
number of long-range nuclear ALCMs for which each heavy bomber 
equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs in excess of 150 such heavy 
bombers is considered to be actually equipped shall be the maximum 
number of long-range nuclear ALCMs for which a heavy bomber of the 
same type and variant is actually equipped.
(f) For the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, each heavy bomber 
equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs, up to a total of 180 such heavy 
bombers, shall be attributed with eight warheads. Each heavy bomber 
equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs in excess of 180 such heavy 
bombers shall be attributed with a number of warheads equal to the 
number of long-range nuclear ALCMs for which it is actually equipped. 
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall specify the heavy bombers 
equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs that are in excess of 180 such 
heavy bombers by number, type, variant, and the air bases at which 
they are based. The number of long-range nuclear ALCMs for which 
each heavy bomber equipped for long-range nuclear ALCMs in excess 
of 180 such heavy bombers is considered to be actually equipped shall
