Non-Proliferation 1. An understanding with the major industrial states that we would not exercise a veto on nuclear trade among them or on their development of sensitive facilities involving materials of U.S. origin; provided (i) they accept full-scope and improved safeguards on all civil nuclear facilities and an appropriate institutional framework for their operation and the management of the materials they produce, and (ii) they have a reasonable economic case for building sensitive plants. We would interpret reprocessing in order to obtain plutonium for certain research, for breeders and for other advanced reactors as “reasonable” for countries with large programs, but not in the near to medium term for the recycle in conventional thermal reactors or as a precursor to waste disposal. (Eventual U.S. agreement to this point could require legislative changes; our exploratory talks would note this fact.) 2. The development of international and multinational institutions as a further means of reducing the likelihood that critical materials will be diverted to making weapons. This would include (as foreshadowed in the NNPA) willingness to consider foreign participation in U.S. enrichment capacity. 3. As a part of such institutional development, early establishment of an effective international plutonium storage/management system. Since accumulation of substantial stocks of plutonium by some countries is inevitable, nuclear cooperation with them and other nations which might acquire or produce plutonium should be conditioned on their willingness to place excess civil plutonium stocks under international control. This should include U.S. willingness (as proposed by the Ford Administration) to place U.S. excess civil plutonium in an effective control system. 4. Shortand long-term measures to provide greater assurance of fuel supply, especially to countries stopping short of full fuel cycles. 5. Technical cooperation and assistance regarding (i) three major problems of nuclear power (safety, spent fuel disposition and waste disposal) and where appropriate (ii) research and development on breeders and other advanced nuclear technologies. 6. Improved safeguards for enrichment, reprocessing and MOX fabrication plants, and undertakings to limit new enrichment capacity to low enrichment. In sum, we plan to begin exploration of what post-INFCE regimes might look like. Hopefully, we will as a result be able to provide you with a realistic assessment of the best possible alternatives which could be negotiable with other countries. You would then be in a better position to establish post-INFCE U.S. policy. I am taking the liberty of sending a copy of this memorandum to the Secretaries of State and Energy, and the Director of ACDA. Gerard Smith4 4 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry.”
