Non-Proliferation
951
1. An understanding with the major industrial states that we would not
exercise a veto on nuclear trade among them or on their development of sensi-
tive facilities involving materials of U.S. origin; provided (i) they accept
full-scope and improved safeguards on all civil nuclear facilities and an appro-
priate institutional framework for their operation and the management of the
materials they produce, and (ii) they have a reasonable economic case for
building sensitive plants. We would interpret reprocessing in order to ob-
tain plutonium for certain research, for breeders and for other ad-
vanced reactors as “reasonable” for countries with large programs, but
not in the near to medium term for the recycle in conventional thermal
reactors or as a precursor to waste disposal. (Eventual U.S. agreement
to this point could require legislative changes; our exploratory talks
would note this fact.)
2. The development of international and multinational institutions as
a further means of reducing the likelihood that critical materials will be di-
verted to making weapons. This would include (as foreshadowed in the
NNPA) willingness to consider foreign participation in U.S. enrich-
ment capacity.
3. As a part of such institutional development, early establishment of an
effective international plutonium storage/management system. Since accu-
mulation of substantial stocks of plutonium by some countries is inevi-
table, nuclear cooperation with them and other nations which might ac-
quire or produce plutonium should be conditioned on their willingness
to place excess civil plutonium stocks under international control. This
should include U.S. willingness (as proposed by the Ford Administra-
tion) to place U.S. excess civil plutonium in an effective control system.
4. Short- and long-term measures to provide greater assurance of fuel
supply, especially to countries stopping short of full fuel cycles.
5. Technical cooperation and assistance regarding (i) three major
problems of nuclear power (safety, spent fuel disposition and waste
disposal) and where appropriate (ii) research and development on
breeders and other advanced nuclear technologies.
6. Improved safeguards for enrichment, reprocessing and MOX fabri-
cation plants, and undertakings to limit new enrichment capacity to
low enrichment.
In sum, we plan to begin exploration of what post-INFCE regimes
might look like. Hopefully, we will as a result be able to provide you
with a realistic assessment of the best possible alternatives which could
be negotiable with other countries. You would then be in a better posi-
tion to establish post-INFCE U.S. policy.
I am taking the liberty of sending a copy of this memorandum to
the Secretaries of State and Energy, and the Director of ACDA.
Gerard Smith4
4 Smith signed the memorandum “Gerry.”
