1202 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX end of the 40 days, to have a brief session here to confirm what has been done. This is an option the Egyptians would like to have. Prime Minister Begin said that this could be considered at the proper time. With regard to the draft on the Continuing Committee, in accordance with the Camp David Accords, in the transitional period the Continuing Committee could deal with other matters of common concern, with the U.S. invited to take part, and decisions to be taken on the basis of unanimity. First, he did not like to change Camp David, and this could be written into a protocol, that this is not a precedent. Second, we don’t need all the words of Ambassador Linowitz (from yesterday’s U.S. proposal),5 if they say “in accordance with the Camp David Accords.” We should also put in the word “also,” to show that we are leaving in the original text (on the uses of the Continuing Committee). It will “also” deal with other matters. He has accepted the U.S. idea on citing some examples (of the work the Continuing Committee might do). It should also cite the development of sources of water, for the benefit of all. In accordance with paragraph five (of the Camp David Accords Associated Principles), the United States would be invited to join. He had a problem with the word “operate” (in the U.S. draft). Rather we should say that “decisions will be taken.” The President asked the Prime Minister to reread his draft.6 Prime Minister Begin said that it was his handwriting. Nobody else could read it; and even he could only read it with difficulty! (laughter) The President said he wanted to hear whether Prime Minister Begin could read it the same way a second time! (laughter) (The Prime Minister reread his draft.) The President said he preferred actually listing the three nations to be involved, as stated in Camp David that they “will constitute” the Continuing Committee. Prime Minister Begin asked if the President wanted to list all the names. The President said that if we were going to change the words of Camp David, then he would like to add the word “immediately,” since the Accords just say the Continuing Committee should function soon. Prime Minister Begin asked if the words “as soon as possible” would be all right. The President said that Camp David did not contemplate any delay.
