Arms Control and Disarmament 1497 of any element of the system or any area where an on-­site inspection has been initiated whenever adequate and expeditious transportation is not available or has been discontinued for any reason. 3. The parties undertake to enter into appropriate arrangements with the Commission for the utilization of national aircraft for the rou­ tine collection of air samples when the administrator determines that existing routine meteorological or commercial flights of national air­ craft are acceptable for this purpose. In such cases, the administrator shall specify the equipment to be utilized, and one or more observers from the system, none of whom is a national of the state providing the aircraft, shall accompany the flight. 4. The parties undertake to enter into appropriate arrangements with the Commission either to permit flights by system aircraft over their national territory or to have national aircraft immediately avail­ able for flights over their own territory when the administrator deter­ mines that special aircraft flights are required over national territory in accordance with the criteria in Annex I. In such cases, the admin­ istrator shall specify the equipment to be utilized and one or more observers from the nuclear test detection and identification system, none of whom is a national of the state being overflown, shall accom­ pany the flight. 5. The parties undertake to enter into appropriate arrangements with the Commission for the utilization of national vessels for use as elements of the system when the administrator determines that existing weather or geophysical exploration ships are acceptable for this pur­ pose. In such cases, the administrator shall specify the equipment to be utilized and the operating specialists and technical staff. 6. The parties agree to give inspection groups immediate and undisputed access to the locality of any event for which an inspection has been ordered by the administrator. The parties further agree not to interfere with any of the operations undertaken by an inspection group and to assist the personnel of the inspection groups as they may require in the performance of their mission. Inspection groups may be accom­ panied by representatives of the states concerned provided that the inspection groups shall not thereby be delayed or otherwise impeded in the exercise of their functions. (Paragraph 7 will be drafted to make provision for high altitude detection after this matter has been further discussed.) End vervatim text. Villard
