176
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
he understood this, but that it would have been much easier for the
Egyptians to swallow had we given them a copy of our initial paper at
the outset. It is now viewed in Egyptian eyes as a U.S.-Israeli paper no
matter what we say about it. Kamel had not wanted to say this to the
Secretary, but we should know that this is one of the principal Egyptian
gripes about it.
45.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Camp David, September 12, 1978, 1:45–3:30 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
American Ambassador Samuel Lewis
Israeli Foreign Minister Dayan
SUBJECT
Dayan’s Unhappiness with Secretary’s Response
As we were leaving the dining area, Foreign Minister Dayan took
me aside in some agitation. He said he wanted me to remember today’s
date very carefully, since he thought history would show that a conver-
sation2 he had just had with Secretary Vance over lunch was the point
at which the chance for a peace agreement had been lost and the seeds
of the next Arab-Israeli war had been planted. He said he had made a
proposal to the Secretary and that he was extremely sorry the Secretary
had rejected it so quickly, “But since he has, I guess there is nothing
more to be done and we will just have to live with the consequences.”
I took Dayan aside for more elucidation. He went over, at some
length, his conclusion that there were at least three insoluble issues
which precluded any chance of Israeli agreement on an overall frame-
work: “The inadmissibility of the acquisition language, the demand for
removal of Sinai settlements, and insistence on a total freeze on West
Bank settlements.” He said there might be a number of other points, but
he believed that, based on what he felt now, the other hurdles could
have been surmounted if we had not been adamant on these.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 7, Camp David: 9/9–17/78. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Lewis. The meeting
took place in Laurel Lodge.
2 See footnote 43, Document 28.
