of the above treaty”, which referred to the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru, should be omitted from the third part of the proposal by the Secretary of State thus leaving that part to deal with matters exclusively between Brazil and Colombia. This was agreed to and the Procès Verbal was signed in that sense. However, in order that there might be no misapprehension on the part of those concerned that the various steps in the proposal of the Secretary of State were to be carried out in the sequence mentioned, my predecessor made this clear by stating in his covering note that the third proposed action would be taken after the carrying out of the second step. It was likewise the understanding that Mr. Secretary Hughes’ second suggestion would not be carried out until the first suggestion had been complied with but it was not necessary to mention this in the covering letter as his first suggestion was complied with in the Procès Verbal itself wherein the Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires informed Your Excellency of the withdrawal by Brazil of its observations regarding the Colombian-Peruvian treaty. There is thus no change whatsoever in the Procès Verbal as signed. The Procès Verbal is itself clear and the covering note merely sets forth what is obvious in the Procès Verbal that the settlement proposed by the Secretary of State is to be accomplished in three steps in the order mentioned. With reference to Your Excellency’s remarks regarding Mr. Secretary Hughes’ reference to the renewal by the Colombian Minister of his statement made in the meeting on March 4, that his Government will conclude the treaty with Brazil provided for in the third portion of the Secretary of State’s proposal, immediately after the ratification by Peru of the Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty, I have the honor to reply as follows: In the Procès Verbal as originally drawn up it was provided as Your Excellency remembers that the Colombian Minister would say that he was authorized by his Government to state that should the treaty of March 24, 1922, between Colombia and Peru be ratified by the Government of Peru the Government of Colombia would conclude immediately thereafter the treaty with Brazil provided for in the third step of the proposal of the Secretary of State. Although this step of the proposal provided for action only by Colombia and Brazil, those Governments agreed, at the request of your Government, to change the words “by the Government of Peru” for the words “by both Governments”. It is manifest that this change, while it could benefit none of the three Governments concerned, might conceivably cause a delay to the prejudice of Brazil by requiring one extra step, namely the ratification by Colombia of the treaty of March 24, 1922, between Colombia and Peru, before the third step in the Secretary of State’s proposal, which relates only to action by Brazil and Colombia, would be carried out. The Colombian Minister therefore spontaneously addressed a note to the Secretary of State on March 4, before the signing of the Procès Verbal, which made it clear for the benefit of the Brazilian Government, the one principally concerned in this matter, that the
