20 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 4. Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–101 Washington, February 18, 1977 TO The Vice President The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense ALSO The Director, Office of Management and Budget The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence The U.S. Representative to the United Nations SUBJECT Comprehensive Net Assessment and Military Force Posture Review (U) I hereby direct that a comprehensive examination be made of overall U.S. national strategy and capabilities. This examination will consist of two parts to be done concurrently. One part of the examination will be conducted by the Policy Review Committee under the chairmanship of the Secretary of Defense. It will define a wide range of alternative military strategies and construct alternative military force postures and programs to support each of these military strategies. Among other topics, this segment will consider: military force levels; technological developments with regard to new weaponry; alternatives to our reliance on foreign bases; deterrence at reciprocally lowered strategic levels; viability and desirability of the “triad” posture. This portion should also evaluate the relative ability of the U.S. and its allies to achieve U.S. objectives in specified military contingencies. It will identify the key issues for Presidential decisions, including the budgetary implications of each of these postures. The other part will be a dynamic net assessment conducted by the Special Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. It will consist of review and comparison of the overall trends in the political, diplomatic, economic, technological, and military capabilities of the United States, its allies, and potential adversaries. It will evaluate the objectives and national strategies that may be pursued by our principal potential 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 37, PRM–1 through PRM–11: 1–2/77. Secret; Exdis.
