1236 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement field of control and regulation of armaments, for consideration by you and by the National Security Council. With the assistance of an able, experienced, and devoted group of men from without and within the government these studies have now been completed and a comprehensive set of recommendations have been made, some of which have already been adopted as the policy of the United States and the others of which are well understood within the Administration. It has been an honor, inspiration, and privilege to work with you in this task. It is my highest hope and my fervent prayer that our endeavors in this assignment are confirmed in the years ahead as having made a contribution to a lasting peace with freedom and justice. It is my belief that I may now make a larger contribution to your objective of a durable peace, which I share, by reentering the active political field in the Pennsylvania Governorship campaign and by dis­ cussing with the people of our country the issues and problems of the worldwide competition of ways of life and the tasks of building peace and safeguarding against war. I write with deep appreciation and commendation for your life time of service to our country, with an especial heartfelt thanks for your leadership as President these five years, and with best wishes for the years ahead. Sincerely, Harold E. Stassen Special Assistant to the President 291. Record of Telephone Conversation Between John Foster Dulles and Sherman Adams1 February 19, 1958, 3:33 p.m. The Sec said he had quite a talk with Gruenther re disarmament. The Sec suggested the handling of it should be under the control of State through some regular fellow but that we should have an outside panel of advisers or consultants to guide us. G thought that was a good way and he would be agreeable to serving on such a panel. The Sec thought 1 Source: Advisory panel on disarmament. No classification marking. 1 p. Eisen­ hower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
