58
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
26.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, November 1979
Iran: Forces Occupying the US Embassy in Tehran
[portion marking not declassified]
Summary
There are conflicting reports on the composition of the forces occu-
pying the US Embassy in Tehran. The principal organization involved
may be the “Islamic Monotheists,” a group of Islamic militants which
has declared its loyalty to Ayatollah Khomeini, but which apparently
has been heavily infiltrated by leftists whose loyalty to Khomeini is
probably only a protective measure. Leftists in the group may have
links to a radical Palestinian organization, [2 lines not declassified].
Spokesmen for this group have remained adamant in refusing any
negotiated compromise that does not include the return of the Shah
to Iran for “trial.” If a basis for negotiation short of returning the
Shah receives support from Khomeini, the latent ideological differences
among those occupying the Embassy could cause dissension within
the group and confusion over policy. It is unlikely, however, that the
group would continue to hold the hostages if Khomeini ordered them
released. [portion marking not declassified]
The group occupying the Embassy reportedly numbers 150 to 200.
Reports of security measures, including the posting of guards equipped
with light arms both inside and outside the Embassy gates, indicate
they are well organized. The hostages are dispersed among at least
three separate buildings in the Embassy compound, and relations
between the hostages and their captors reportedly are good. [portion
marking not declassified]
[Omitted here is a schematic of Tehran.]
Occupation of the Embassy
On 4 November a group identifying itself only as the “Muslim
Student Followers of the Imam’s Policies” occupied the US Embassy
in Tehran. The incident followed a pattern that has been frequently
repeated since Khomeini took power in Iran last February—that is,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Office of the Chief of Staff,
Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 35, Iran—CIA Reports, 11/79. Top Secret; [handling
restriction not declassified]. Prepared by [name not declassified] of the Iran Task Force;
coordinated with the National Intelligence Officer for Near East and South Asia. Informa-
tion available as of November 13 was used in the report’s preparation.
