694 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI should be seeking a cooperative transition toward a more stable deterrent which includes a better balance between offenses and defenses. Smith acknowledged that the Soviet position was different on the effect of offensive reductions and new technology on stability, but said there might be elements of common ground. The United States felt a sense of urgency in DST and favored including the objective of achieving agreement by 1992, which was eight years after the start of negotiations. — Nazarkin thanked Burt and Smith for their comments, expressed the view that the sides did not differ on too many points, and identified the joint task as marrying the two documents. Burt agreed with this task and suggested that the U.S. side attempt a merged draft with brackets where necessary. He opined that the “standard diplomatic” preamble was a little old-­fashioned and might be hard for the press to take easily. Since the U.S. draft had some of the same elements, it might be preferrable to drop the preamble. Nazarkin responded that it might be old-­fashioned, but it also was more solemn. The Soviets had thought a preamble would put the document on higher ground. Burt joked that congressional resolutions declaring national tree week or national onion day used the same format. After retorting: “so does the U.N.,” Nazarkin said he would offer a major concession and let the U.S. side have a go at it. Other Issues — Nazarkin raised the issue of warhead elimination—not just the warheads, but also the hulls of the RV’s. In response to Burt’s inquiry, Nazarkin confirmed that he meant along the lines of the INF Treaty. Burt said he was aware of the Soviet position, knew that the U.S. side owed the Soviets a response, and hoped to have one in the near future. — Nazarkin brought up the road-­mobile ICBM verification package which had been agreed Ad Ref in Geneva, and summarized Moscow’s response: Restricted areas of 5 sq km, in which OSI could occur; deployment areas of up to 125,000 sq km; no notification regime for routine movements; no limits on the number of launchers outside of the restricted areas and no limits on the duration of time outside these areas. — Burt said that his reaction to this position was “very, very, very negative.” After three weeks of discussion in Geneva, the sides had now gone completely back to the drawing boards. The U.S. side had been successful in getting Washington to concur with almost every Ad Ref Agreement reached. In this case, Burt had spent a lot of capital—­ including personal capital—­to sell the road-­mobile agreement in Washington. The United States had originally wanted a much smaller deployment area, but had listened carefully to Soviet concerns about survivability. Burt said there was no way he could sell the latest Soviet proposal in Washington, nor would it do much good to discuss it in Geneva; it would have to be raised at the Summit. Nazarkin said that
