arising from the Washington Treaty and resolution for the purpose of which the Conference had been convened. It was agreed that the official language of the Conference should be Chinese and English, but that any Delegate who so preferred could speak in French. The Rules of Procedure were then taken up and, after discussion, were adopted with slight amendments. A copy of the Rules of Procedure as adopted may be found on p. 23 of the Minutes of the Committee on Programme and Procedure, October 27, 1925. After deciding to issue a brief press communique the Committee adjourned. Committee on Tariff Autonomy, First Meeting, October 30, 1925. The third meeting held under the auspices of the Special Conference was that of the Committee on Tariff Autonomy which was held on October 30, 1925. At the suggestion of Mr. Oudendijk, Dr. C. T. Wang was elected Chairman of the Committee and in taking the chair he referred to the Proposals on Chinese Tariff Autonomy presented at the Plenary Session of October 26, and to the proposals presented by the Chinese Delegation at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 (See p. 3, et seq., of Minutes of October 30, 1925). He praised the spirit of the Washington Treaty, but stated that the Chinese people found it difficult to accept the conditions of the Treaty. He stated that the Chinese people were determined to exercise what was due China as a sovereign nation and that it had often been said that the right of tariff autonomy had been denied to China because of a lack of unity in the country, but that this seemed to him in the nature of a vicious circle. He stated also that the Government, in order to function properly should have freedom of action in fiscal matters and that China, by reason of various treaties with the foreign powers, was bound hand and foot and was not able to increase its revenues without the consent of the Powers concerned. In commenting on the fear expressed in some quarters that the additional revenues which might accrue to China would be squandered, he stated that no portion of the customs revenues had ever been dissipated. He spoke also of the overdue obligations of the Chinese Government and the need for the economic development of the country, especially railway construction. He asked for the views of other Delegates and Mr. Hioki responded with a
