866
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
can maintain its own economic vitality only within a healthy interna-
tional economy whose overall strength will increase as each of its com-
ponent parts becomes more productive, more equitable and more inter-
nationally competitive. To sustain a healthy global economy, the
purchasing power of today’s poor people must rise substantially, in
order to set in motion that mutually-reinforcing exchange of goods,
services and commodities which provides the foundation for viable
economic partnership and growth.
The international food system is one important component of the
international economic order. The United States depends on world
markets to maintain its own strong farm economy: American farmers
export two-thirds of their wheat, about half their rice and soybeans,
and about a quarter of their corn and other coarse grains. Although
farm output makes up only three percent of the nation’s Gross National
Product (GNP), it provides 20–25 percent of the exports ($32 billion in
1979) that are so essential to the U.S. balance of payments position.
Paradoxical though it may seem, the United States will continue to
reap these benefits as the developing nations step up their own food
production. Rising agricultural productivity will form the foundation
for Third World economic growth—and for the continually rising de-
mand for American farm products this growth is bound to create. Even
assuming the most ambitious increases in local production of cereals,
fats and oils, the food import needs of the developing nations will con-
tinue to rise dramatically. Higher economic growth in the developing
nations has already spurred enormous increases in the consumption of
both imported and locally produced food. Third World imports of food
from the United States rose from $2 billion to almost $10 billion during
the past decade.
However, there are also limits to how much food the U.S. itself can
produce. Since World War II, the world has become accustomed to re-
lying on the United States to serve as a cushion when food was needed
anywhere around the globe. The United States had two kinds of excess
capacity: grain surpluses, and arable land deliberately taken out of pro-
duction to stabilize domestic farm prices. Both forms of excess capacity
are now sharply reduced. Consequently, although the United States is
still “the breadbasket of the world,” providing over half of all the grain
imported by other nations, North America can no longer be expected to
keep on generating agricultural surpluses for the world.
Some dislocations will no doubt occur within the U.S. economy as
Third World nations accelerate the development of their own agricul-
ture and industry, since by actively promoting the process of economic
development abroad, the United States is helping other nations to be-
come more competitive with domestic manufacturers and producers.
Most affected will be those industries which depend on skills that can
