Chapter 2, January–June 1989  75
Possible Initiatives
I briefed you on several possible START initiatives. Of these, there 
now appears to be a consensus within the Department in favor of the 
following:
— Dropping the Ban on Single-RV Mobile ICBMs: We should allow 
single-RV mobiles, to reflect the President’s decision on Midgetman 
and make START-­mandated forces more stabilizing.
— MIRV Limit: We should replace our current proposal for an 
ICBM warhead sublimit (the utility of which is waning) with a limit 
on MIRVs—­either a sublimit on MIRVed ballistic missile warheads or 
a limit on the ratio of ballistic missile warheads to ballistic missiles—­to 
focus on deMIRVing as a key element of stabilizing reductions. I find 
the ratio approach more intriguing, but am concerned that its novelty 
may inhibit acceptance, both at home and by the Soviets.
— Short-Time-­of-Flight SLBMs: We should propose to ban short-­
time-­of-­flight testing, if we can develop an unambiguous and verifiable 
provision. (As you know, the Soviets also suggested such an initiative 
at last week’s Ministerial.3)
Although these three options are desirable, I question whether 
they alone would provide us a package substantial enough to give 
our theme credibility. We can do better, by adding to the package a ban 
on MIRVed mobile ICBMs, if political considerations warrant it, and by 
approaching the Soviets quietly to seek additional constraints on heavy 
ICBMs.
A Ban on MIRVed Mobiles
Of all possible strategic systems, MIRVed mobiles provide proba-
bly the greatest opportunity for the Soviets to break out of START lim-
its rapidly. [3 lines not declassified] With a START-­permitted rail-­mobile 
infrastructure, the Soviets could use illegal SS-24s on illegal launchers 
or as reloads for legal launchers, and each SS-24 would add 10 war-
heads to the Soviet force. Even with a MIRVed mobile ban, the Soviets 
would retain other breakout possibilities. But why not do what we 
can to limit breakout potential? A MIRVed mobile ban, by eliminating 
the infrastructure that supports the rail-­mobile system, would make it 
substantially more difficult for the Soviets to prepare for and execute a 
breakout.
We should also recall that rail mobility is an area of inherent Soviet 
advantage. We expect the Soviets to deploy up to one-­third of their 
trains out of garrison on a day-­to-­day basis to maintain survivabil-
ity. Due to political problems, our trains are likely never to get out of 
3 See Documents 17, 18, and 19.
