804  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
147.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, July 3, 1990, 0921Z
6955. Subject: START: New Kinds and Old Arguments
1. Secret—Entire text.
2. Encouraged (alarmed?) by reports that the treaty is to be signed 
in November, the delegations continue to bang away at the 49 issues, 
on the ambassadors’ list, plus the 490 issues that did not make the list. 
We are so enmeshed in these, rushing from meeting to meeting in a 
war with many fronts, that it is difficult to make an assessment of our 
overall progress. We are approaching another watershed in the form of 
a new joint draft text, to be dated July 14. We hope to spend a few days 
the following week doing a new set of annotations for the new JDT. At 
that point, both Geneva and Washington will be in a better position to 
see where things stand. We have managed to convince the Soviets that 
the period after July 14 will be called Round XIV.
3. The center ring here continues to be the Ambassadors’ daily after-
noon meetings. These continue to be substantive and generally produc-
tive sessions. Nazarkin is proceeding more slowly and cautiously in 
these meetings than we would like, but that is to be expected in the 
wake of having some of his ad ref agreements overturned by Moscow. 
We have emphasized in recent meetings non-­deployed systems, PPCM, 
sub tunnels, verification of road-­mobiles, test and training launchers, 
and definition of weapon delivery vehicle. I believe we will have ad 
ref agreement soon on test and training launchers, facility terminology, 
sub tunnels, and initial accountability. The rest of this message deals 
with other specific issues. If what follows sounds as though I am a bit 
frustrated, it is because these are frustrating times.
Weapon Delivery Vehicle
4. We have reached ad ref agreement with Nazarkin on a defi-
nition of “weapon delivery vehicle,” based upon the Kampelman–
Karpov INF letter of May 12, 1988.2 Our START definition is “the term 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D900606–0228. Secret; Immediate.
2 In telegram 5553 from NST Geneva, May 13, 1988, the Delegation to the Nuclear 
and Space Talks submitted the text of notes exchanged with the Soviet delegation stat-
ing a common understanding for a “weapon-­delivery vehicle” in the INF Treaty as “any 
ground-­launched ballistic or cruise missile in the 500 kilometer to 5500 kilometer range 
that has been flight-­tested or deployed to carry or be used as a weapon—­that is, any 
warhead, mechanism or device, which, when directed against any target, is designed 
to damage or destroy it.” (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic 
Telegrams, D880791–0303)
