1957  1433
him when we came here more than two years ago my interest and the 
interest of my government is in substance rather than words. At his 
­suggestion we entered into an agreement more than two years ago 
which was supposed to embody the principles of equality, mutual ben­
efit, and reciprocity. I could not see that that agreement has in any way 
insofar as implementation by his country is concerned demonstrated 
either equality, mutual benefit, or reciprocity. The evidence of this is 
not the unsupported statements of myself and of my government; the 
evidence is the impartial observations of the third parties named in that 
agreement to determine whether it was being carried out in good faith. 
With respect to his country the UK is witness to the fact that it has not 
even been able to carry out the subsidiary provision of that agreement. 
The UK is witness to the fact that for more than two years there has 
not been even any pretence of releasing the imprisoned persons who 
were subject to that agreement. Prisoners are now being held up to the 
very last day of completion of their sentences. I cannot see the slightest 
evidence of what he termed lenient treatment, much less any evidence 
of carrying out the terms of the agreement permitting these people to 
return to the U.S.
8. I continued. On the other hand the Government of India which 
was named by him in the Agreement with respect to its operations in 
the U.S. has not yet called to our attention a single case of obstruction 
to the return of any Chinese who desires to return to his country. The 
question, he full well knew, is not whether a majority of Chinese resid­
ing in the U.S. have returned to his country or whether a minority have 
returned. The question is whether those who desire to return have 
been and continue to be free to do so. The Government of India and 
the Indian Embassy in the U.S. are witness to the fact that they are able 
to do so.
9. I continued. Thus it is clear, not on the basis of my words but 
on the basis of impartial evidence to whose benefit that agreement has 
operated. However, apart from all this, his government full well knew 
even before we came here that the question of Americans imprisoned 
in his country and prevented from returning to the U.S. was one of the 
major obstacles to the improvement in our relations. The very terms of 
reference agreed upon by our two governments for these talks are wit­
ness to that fact. I have not and do not ask him to agree as to whether 
this position is right or wrong, but what I have asked him to recog­
nize is that it is a fact. It is a fact of fundamental importance and a fact 
which is readily within the control of his government. I agreed to the 
proposal which he made for our agreed announcement on the subject 
on the understanding that his authorities would be willing and able to 
remove this block to the improvement of our relations. In spite of all 
this his authorities deliberately are maintaining this block to our rela­
tions. It is entirely impossible for me to understand why they continue
