1957 1399 prejudicing the substantive position of either side and yet meeting the fundamental requirements. Thus our draft made it clear that renuncia­ tion of force would not prevent either side from peaceably pursuing its policies or deprive either side of the right of self-defense, but it would have application to the Taiwan area as well as general application. d. With these two drafts before us we continued our discussion of the problem of renunciation of force during our 26th and 27th meet­ ings and at our 28th meeting on December 1 you submitted a draft which was brief and couched in rather general terms. While this draft of December 1 did not entirely meet the requirements of the situation it did represent, we felt, a distinct step forward toward agreement. We were still disturbed, however, by the absence of specific reference in your December 1 draft to the Taiwan area or to the right of self-­defense, and on January 12, 1956 we suggested two simple amendments to your draft designed to cover these two points. e. In our meetings during the next six weeks much of our discus­ sion centered around the two amendments which we had proposed at our January 12 meeting. You will recall that I drew a distinction between the claims and views of the two sides with respect to the situation in the Taiwan area and the question of renouncing force as an instrument of policy. Our proposals with respect to the draft declaration on renuncia­ tion of force were not designed, and are not now designed, to bind your side to an acceptance of our policies with respect to the Taiwan area any more than our agreement to such a declaration binds us to accept your policies respecting the Taiwan area. In an effort to reassure you that our proposed amendments did not seek to prejudice your policies with respect to Taiwan, we submitted on April 19 further proposals, revising those we had put forward on January 12. f. Nevertheless, you declared our further efforts to meet your point of view unacceptable and in your arguments made it clear that what you objected to in our April 19 draft was really that it failed to prejudice the U.S. position—­not that it prejudiced your side’s position. You made it clear that your side would consider acceptable only a declaration which permitted it to continue to exploit the threat of the use of force. Then on May 11 you submitted a new draft announcement which wiped out completely the fairly extensive area of agreement which had seemingly been achieved by the submission of your December 1 draft. Your May 11 draft, unfortunately, included every element of your side’s position to which we had expressed opposition together with new unacceptable points not previously put forward. g. I have reviewed in some detail the course of our negotiations on renunciation of force because of my deep concern that we should not relax our efforts to reach agreement on this fundamental issue. Since the submission of your draft of May 11, 1956, which, as I have just pointed
