198 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement BL–30. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of Bolivian Affairs (Pitts)1  Washington, April 28, 1960. SUBJECT Possible Settlement between the Patiño Group and the GOB and COMIBOL’s ­Difficult Situation2 PARTICIPANTS ARA - Mr. Rubottom Victor ANDRADE, Ambassador of Bolivia ARA/WST/B - Mr. Pitts Ambassador Andrade referred to negotiations that had taken place last month between representatives of the Patiño group and COMIBOL at Montreal on the question of compensation to be paid for Patiño’s expropriated mining properties. On that occasion the Bolivians had indicated that they would recommend the GOB pay $4 million to Patiño in addition to retentions already paid, and the Patiño representatives had proposed $9-1/2 million. Ambassador Andrade stated that he had received instructions from his government to inform the Patiño group and the Department that $4 million was all the GOB was prepared to offer, in addition to past retention payments, as a definite and final settlement. He pointed out that making even this offer required a certain amount of political courage as there was a strong feeling in Bolivia the government owed nothing further to Patiño. Mr. Rubottom said that he was encouraged to hear of the recent negotiations and hoped for a settlement, which he thought would benefit the GOB’s public relations abroad. He added that he did not know what we could do to help bring about a settlement between the two sides. Andrade said that feelings had mellowed over the years and that he thought that it was quite possible to reach a settlement of the Patiño problem, just as a settlement was eventually reached with the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey following expropriation of that company’s properties in 1937. Mr. Rubottom reiterated that in his opinion a settlement was certainly desirable, and he hoped that some means would be found to bring this about in the near future. Mr. Rubottom then referred to information just obtained from our Embassy at La Paz indicating a serious government financial crisis caused by continued COMIBOL losses. He said that COMIBOL’s 1 Source: Department of State, ARA Files, Lot 63 D 61, “Bolivia-Memoranda of Conversations.” Confidential. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy. 2 Further documentation concerning this subject is in ARA/WST Files, Lot 63 D 61, “Bolivia-Comibol.”
