212  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
resulted in substantial losses to the Bolivian mining industry. In regard 
to the U.S. stockpile purchases of tungsten, Andrade said, Bolivians 
recall that in 1953, following nationalization of the mines, the United 
States Government refused to allow GSA contracts signed with the for-
mer private mine owners to be subrogated to the Bolivian Government. 
Andrade said he recognized there may have been legal reasons which 
prevented GSA from agreeing to subrogate these contracts. However, in 
the minds of many Bolivians, the requirement that ore sales to the U.S. 
stockpile be consummated through the former companies meant only 
that the GOB had to pay to the private owners $10 out of every $54 per 
unit of tungsten shipped, even though these companies no longer oper-
ated the mines. Andrade said that most people were not aware of the 
legal or technical reasons for the U.S. position on these matters and 
that consequently the Communists had exploited public ignorance by 
accusing the United States of having failed to give Bolivia a fair return 
on its sales of tungsten to the U.S. stockpile.
Ambassador Andrade then emphasized that COMIBOL is pres-
ently confronted with grave and serious problems which have been 
aggravated by the mounting threats of Communist-­led strikes in the 
mining sector. Andrade said he felt it necessary to “dramatize” the 
Bolivian situation in order to impress upon Mr. Dillon Bolivia’s urgent 
need for U.S. assistance. Andrade pleaded, “I do not wish Bolivia to 
become a guinea pig of the cold war.” He hoped that his government 
could avoid sending a mission to Moscow to discuss the Bolivian tin 
offer in view of the many political risks involved.
Mr. Dillon expressed interest in the Ambassador’s presentation 
and evaluation of the present Bolivian political crisis. He said that, 
according to studies of the Bolivian tin industry made by Bolivian 
and foreign technicians it appeared that a tin smelter was not needed. 
What these studies did point out was that concentration facilities and a 
rationalization of the Bolivian mining industry were urgently needed. 
Mr. Dillon also indicated that the Department was studying the effect 
a moratorium on retention payments to the former mine owners might 
have, both from the economic and legal standpoint. He said it was our 
understanding that the former mine owners had now received approx-
imately $20 million in compensation through retention payments on 
ore shipped from nationalized mines. Ambassador Andrade said he felt 
that the alternatives mentioned by Mr. Dillon would be of interest to the 
Bolivian Government and would offer an appealing counter-­proposal 
to the Soviet offer of a tin smelter. Mr. Dillon assured Ambassador 
Andrade that the Department would continue to give careful attention 
to the problems of Bolivia’s mining industry.
