Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII and pro-Soviet. In deciding its course of action, Moscow will have to bear two main considerations in mind: —The Soviets will not want their activities in Afghanistan to set back the USSR’s broader strategic-political interests in South Asia, which center fundamentally on good Indo-Soviet relations. The Soviets realize that Delhi’s main foreign policy goals are to “regionalize” and to “normalize” inter-state relations in South Asia, while minimizing the potential for involvement in the region by outside powers. —Moscow will not want to encourage, through excessively overt Soviet identification with the new Kabul regime, a “marriage of convenience” of potentially anti-Communist/anti-Soviet elements including nationalist, anti-Communist and Islamic forces in Afghanistan, which could coalesce and threaten the new regime with a “counterrevolution.” 3. What will be Soviet short term objectives? It is hazardous to attempt to predict shifts in Moscow’s policies as a result of recent events in Afghanistan. Much will depend on the Soviet assessment of the internal Afghan political scene, the degree to which the new regime turns out to be pro-Soviet and/or genuinely non-aligned. Past experience leads us to conclude that in the short run Moscow will mainly be interested in helping to insure the survivability of the new leftist regime and its consolidation of power. Moscow knows that this will be no mean feat for the new rulers in Kabul, given the background of recurring coups and violence in Afghan political history, and the degree of conservative and anti-Communist sentiment prevalent in Afghanistan. We anticipate that the Soviets will continue and probably increase economic and military aid, and work behind the scenes to bolster the new regime through material support and political “advice”. The Soviet “advice” probably will stress the importance of continuing unity among the leftists and military factions that have seized power as the only hope to establish the permanence that has eluded all Afghan regimes in recent history. We believe that the Soviets will also encourage the new regime to move quickly and dramatically to show economic and social “progress” (e.g., confiscation of Shah dynasty property). Internationally, the Soviets will seek to “consult” closely with New Delhi on the Soviet reading of events in Afghanistan in order to reassure the Indians of Soviet bona fides and to dispel possible Indian apprehensions of excessive “outside” involvement in Afghanistan. Soviet propaganda will selectively highlight the recognition and welcoming of the Afghan regime by other countries, particularly those in the Third World and the Non-Aligned Movement. Moscow will work through international organizations and its bilateral relations with other (particularly non-aligned and fellow “socialist” countries) to mobilize aid for Afghanistan. We agree that the Soviets are not likely to encourage the
