Afghanistan
869
gress, but we are willing to discuss purchases, if you want, of military
equipment. If you need the assurance from us that you could purchase
F–16s, we would be forthcoming. I know you have access to French
planes, but we are willing to sell if you so desire it. If you want it, let’s
work it out between us directly.
We are deeply committed to the security of your country. We will
be forthcoming if you want to purchase military equipment. We both
have military backgrounds, so we can deal, if you want, directly.
President Zia: We admire you personally and we are grateful. We
are a developing country and our dream is to have what is best for
our military. We have only China, France, or the USA from whom to
get aircraft; and only China or the USA for our tanks. We understand
your sensitivity about India and we also understand that the U.S. must
have an interest in Pakistan before it does anything for us. We do not
ask you to sever your relations with India, but we are sensitive about
any India veto over your relations with us. (Clifford apparently told
Mrs. Gandhi that the Brzezinski visit was only an eyewash.)4 We should
get your aid on our own merits, not because of an Indian veto or wishes.
We do not have any money for purchases. We will not get it from
Saudi Arabia unless the Saudis feel a genuine interest in Pakistan. Our
problem is that the Soviet Union is now our neighbor. I have told the
Soviets that we will resist to the end and in the meantime, with your
help, we will continue fighting the battle of Pakistan in Afghanistan.
President Carter: It is our fight too.
President Zia: I am 100 percent certain the Afghanistanis will not
surrender. The Soviets will feel the pinch.
President Carter: What is your assessment of the effectiveness of
resistance?
President Zia: Excellent. And they could do more.
President Carter: Do you think more is needed?
President Zia: Yes. Not enough has been given so far. I feel that
Pakistan should continue to fight in Afghanistan, but Pakistan must
be safe. It is in the interest of both Pakistan and the U.S. to support
the freedom fighters. But Pakistan will be punished by the Soviet Union,
and we are prepared for that. If they escalate, and they will do so in
the next few months in order to humiliate us, we will stand up and
we will need your assistance.
I could greatly improve the spirit of my Air Force if I had six more
planes, but if I am able to feed more effectively 650,000 people, I can
4 For Clifford’s trip to India, see Document 190. For Brzezinski’s trip to Pakistan,
see Document 193.
