774 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew: There is an implicit difference here, related to the point in time when the freeze comes into effect. I am also saying we need to know that number that will be frozen. If you have better language or different language, tell me. Karpov: There in no real difference here, and no difference between the treatment of aircraft assigned to the air force and naval aircraft. Burt: We are not placing ceilings on these categories of aircraft. Karpov: Everything is prejudged. First, you put together naval and air force aircraft. Second, you establish limits. Nothing changes compared to what we discussed and criticized. Bartholomew: Under what I have given you it is your business what is naval, what is air force. It doesn’t say naval or not naval, just TU–22M period. The effect is to establish an upper limit on air force and naval Backfire that will not be exceeded. It seems to me that separating them only highlights the problem of naval aircraft. This way for these purposes we do not need to know and you do not need to tell us which services have which. Look at the paragraph again. Tell me how you would express your idea of a separate naval freeze. Maybe I am missing something, but I think the general way is better. Tell me how you would fix our general language, tell me how you would implement your naval approach. Karpov: I have given you the text of a letter to the Secretary of State. The ideas in that letter deserve attention. We can find a place for a naval freeze, somewhere on the first page. That is the general idea. Bartholomew: We have an idea. Let us review the basis on which are are working. 1. We are agreed the form will be a political declaration. 2. It will include constraints on upgrade. 3. We are prepared to replace the paragraph on number with two sentences rewritten from your draft letter. “As regards the numerical limit on TU–22M airplanes, the Soviet side will not possess more than 250. This number does not include naval TU–22M airplanes, the number of which does not exceed the number as of December 31, 1990.” Karpov: Where does the 250 come from? Bartholomew: We had assumed the number 400 we originally proposed was more than your Backfire force, both air force and naval. And we further assumed this was roughly divided into 250 air force and 150 naval, for a total of 400. In fact, we think these numbers may be higher than what you actually possess, especially the air force number. We propose not to reduce Backfire. This does what you were talking to me about—­a number on air force Backfire and a freeze on naval. If you think there is a problem with this number, I’ll listen. I am trying to go as far as I can to meet your concerns.
