United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  71
ETA–26.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the 
Commercial Policy Branch, Office of International Trade 
(Fishburne)1

Washington, November 18, 1959.
SUBJECT
Economic Integration in Latin America
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Raul Prebisch, Executive Secretary of ECLA
Dr. Esteban Ivovich, Chief of Commercial Policy Division of ECLA
Mr. Milic Kybal, Director of Washington Office of ECLA
E - Mr. Mann	 	
OT - Mr. Hadraba
CPT - Mr. Fishburne
After a few words of welcome, Mr. Mann asked Dr. Prebisch to indi-
cate what he would like to take up in particular as the topic of discussion 
during the meeting. Dr. Prebisch said that he wanted to discuss regional 
economic integration in Latin America and was especially interested in 
the views of Mr. Mann as to the merits of an over-­all approach to eco-
nomic integration as contrasted with a subregional approach. His own 
feeling, he said, was that the subregional approach might prove to be 
detrimental to the formation of an over-­all Latin American Common 
Market. He did, however, make an exception for the Central American 
countries since they are already fairly closely knit and have a long history 
of attempting to attain economic integration. He based his objection to 
the subregional approach on the fact that the market in a subregion is not 
large enough for the growth of efficient industry, and protection would 
inevitably grow up on manufactured products, such as automobiles.
Mr. Mann said that experience in Europe so far has been contrary 
to the idea expressed by Dr. Prebisch. He cited the example of Benelux, 
which is being integrated successfully into the European Economic 
Community. He said that if a subregional group started out with the 
proper concept of the advantages of competition, it would be easy for 
that group to make the transition into the larger market; on the con-
trary, if the group started out with protectionist ideas, further integra-
tion would be very difficult.
Mr. Mann said that we have given encouragement to the Central 
American countries to make a start on economic integration even if less 
than all are ready to make a start. He said that we agree that it would 
be best for all five countries to act together; but if that is politically 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 820.00/11–1859. Official Use Only.
