Eastern Europe Region
139
from which East-West trade coordination grows. If the Germans believe
that Soviet markets are critical for their machine exports, then we can
retaliate by denying them our import market. We have strong laws
that allow the President to force Europe to choose between the US as
a trading partner and the Soviet Bloc as a market. Once the allies are
whipped into line, we can dictate the political terms of East-West trade.
The Soviets deeply fear a Western united economic front. If we do
not present them with one in the 1980s, the incongruities between
security burdens and economic power in NATO will create a political
backlash in the US which will destroy public support for US troops in
Europe. The Mansfield Amendment was merely a hint of what can
come if the Europeans continue to get without paying for, because we
choose not to tax them.
To move from the rhetorical to the operational, we should use the
post-Afghanistan policy with our allies to lay the basis for East-West trade
coordination at the Economic Summit in Canada next summer. Once the
Soviets see an emerging united economic front, we will have important
opportunities for our economic diplomacy.
d. Reduction of Soviet influence over 1) client states, 2) bloc states, and
3) national minorities in the USSR.
It is time to reduce the spheres of Soviet influence, and the opportu-
nities are large. We have the beginnings of a policy for the three non-
Russian areas of Soviet influence.
—Client States. In Southwest Asia, in the Horn of Africa, in Southern
Africa (Angola), in Yemen, in the Caribbean, and in Southeast Asia we
can and should bring some reverses to the Soviet projection of power.
This will involve more vigorous support for anti-Soviet movements
afoot in all areas.
—Bloc States. We already have a policy for East Europe of encourag-
ing its autonomy vis-a-vis the USSR. We must help Poland consolidate
recent gains.
—Minorities in the USSR. We can do more on the nationality ques-
tion within the USSR. The human rights policy is, of course, already
a weapon in our arsenal. In an age of nationalism, there is nothing
permanent about Soviet “internationalism” and Soviet borders—some-
thing we can imply and encourage others to say explicitly.
A competitive approach to spheres and areas of Soviet influence
will make further Soviet projection of power more difficult. A passive
containment approach will permit Soviet consolidation of recent gains
and new efforts to expand further.
The Soviet Union, however militarily strong it is becoming, suffers
enormous centrifugal political forces. A shock could bring surprising
developments within the USSR, just as we have seen occurring in
