3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
58
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Brezhnev went on to say that people like Sakharov were traitors to
their country, were linked with espionage organizations, and at
meetings in his home Sakharov had received outright criminals. There
were some stories about some illegal currency operations they had
been involved in. As for the United States, he would note that the U.S.
Constitution did not provide for the right to work, the right to educa-
tion and the right to social welfare. Up to now, there was no equality for
women in the United States. He had read in the New York Times of Jan-
uary 9 of this year that U.S. economists proceeded from the premise
that the United States would have full employment if it were able to re-
duce unemployment to the level of four percent of the labor force;13 in
other words, according to the New York Times, millions of people
would still be unemployed, and yet U.S. economists considered that
full employment. In February of this year the United States had 7 mil-
lion unemployed, among whom there were twice as many blacks
as whites. 48 percent of young people in the U.S. under 24 years of
age were unemployed. These were data of the U.S. Department of
Labor. Gromyko added that this represented “discrimination within
discrimination.”
Brezhnev said that between the years 1960 and 1974 the FBI had car-
ried on surveillance on 500,000 citizens accused of subversive activities,
although their actions did not go beyond lawful activities. According to
a Congressional report on intelligence activities,14 the CIA had unlaw-
fully opened 250,000 letters from abroad between the years of 1953 and
1973. Brezhnev further cited an open letter by James Baldwin, ad-
dressed to President Carter, in which he wrote “too many of us are in
prison, too many of us go hungry, for too many of us the doors are
closed.”15 That letter had been published in the New York Times and
Baldwin spoke of the stepsons of America who were being persecuted
because they refused to acquiesce in racial discrimination. Baldwin had
also mentioned the Wilmington Ten—nine blacks and one woman—
who had received sentences totalling 282 years in prison, only because
they had protested against discrimination in the schools. Baldwin
wrote about a trial in Charleston, North Carolina, where three blacks
faced the same prospect as the Wilmington Ten. They were accused of
arson as a pretext for imprisoning them for protesting. In conclusion,
Baldwin had called on the President to correct this situation. So far he
had received no response to his open letter to President Carter.
13 Article not found.
14 See Hearings Before the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Re-
spect to Intelligence Activities of the United States Senate, vol. 4. (Washington, D.C.: Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1976)
15 See James Baldwin, “An Open Letter to Mr. Carter,” The New York Times, January
23, 1977, p. 153.
