658  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
specifying the situation in a little more detail. Bartholomew: I think this 
will be a difficulty.
Bartholomew: On para 14, you speak of an agreed distance between 
where weapons are stored and a base where heavy bombers with non-­
nuclear armaments are based. What is your concept, and do you have 
a distance in mind? Karpov: Both in the negotiations and in the minis-
ter’s meetings we have already talked about basing separately heavy 
bombers with nuclear weapons and heavy bombers without nuclear 
weapons. We are trying to strengthen this idea by separating bases 
with a certain distance, so one type would not be close to another. This 
would help guarantee the distinction between nuclear and non-­nuclear 
heavy bombers.
Bartholomew: Is there a particular number you have in mind? 
Omelichev: Let the experts look at it. Our preliminary analysis indi-
cates 200–300 km. We should task the specialists at the negotiations, let 
them argue and work out what that distance should be.
Bartholomew: On para 15, what sort of questions are for Geneva? 
Karpov: They are already discussing those questions in Geneva. There 
are things we don’t talk about in Ministerial meetings, for example 
technical questions. We are not here going to solve all these questions. 
It is useful to show there are in Geneva more aspects under discussion. 
This is more a statement than a proposal.
Bartholomew: Turning to SLCMs,3 beginning with para 3. This 
may be a translation problem, but the phrase “for every subsequent 
five year period” is not clear. Can you explain it. Karpov: This is the 
same thing we discussed in Moscow. Bartholomew: It means today I 
give you a declaration for five years, and a year from now I give you 
one for the five years from that date? Karpov. Yes, just what we talked 
about in Moscow. There are no new nuances.
Bartholomew: Let us look at para 6. Karpov: The same text as in 
Moscow. Bartholomew: This says “equipped for SLCMs,” in Moscow 
we said “capable of deploying.” Karpov: You are right, there is a 
small distinction. Our specialists asked the question what does “capa-
ble of deploying” mean. There have to be signs. They explained that 
being equipped for is a sign of being capable. This is why we got to 
“equipped for.”
Bartholomew: Let me make an editorial comment. I advise you to 
find a way of saying in Russian “capable of deploying,” which is the 
phrase in the draft declaration we worked in Moscow. The reason is 
the phrase “equipped for” comes too close to giving us a big problem 
in terms of our neither confirm nor deny policy with respect to nuclear 
3 Not found.
