Romania 663 expressed his desire for me to extend my stay for this purpose. While this proved impossible this time, a field trip at a later date—perhaps combined with stopovers in Warsaw and Budapest—is worth considering. (C) The Romanians were obviously very appreciative of the trip and US support generally. (Indeed, as Blumenthal stepped off the plane on arrival, Mitran, Andrei’s Special Assistant, acted like a cheshire cat who had just swallowed a canary.) The visit received substantial press treatment, though the Romanians were careful not to overdo it. Despite his initial reservations, the Secretary proved to be an effective and skillful envoy. He was open and businesslike in his presentations and quickly established good rapport with all his discussion partners. I was particularly impressed with his quick learning curve and his intuitive political judgment. (C) How the Soviets will react to the visit is difficult to determine at this point. While its symbolic significance will hardly be lost on them, I doubt that they will react too strongly publicly. Privately, they will probably take the Romanians to task for it. But whatever their irritation, it is hardly going to affect their basic attitude toward outstanding US- Soviet bilateral issues such as SALT. They will continue to give these priority while trying to paper-over differences with Romania. (C) The Romanians clearly feel it is in their long-run interest to be able to demonstrate as broad a range of support as possible, even if this intensifies Moscow’s momentary ire. They have made a carefully calculated gamble and are confident that they can handle the situation. They do not, however, intend to push too hard. But they are determined to maintain, and where possible expand, the bounds of autonomy. (C) Within this framework, they are likely to look to the US for concrete signs of support, especially in the economic field, as a means of reducing their dependence on Moscow and decreasing their vulnerability to Soviet pressure. We ought therefore to think carefully about the degree of support and encouragement we are willing to give them and its potential impact on other relationships, particularly those with Moscow. (C)
