1977 159 issues involving deterrence and the possible employment or threat of employment of nuclear weapons. (TS) Clearly, the question of whether existing nuclear employment policy should be continued or modified, and if so, in what respects, is of greatest importance. In providing their comments to assist in preparing the report, the Joint Chiefs of Staff judged that the rationale used in developing current nuclear doctrine appears valid for the immediate future. They recommend that current nuclear policy as described in NSDM–242 be retained. (TS) The analyses and discussions of PRM–10 suggest that there is still no consensus with respect to some elements of the general war targeting criteria described in NSDM–242. It is apparent that follow-­on work will be required in this area, and I intend to continue such study. I am not, therefore, prepared to make a final recommendation on the ultimate disposition of NSDM–242 at this time. The attached report therefore does not present that issue for decision by you. (S) Nevertheless, whatever judgments may ultimately be made on its details, NSDM–242 represented a major step in nuclear employment policy. It promulgated for the first time a single national policy for employment of both strategic and theater nuclear forces—­i.e., for planning how our existing forces would be used if necessary. It is a major advance in providing an opportunity for greater participation by the (civilian) National Command Authorities in nuclear planning, and for rationalizing the planning process. Moreover, in addition to establishing objectives and policy for nuclear weapons employment planning, NSDM–242 also specified several tasks to be undertaken in the areas of crisis management, declaratory policy, political-­military interface in the planning process, and Presidential review of the resulting operational plans. For a variety of reasons, these requirements for implementing the overall policy have never all been completely satisfied. I believe that reemphasis on these areas will now be needed regardless of the eventual judgments made on NSDM–242. (TS) With respect to the status of current guidance, I endorse the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the policy stated in NSDM–242 appears valid for the immediate future, and I recommend that NSDM– 242 be retained for employment planning purposes. I do this because even if (as is quite possible) further analysis indicates that significant policy modifications should be directed at some future point, adequate lead time will be necessary to transition to a new employment policy. Indeed, because of the complexity of the planning process, while some limited modifications might be introduced more rapidly, two or more years would be needed to develop new planning guidance and fully translate it into a new general war plan (SIOP). It would be essential
