Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Senghor, etc? Sadat was very eloquent on these points with the Vice President, and perhaps Fritz has reported this to you already.12 I know that our commitment is to majority rule, and not to any particular individuals or orientation. Yet the perceived effect of our policy is to favor the left and the guerrillas. Moreover, in Angola, we are beginning to inch up to Neto, who does not even command the support of his own people. Perhaps the British will succeed in seducing Nkomo—but if they do not, then maybe we should choose to quietly disengage and lower our own direct involvement.13 This will not be a satisfactory outcome, but it may be better than being drawn into a massive conflict between the forces of apartheid and Soviet/Cuban dominated guerrillas. A final thought: our foreign policy till now has been heavily “contractual.” Yet political problems cannot be resolved by patient negotiation of peace contracts or agreements alone. At some point, it is necessary to bring a situation to a head—to have a brief crisis or confrontation even—and then to resolve it, with one’s own forces marshalled in the background to provide the needed sanction or leverage. This is essentially true of the Middle East and of U.S.-Soviet relations. A period of tension with Israel is probably an unavoidable prelude to a settlement; U.S.-Soviet frictions in the past contributed to the development of mutually understood rules of the game governing European affairs and the strategic equation. The same may now be needed regarding human rights and intervention in Third World problems. A period of friction or crisis is not the same thing as a confrontation—and it should not be viewed as mindless advocacy of conflict. But unless some situations are brought to a head, they are likely to fester, with destructive consequences for either regional or international peace. Making the right choice at the critical moment is ultimately the basic test of statesmanship. [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 12 The President wrote “no” in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. Reference is to Mondale’s trip to the Middle East; he met with Sadat in Cairo on July 3 and 4.
