440
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Senghor, etc? Sadat was very eloquent on these points with the Vice
President, and perhaps Fritz has reported this to you already.12
I know that our commitment is to majority rule, and not to any par-
ticular individuals or orientation. Yet the perceived effect of our policy is
to favor the left and the guerrillas. Moreover, in Angola, we are begin-
ning to inch up to Neto, who does not even command the support of his
own people.
Perhaps the British will succeed in seducing Nkomo—but if they
do not, then maybe we should choose to quietly disengage and lower
our own direct involvement.13 This will not be a satisfactory outcome,
but it may be better than being drawn into a massive conflict between
the forces of apartheid and Soviet/Cuban dominated guerrillas.
A final thought: our foreign policy till now has been heavily
“contractual.” Yet political problems cannot be resolved by patient ne-
gotiation of peace contracts or agreements alone. At some point, it is
necessary to bring a situation to a head—to have a brief crisis or con-
frontation even—and then to resolve it, with one’s own forces mar-
shalled in the background to provide the needed sanction or leverage.
This is essentially true of the Middle East and of U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions. A period of tension with Israel is probably an unavoidable pre-
lude to a settlement; U.S.-Soviet frictions in the past contributed to the
development of mutually understood rules of the game governing Eu-
ropean affairs and the strategic equation. The same may now be needed
regarding human rights and intervention in Third World problems. A
period of friction or crisis is not the same thing as a confrontation—and
it should not be viewed as mindless advocacy of conflict. But unless
some situations are brought to a head, they are likely to fester, with de-
structive consequences for either regional or international peace.
Making the right choice at the critical moment is ultimately the basic
test of statesmanship.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
12 The President wrote “no” in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. Refer-
ence is to Mondale’s trip to the Middle East; he met with Sadat in Cairo on July 3 and 4.
See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August
1978, Document 259, footnote 2. For Mondale’s recollections about the trip, see The Good
Fight, pp. 205–209.
13 The President underlined “to quietly engage” and wrote “a good possibility” in
the right-hand margin next to the sentence.
