498  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
approaches to Moscow are by far the most heavily-­defended area in 
the Bloc. Moscow’s defenses are estimated to have a high capability to 
engage large-­scale attack at altitudes up to 60,000 feet under all weather 
conditions, but they probably remain vulnerable to low altitude attack.
159. In general Bloc air defense capabilities would be as follows:
a. Against penetrations conducted during daylight and in clear 
weather, at altitudes between about 5,000 and 35,000 feet, the capabil­
ities of the system would be greatest. Above 35,000 feet they would 
begin to diminish and above 45,000 feet would fall off markedly. At 
altitudes below 5,000 feet they would also be progressively reduced.
b. Against penetrations conducted at night and under poor visi­
bility conditions, the capabilities of the system would be considerably 
reduced.
c. Against varied penetration tactics utilizing altitude stacking, 
diversionary maneuver, decoys and electronic countermeasures, the 
capabilities of the system would be diminished through disruption and 
saturation.
160. Over the next five years there will be significant improve­
ments in the performance characteristics of most Soviet air defense 
equipment, including fighters, radars, and communications and con­
trol equipments. Air defense guided missile and unguided rocket capa­
bilities will increase. These developments will considerably improve 
Bloc capabilities for all-­weather defense against manned aircraft and 
cruise-­type missiles. Nevertheless, at the end of the period, warning 
times available to Bloc targets in border areas will probably be deficient 
for fighter interceptors and marginal for surface-­to-­air missile defenses 
against the highest performance Western aircraft and cruise-­type mis­
siles. The Bloc will also continue to have difficulty in opposing very 
low altitude attack, air defense electronic systems will still be subject to 
disruption, and the USSR will probably not have in operation a weapon 
system capable of successfully intercepting ballistic missiles.
161. Offensive Capabilities in Western Europe. The 22 Soviet line divi­
sions in East Germany, together with forces available in adjacent areas, 
could initiate an attack without reinforcement by major units. To aug­
ment the strength of the ground attack and to seize bridgeheads and 
other key objectives in NATO territory, the USSR could mount initial 
airborne operations from within Soviet territory. We estimate that in 
the European area, the Soviet airlift capacity is sufficient for troops and 
light equipment equivalent to 4–5 divisions (of 7,500 men each) in a 
one-­day operation, and 8–9 divisions in a five-­day operation, using half 
the civil and military transport aircraft normally in that area. Airlift 
operations on this scale would be limited to the radius of the smaller 
aircraft employed (i.e. about 550 n.m.).
