Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I “We will speak frankly about injustice both at home and abroad. We do not intend, however, to be strident or polemical, but we do believe that an abiding respect for human rights is a human value of fundamental importance and that it must be nourished. We will not comment on each and every issue, but we will from time to time comment when we see a threat to human rights, when we believe it constructive to do so. “Q. Mr. Secretary, Barry Schweid of AP. On the same subject, one of the local pundits yesterday called it sudden diplomacy, suggesting that this speaking out hasn’t been very well thought out, particularly its impact on diplomacy. “You refer to your trip to Moscow. Do you think the statement you have made on Sakharov and your general view on human rights will have an impact, a negative impact, on negotiations with the Soviet Union? Indeed, isn’t that what Mr. Dobrynin [Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the U.S.] called to tell you the other day? “Secretary Vance: I do not believe that it will have a negative impact. As I indicated, we will from time to time speak out. I have discussed the matter with Mr. Dobrynin, but I am sure that our discussions with the Soviet Union on a whole range of matters will not be adversely affected by what we have said.” After discussion of several issues, Vance again responded to questions relating to human rights violations: “Q. Marvin Kalb, CBS. The President said yesterday that perhaps the statement about Sakharov should have been made by him or by you. Yet the day before the State Department made its statement on Sakharov, it did come out with a statement on Czechoslovakia, which apparently had been cleared. Are you not running the danger, sir, of setting up what amounts to a double standard of the manner in which you respond to violations of human rights in the Soviet Union and in smaller countries where there is not a direct, vital interest conflict? “Secretary Vance: This is a very complex area. As I indicated, we will not be speaking out in every case. We will speak out when we believe it advisable to do so, but that will not be, as I said, in each and every case. It is an area where, as I said, I think we have an obligation to make our views frankly known; but we hope we can do it without being strident, as I said, or intrusive in an improper way. “Q. Isn’t that really setting up a kind of double standard where the Department, or the Administration, might feel itself more free in condemning human rights in smaller countries where there is not a vital interest affected? “Secretary Vance: No. I hope we will not have a double standard. I think what we have done so far would indicate we have not.
