1280  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and expressed understanding at various points but did not indi-
cate any substantive reaction to the content of the message. He said 
he wanted to discuss this with his advisers, particularly Minister of 
Mines, and Hydrocarbons, PEREZ Alfonso, and that he would be able 
to see them tomorrow night for this purpose. I mentioned that the tele-
gram had been sent NIACT and that I felt Ambassador Sparks would 
await in Washington3 a reply from the President. President Betancourt 
responded by saying in that case he would see Perez Alfonso tonight 
and would convey to me tomorrow his decision as to whether he 
would prefer that Mr. Mann visit Caracas.4 It became obvious during 
the conversation that the President was turning over in his mind the 
relative desirability of having the United States’ position become 
known in Venezuela following a visit of Mr. Mann as compared with 
having it become known through a formal note to the Foreign Office. 
He also expressed tentative approval for his own part of a visit by Mr. 
Mann to Caracas.
I asked the President how he felt about the outcome of the 
Santiago Conference5 and the President said he was very satisfied. He 
said that he had been somewhat disturbed by the editorial reaction of 
most of the newspapers in Caracas and indicated he felt most of the 
editorialists had exhibited a lack of intelligence or of understanding of 
the Conference.
From the Santiago Conference the conversation turned to the 
Dominican Republic and the situation in the Caribbean. The President 
referred to the continued propaganda being issued by Trujillo against 
him and spoke also of the libelous statements that are being distrib-
uted through the mails concerning MUÑOZ Marin. I spoke of our 
interest in international free trade and asked the President if in his 
opinion Venezuela will endeavor to exercise a complete boycott against 
the Dominican Republic. The President understood that my remarks 
had specific reference to the matter of ships proceeding here from 
the Dominican Republic and said that although the Government had 
3 Sparks was in Washington for an appearance before the Senate Permanent 
Investigating Committee on Government Operations regarding the Bolivian aid pro-
gram. (724.5 MSP/8–1259)
4 The Venezuelan Government responded that Mann should not come to Caracas 
since his visit would not help to explain the U.S. position. Perez Alfonso also handed the 
Chargé a memo analyzing and rejecting the U.S. position. (411.0016–2859)
5 Reference is to the Fifth Meeting of consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs 
of American States, held in Santiago, Chile, August 12–18, 1959, which resulted in the 
so-­called Declaration of Santiago de Chile that restated the general inter-American com-
mitment to democracy and human rights, and another that directed the Inter-American 
Peace Committee to study the whole question of political conflicts such as had recently 
been occurring and to report to the Eleventh Inter-American Conference, scheduled to 
meet in Quito in 1960.
