1446 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement agencies will be placed in proper perspective and the tension surround­ ing these problems will tend to disappear. 3. Level and caliber of national representatives to the Agency: Many governments are sending medium or low level diplomatic personnel to Board meetings and are showing signs of reducing the caliber of future representation. We are pressing a plan to facilitate future high-­caliber participation by holding less frequent and shorter Board meetings in the future and have solicited appropriate capitals for support (TAB C). The level of the U.S. diplomatic and technical delegation is appropri­ ate. The Soviet representative has long been pressing for an advisory committee to the IAEA consisting of scientists of international reputa­ tion but the U.S. has resisted the establishment of such a committee as it might jeopardize the role of the Board of Governors and ultimately damage, rather than aid, the Agency. It might be useful to emphasize the importance of Chairman McCone’s presence in Vienna during the opening days of the Second General Conference of the IAEA regardless of the positions the U.S. may find it necessary to take on the issues arising. HIS TALKS WITH PERRIN, FRENCH HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR ATOMIC ENERGY McCone reports that Perrin indicates that the French want (a) infor­ mation on fuel to guide them in building a gaseous diffusion plant, (b) design information, or (c) alternatively, a submarine reactor which they feel was promised them last December. We have made it clear to the French that it is not legally possible for us to provide Restricted Data or a submarine reactor to them until a bilateral agreement has been con­ cluded and has laid before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy for 60 days. A U.S. team will visit Paris in mid-­September to survey French security. A technical team will also have exploratory discussions of the possible scope of a French agreement. However, State and AEC agree that we cannot now answer most of the technical questions submitted to us by the French. You may wish to emphasize to Chairman McCone the high polit­ ical importance of the successful completion of a bilateral agreement with the French enabling us to aid them with their nuclear submarine program, assuming security guarantees are adequate. Thus far the AEC and DOD have been fully cooperating with the Department in doing all that can be done to promote progress toward its completion.
