Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America 1017 1. Unless you perceive objection, please deliver the following message, and make the following points, to Foreign Minister Silveira: Begin quote: Dear Mr. Minister: I have asked Ambassador Crimmins to make himself available to you and want to convey to you, by means of this letter and his presence, the importance we attach to our relationship with Brazil. We wish to affirm our desire to continue the consultative processes which have served both countries so well over the years. My colleagues in this administration would welcome your views on the various issues—bilateral, regional and global—with which our two governments will be confronted in coming months. For my own part, I am looking forward to the early opportunity of meeting you. Please accept my best wishes. Sincerely, Cyrus Vance. End quote. 2. You can make any or all of the following points orally to Silveira: —I am deeply concerned that events and newspaper stories of the past week2 not affect US-Brazilian relations; —We would like to move ahead promptly to consult on the full range of issues outstanding between us, including the nuclear. I recognize that the differences on some issues are deep, but I am committed to attempting to reduce them, where that may be possible, by frank consultation; —I believe we owe the GOB an early and authoritative presentation of the perspectives President Carter’s administration brings to the nuclear issue. We would be prepared to send a representative to Brasilia for that purpose at Silveira’s convenience. —While we have not worked out detailed nuclear policies—and do not intend to consult on important issues through the press—I would like the Foreign Minister to know that in his discussions with Chancellor Schmidt, Vice President Mondale conveyed President Carter’s interest in moving toward official discussions with both the FRG and Brazil on nuclear exports and non-proliferation issues.3 (FYI: 2 The Washington Post reported on January 26, 1977, that Vice President Mondale, during his meeting in Bonn with West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, requested the FRG curb its sale of nuclear technology to Brazil. The Los Angeles Times also reported the same week that Carter objected to a German agreement to construct a plant in Brazil for reprocessing spent nuclear reactor fuel “because it would give Brazil plutonium, which can be used only for making nuclear weapons.” (David Broder and Michale Getler, “U.S.-Bonn Agree to Early Talks on Nuclear Curb,” Washington Post, January 26, 1977, p. A1; “Mondale Wins German Promise on Nuclear Sales,” Los Angeles Times, January 25, 1977, p. A2) 3 Mondale met with Schmidt on January 25 in Bonn. He reported on his meeting in telegram Bonn 590 from Mondale to Brzezinski, September 25. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic, 1–3/77) In his memoirs, Brzezinski wrote that after Mondale expressed “our strong opposition to the deal,” Schmidt “stood firm” and gave only his “assurance” that the FRG “would observe existing international safeguards” against the proliferation of weaponsmaking materials. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 131)
