Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 393 All other launchers not associated with deployed missiles are really non-­deployed launchers, but one need not use this term, since they all have their own names as noted above. I think this indicates a possible solution to the current messy and quite unnecessary deadlock. If anyone sees a flaw in this, please call right away. 8. I want to call attention to the crucial role Ellie Sutter has played in this whole battle over unit of account. What seemed like a simple fix in Wyoming has proven to be anything but simple. Ellie has supplied a major portion of the intellectual effort on this, plus preparing much of the massive paperwork that was required. Mobile ICBMs 9. Everyone is awaiting the decision on mobiles. If things are delayed another week, it will be physically difficult to merge the mobiles language into the JDT by the end of the round. Rick might insist that we do it anyway, of course. However, simply telling the Soviets the decision has been made and the merge will be carried out at the beginning of next round would be sufficient to satisfy the Soviets and preserve the Secretary’s reputation. In any case, the details of how the merge should be carried out should remain a delegation responsibility and not allowed to become an interagency agenda item in Washington during the break. 10. We still are not sure whether we will present the JCS concepts for U.S. road-­mobile ICBM basing here or not. Burt and Brooks both strongly believe the DEL should not change its game plan just because an agency at home has an idea for changing the U.S. position. The presentation we made on rail garrisons was heavily larded with caveats, which did not come through in the reporting. Anything we say on concepts for road-­mobiles will naturally be treated even more carefully. In the future, if something happens in Washington which would make carrying out some part of our instructions a mistake, please stimulate the backstopping apparatus to send us a cable to that effect. 11. The rumors of major changes in the U.S. approach to restricted areas do not fill us with joy. You can easily imagine the effect here if we jettison a concept long agreed at the highest level and carefully elaborated in agreed Treaty text (restricted areas) for one that is highly controversial (deployment areas). New Kinds of SOA 12. Nazarkin has hinted at a solution to the disagreement caused by the Soviet proposal to ban new “kinds” of SOA in Article V. In response to our objections that this prohibition is too vague and the Treaty should deal with specific systems, he indicated that this proposal might be withdrawn if the U.S. agreed to ban ASBMs and ICCMs. We, of course, have had placeholder language on these for
