National Security Policy  33
IV. The earliest availability of a land-­based 1500 mile missile with 
a solid propellant engine is thus 1963, but it will probably be delayed 
until 1964–65, notwithstanding a maximum effort. To develop a solid 
propellant ICBM is a still more difficult undertaking and its earliest 
availability is 1965, while 1966–67 is a more realistic date, unless a crash 
program is initiated. There is thus a gap of some five years or more 
between an early IOC of present IRBM and ICBM and the start of their 
possible replacement by solid propellant missiles. This gap justifies the 
consideration of a systematic “product improvement” program on one 
present IRBM (Thor) and one ICBM (Titan) to accompany the steady 
growth of operational capability of both. We should like to emphasize 
that the value of liquid propellant engines and of missiles using them 
need not end with the present models. It appears that the present types 
of airframes and engines can be comparatively readily modified to use 
storable, self-­igniting (“hypergolic”), propellants, which will give them 
the advantages of solid propellant engines—­simplicity and thus greater 
reliability, rapid reaction time, easier transportability, reduced ground 
support equipment and operational personnel. For a rather long time to 
come liquid propellant engines will carry heavier payloads for longer 
distances than will solid propellant engines of the same total weight.
While these considerations justify a steady improvement program 
for the Thor IRBM, they are truly compelling in the case of ICBM Titan. 
This is a missile with a great growth potential as an ICBM of unlimited 
range and very large payload. If anti-­missile-­missiles become effec­
tive the large payload of Titan may become a necessity, to carry along 
sophisticated devices to overcome the defenses. Solid propellant ICBM 
of similar payload capacity are presently not within sight. A retaliatory 
ICBM force made up of Titans with sophisticated nose cones and of 
solid propellant ICBM’s with much lighter (and therefore not so sophis­
ticated) nose cones, may prove to have an exceptional effectiveness.
V. We as a nation seem to commit ourselves to a substantial effort 
toward space exploration. In any such program the propulsion is an 
essential and the major part. For economy’s sake we should use for 
this purpose rockets developed as ballistic missiles. Titan even in its 
presently conceived form is a better booster for space missions than 
is Atlas. A systematic improvement program on it will provide a sat­
isfactory booster for rather advanced space missions. For still more 
advanced missions, such as manned flights to the moon and beyond, 
far larger and more advanced engines will be required than are now 
in the state of development. To avoid being caught in a crash pro­
gram, it is advantageous to initiate preliminary work on such engines 
in the near future.
