892 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 558. Letter 36 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 36 Washington, April 2, 1956 Dear Alex: With reference to my last letter No. 35, of March 23, 1956, I am now enclosing copies of the two highly classified memoranda of Krishna Menon’s recent conversations in Washington, with Sherman Adams and [text not declassified]. I am sending you the text of these two doc­ uments since the flavor is somewhat different from that described in my last letter. My description was based on an oral briefing given me by [text not declassified]. My last letter was written before I had seen the memo of conversation with [text not declassified]. My oral briefing was based on a conversation of [text not declassified] and may more accu­ rately convey the tenor of the conversation than the written memo. I have no way of judging that, but in any event we think that you should have the written summary of the conversation. We discussed this latest Krishna Menon move with the Secretary shortly after I wrote you last. His reaction was that the move was probably an effort by the Chinese Communists to take an intermedi­ ate step in the direction of an eventual Foreign Ministers’ Meeting. His off-­hand reaction was that we had nothing to gain by assenting to Krishna Menon’s suggestion, and that we would be walking into a trap if we did. We all anticipate that Nehru may follow up on Krishna Menon’s initiative when he comes to Washington in July. This looks as if it is preparatory to a more active espousal of this proposal on the part of the Indians. Wang’s more flexible and moderate attitude at the last meeting on March 29 amply confirms our feeling that the Chinese Communists are not contemplating an immediate break. Mr. Robertson is in Richmond today but we will have a meeting in ample time to consider the latest developments and get your instructions to you before the next meeting a week from today. Drumwright rather objects to giving up Holdridge for any extended period. He points out that the important reporting on Main­ land China developments from Hong Kong will suffer. With the pat­ tern of the talks now getting pretty set, and with the big job of revision 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Eyes Only; Official–Informal.
