World Hunger and Food Policy
709
Much more is required and leadership from the Executive Office could
ensure that all views were considered in a policy evaluation.
In fact, what appears to be needed is to reform the present patch-
work set of authorities and functions and, during the interim, establish
a temporary coordinating mechanism which ensures that the various
government and private interests are taken into consideration in
making and executing policy over the short run and until the reforms
are implemented.
—More attention should be given to the “demand” side of hunger, i.e., the
ability of people to buy food. One key element in overcoming world
hunger is to promote adequate development to enable people to earn
enough money to buy the food they need. Simply focusing on in-
creased production might lower food costs, but unless the question of
hunger is looked at in an overall developmental context, we will be ad-
dressing only the supply side and not the demand side. This argues for
avoiding too much of a shift from AID to the Department of Agricul-
ture in dealing with the problem of world hunger.
—There is no objective analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of
policy recommendations, and no alternatives suggested. The President needs
to know the political and economic implications of a recommendation
and the various alternatives available before deciding on a policy. Oth-
erwise, there is no way to judge how one recommendation impacts on
overall Administration objectives in this area.
—The report does not address the OMB Food Policy Reorganization Ini-
tiative or the AID and Brookings Development Assistance studies.3
IV. Next Steps
A. It is recommended that you send a memorandum to Secretary
Bergland commending him for the very welcome, thoughtful, and in-
novative report. Furthermore, the letter should indicate that plans are
to include Secretary Bergland as a principal participant in the interna-
tional food policy issue. A proposed draft letter to the Secretary of Ag-
riculture is attached.4
3 For information regarding the AID/DCC and Brookings studies, see footnotes 8
and 9, Document 216. As part of a larger review of the economic policy and analysis ma-
chinery of the Federal government, the President, in an August 25 memorandum to
heads of Executive Agencies and Departments, indicated that he had directed OMB’s
Reorganization Project Staff to begin a review of the organization and structure of Fed-
eral food and nutrition programs. The review would focus on seven areas: food produc-
tion and marketing; regulatory activities affecting food; food research and education; in-
ternational activities; commodity procurement and distribution; aquaculture activities;
and conservation activities. (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents August 29, 1977,
pp. 1249–50)
4 A draft undated and unsigned memorandum from the President to Bergland is at-
tached but not printed.
