3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
535
In the light of the present US position a situation emerges where
we follow completely different roads in the Middle East and it would
be more than unjustified to count on our support of what is schemed
with regard to that region. Now we do not see how the positions of the
USSR and the US can be bridged. We tried to do it more than once but
each time the US side destroyed those bridges. Such are the facts.
In this connection I wish also to tell you beforehand that we shall
strongly object to having now the UN Security Council or the General
Assembly—which, by the way, is not competent at all to decide such
questions—involved in all that business in order to sanctify, so to say,
the separate deal between Israel and Egypt by the authority of these in-
ternational bodies.
Finally, I wish to draw your attention, Mr. President, to one more
question fraught with very serious consequences. According to the in-
coming information, attributed also to US officials, efforts are now
made to establish a new system of military relationship in the Middle
East under the US auspices, to introduce in fact permanent military
presence of the United States there. I must say that if the question really
were of the presence of the US armed forces in the Middle East region it
would only further complicate the situation. And in general the in-
crease of the US military presence in that and adjacent areas would seri-
ously destabilize the international situation on the whole.
I express these considerations in all candor, Mr. President, being
guided by both the interests of ensuring really lasting and just peace in
the Middle East and the interests of the Soviet-US relations in a broad
sense. I had more than one occasion to give my views on the questions
of Soviet-US relations. Now I would like only to note that there is a
number of issues the solution of which requires our joint efforts. On our
part we are ready—and we prove it in practice—to seek mutually ac-
ceptable solutions to these problems.
One of these problems is a Middle East settlement. In our deep
conviction the policy of the Soviet Union on this issue meets the in-
terests of not only the Arab but also of other states including the US if,
of course, one is to proceed from the real interests of peace and not from
some considerations of momentary nature.
In conclusion I wish to stress the following. Whatever direction the
course of events in the Middle East may take the Soviet Union’s reso-
lute position was and is that there should be no war there, that a lasting
and just peace be established, that the possibility be really ensured for
all the Arab peoples, including Palestinians, as well as for the people of
Israel to exist and develop as sovereign states. This is our unswerving
policy and we intend to follow it in future.
At the same time we would like to count on the restoration—and
on our part we are ready for that—of active cooperation between the
