20
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
plan for territorial compromise presented by the Arabs or “to discuss”
after an interim period the issue of sovereignty, to which it said that “a
solution is possible.” As an indication of the problem before us, this
was considered a major advance by many Israelis but has made little
impression in Egypt, since it falls far short of what Sadat feels he needs.
It appears that there is little room for further softening of the Israeli po-
sition except, perhaps, in return for a commitment by Sadat to pursue a
Sinai agreement.
Both parties have accepted the need for an interim period between
the beginning of the implementation of any West Bank agreement and
the ultimate disposition of territory and sovereignty. This provides us
with the ability to argue that irrevocable changes need not, indeed
cannot, occur immediately. It does not, however, diminish Sadat’s de-
sire to receive a commitment that those changes will indeed take place
nor Begin’s difficulty in giving such a commitment.
What Each Man Wants
Conceptually, the needs of the two leaders can be expressed as
follows:
—Begin, in order to justify the political and personal crises he
would face in agreeing in principle to withdraw from the West Bank,
will want from Sadat a commitment to see the Sinai negotiations
through to a final solution which includes the removal of the Egyptian
military threat and normalization of relations. It remains to be seen, in
fact, whether even then he could agree to an ultimate relinquishment
of Israeli control (except for security strongpoints) to an Arab author-
ity which would come to exercise many if not all the attributes of
sovereignty.
—Sadat, in order to justify the political crisis within the Arab
world which would follow his agreement to pursue a Sinai agreement
before West Bank details have been worked out, will want from Begin a
commitment to withdraw from the West Bank and Gaza subject to ne-
gotiation of the security and other details of a settlement, to freeze Is-
raeli settlements, and to allow the Palestinians a meaningful voice in
the eventual disposition of that territory.
Begin, in addition, wants to be assured that if he makes the neces-
sary commitments on the West Bank there will be someone on the Arab
side with whom Israel can negotiate. He understands that Sadat’s goal
is to draw Hussein into the negotiations, but will want some assurance
that, if that proves impossible, Sadat himself will undertake to nego-
tiate at least the general guidelines of a settlement for the West Bank
and Gaza and will negotiate a Sinai settlement even if there is no actual
change in the status quo on the West Bank/Gaza.
