sign the treaty in the form I had presented; that, however, what Great Britain wanted was to get France into the treaty as they feared that if France did not come in, it would probably prevent any treaty being made. I replied that I understood this but that I had not yet had any suggestions from France other than their draft treaty with all their reservations and the provisions about war as an instrument of individual, spontaneous and independent policy. That draft, I said to him, could not be understood to mean much of anything. I said that the entire European press was in favor of the anti-war treaty idea, except the press in France, but that even in France there was some support of it. I added that Mr. Herrick had said to me that he did not believe that all the press reports in France represented the opinion of the Government. Sir Esme said that he was surprised that the French press was so hostile and I said that I was too. I gave the Ambassador clearly to understand that I did not propose to enter into a treaty with so many reservations as to destroy its efficacy. The Ambassador then said that Sir Austen would like to have the Foreign Ministers meet in Washington to sign the treaty. I said that I should be delighted to have them do so but that I did not know whether they would care to come here; that so far as signing the treaty was concerned, as I had said before, I was willing to sign it anywhere the Foreign Ministers would meet and make a sort of ceremony of signing the treaty. In connection with this, Sir Esme wanted to know if we would invite all the world, should it be decided to sign the treaty at Washington. I replied in the negative, pointing out that there would be no use of inviting the States which have not been asked to participate in the treaty to come to the United States or to any other place as we would never accomplish anything that way. I said that only those which had accepted would sign it in the first instance and that undoubtedly they might want to meet and sign it together. That was a matter, I said, which I would consider but that I could not consider inviting all the world to come here and enter into a treaty which had not even been presented to many of the countries. Sir Esme said that he would like, if possible, for me to give him some more specific message to Sir Austen as to what we would do. I replied that, while of course we will sign the present form of treaty, I was not prepared to say yet whether any acceptable modifications can be made, particularly since I
