September 18–December 16, 1978
495
the Egyptians want a fixed date, whereas it would be better to stick
with the idea of a target date. This seemed to be acceptable to al-Baz.
Weizman also said that al-Baz had raised the difference between the
abolition of the military government and its withdrawal. He wants to
include language on the abolition of the government; Israel will insist
on sticking with the language of Camp David. Weizman said that he had
explained to Mubarak that the Israelis want to stay in the West Bank
and Gaza and share responsibility there, and that they do no intend to
leave completely. They expect to have some settlements there.
Secretary Vance said that anything the two parties could agree
upon would be fine with us. He did not think it was wise, however, to
reopen the treaty text. This would pose lots of problems. Weizman said
that his understanding of the Egyptian position is that they want the
full autonomy implemented by the end of 1979. Weizman added that he
had told Mubarak that it might be time for Sadat and Begin to meet
again, or perhaps to have the Vice President come Israel.
Weizman asked what remained to be done if he were to come back
to Washington. Secretary Vance said that we had proposed a package
and we will stick with it. Weizman said that he understood that the
treaty should be considered as it is. Annex I is virtually finished except
for some language on subphasing. Weizman said that he would do his
best with the Israeli Cabinet. Ambassador Dinitz noted that Minister of
Finance Ehrlich had had a good talk with OMB Director McIntyre and
that this represented a serious professional analysis of the economic
issues. Weizman added that he was concerned by the mood back in Is-
rael. People should be happy at the prospect of peace, but instead there
is a heavy feeling and Weizman has spoken of the “peace calamity”. He
then said to the Secretary that despite the differences that we have with
Israel over the West Bank and the question of settlements, we should
understand that the key to success is still in Begin’s hands. He is not
now in a positive mood, but he does want peace and he did invent the
concept of autonomy. The Central Committee of the Herut Party will be
meeting on Sunday. Weizman said that he wanted to be there. He had
had his differences with Begin. Weizman still believes that he is the key
to a solution. He needs to have some encouragement. He needs to see
that everything is not collapsing around him. Weizman said that his
talk4 with the President had been helpful, and that we now need to
draw Prime Minister Begin back to the point of wanting to reach an
agreement.
In closing, Secretary Vance said that he would like to talk with Min-
ister Weizman at some point about UNIFIL. He said that he was wor-
ried about its renewal.
4 See Documents 82 and 96.
