1112 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ting Congress (e.g. Sam Nunn) to consider security assistance (especially for the new Gulf strategy) against the extra 2% in the budget for DoD. This might be the way to “square the circle,” by matching potential cuts in security assistance against actual reductions in increases in the military budget—thus giving us the best mix of increased security without seeming to weaken in our resolve to strengthen defense and U.S. security. Since this could be couched in terms of not cutting funds for Egypt, and especially for Israel, it could get strong reasonance on the Hill provided careful consultations are carried out. I talked to Nimetz about it, who likes the idea. If you do, you might inject it into the discussions with the President. (C) —Oil. Energy Minister Modai has asked to come here next week to see Vance and Duncan, to 1) activate the U.S. oil supply commitment and 2) ask for money to build underground oil storage facilities, as promised by Kissinger but never followed up. The consensus is that this is a poor time for the activation of the agreement (the need is simply not there; and diverting U.S. oil would play very badly here). This could become a major issue with the Israelis if not played right. I have alerted Ed Fried, and Hinton is holding a meeting this afternoon. The object is to turn off the visit, without letting the Israelis claim that we are not standing behind the oil agreement. Strauss is speaking to Eppy about it. I will come back to you for clearance of any cable coming out of today’s meeting.2 (S) —SFM. State has promised a draft cable3 to Lewis this afternoon for our clearance (I will run it by you). I have asked Saunders to throw the ball back into the Israeli/Egyptian court—i.e. we are prepared to in- 2 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Brzezinski wrote: “separate memo.” A separate memorandum on Israeli oil was prepared by Hunter and sent to Brzezinski on March 7. Hunter informed Brzezinski that Modai told the Embassy in Tel Aviv that he was coming next week and “could not be talked out of it.” “This,” he observed, “could have serious consequences—especially in the ‘honoring of commitments’ vein. We would honor it, though our terms and conditions would appear to be onerous to the Israelis, and would themselves result in a squabble.” Hunter reported, following Hinton’s meeting (talking points from which are attached to the memorandum), “our consensus is that quiet but firm efforts should be made at least to delay this visit for a significant period of time.” In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Vance will talk to Evron. ZB.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
