January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1197
in municipal elections, which, in Israel, is independent from citizen-
ship—one just has to live there. But a citizen, to vote for an authority
with no authority over him (is different). The Self-Governing Authority
has no say in East Jerusalem. So they can’t vote for it.
The President said that he can understand what Minister Burg is
saying, but does not see the logic. Can Israeli settlers on the West Bank
vote for the Knesset? There is an exact parallel here. Minister Burg says
that Israelis have the right to live there, and Arabs to live . . .
Minister Burg said that the Self-Governing Authority gives no
citizenship.
The President said that they can vote in Jordan.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel had never said so.
Minister Burg said that that had never been excluded.
Prime Minister Begin said: thank you! If they have the right to vote
for the Jordanian parliament, why not the Administrative Council?
Minister Burg said he disagreed.
Prime Minister Begin said: all right, but Minister Burg had quoted a
thesis, and he (Prime Minister Begin) is a lawyer. (He continued): Mr.
President, there is a great principle here. If Jerusalem residents do not
vote, he (the President) is saying that this would destroy the elections.
The President said it was accurate.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel is being blamed. Why blame
this on them? No one in Israel would agree to such an event. Only the
Communists—6 out of 120 Knesset members—would agree. There is
complete agreement. Therefore, how can it be changed. Israelis speak
of this city. The Government of National Unity said that Israeli law
should be applied to Judea and Samaria. It did not accept it. But it did—
and the opposition led on this—apply Israeli law to Jerusalem. It is a
city; it became one. When Jordan was there, Israelis could not pray at
the Western Wall. Now it must be undivided.
The President agreed.
Prime Minister Begin said that, therefore, people there can’t vote.
The President said that he hopes that Ambassador Linowitz and he
haven’t taken the vote away in Jordan away from people of East Jeru-
salem! He thinks it would be a waste of time to hold elections; then
there must be an alternative means to set up the Self-Governing Au-
thority—some other procedure. He has some ideas. One he had sug-
gested in private to Prime Minister Begin, who said he didn’t like it.
Prime Minister Begin said he is speaking sincerely, and for all his
colleagues and all but 6 members of the Knesset: Jerusalem is the capi-
tal of Israel, and it is sovereign there, on the basis of the 1967 law.
Ambassador Linowitz said that they had talked at length about this
several times. If Prime Minister Begin is concerned about any sugges-
