690  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Disarmament Administration), Nikolay Sokov (MFA Arms Limitation 
and Disarmament Administration)—Notetaker.
— Ambassador Burt opened the session by asking the Soviet side if 
it had any response to the points on perimeter-­portal continuous mon-
itoring (PPCM) which he had passed on May 16,2 expressing his hope 
that this subject and heavy ICBMs could be discussed in detail at the 
ministerial. Ambassador Nazarkin replied that the U.S. proposals were 
being carefully analized, and that if a response could be formulated, the 
Soviet side would return to them at the ministerial.
Phasing of Reductions
— Burt then raised foreign minister Shevardnadze’s remarks on 
the phasing of reductions, asking whether they contained anything 
which the Soviets had not previously described in Geneva. Nazarkin 
responded that Shevardnadze had, in general, explained the Soviet 
Geneva position, and asked whether Burt could react to what the min-
ister had said. Burt recalled his question to Shevardnadze during the 
small group session3 about whether the Soviets were ready to move 
to a straight and steady rate of reductions. While Shevardnadze had 
answered “in principle, yes,” this was not the case with the Soviet 
reductions schedule.
— Nazarkin confirmed Shevardnadze’s language, but explained 
that in practice, practical realities dictate the actual phasing—­it was 
not possible to have a completely straight line. The Soviet phasing of 
reductions took into account the structure of the armed forces and the 
practical capabilities for eliminating missiles. (At this point, Khromov 
declared in Russian from the back row: “.  .  . and warheads,” but it 
was not interpreted into English.) Narzarkin continued that while one 
would like to have a steady rate of reductions, the maximum deviation 
from the line according to Burt was 500 warheads. This represented 
only six percent of the total, and this was the maximum gap—­at other 
times the deviation was much less—­so one should not exaggerate.
— Burt urged that the question of how much either side was 
allowed to diverge from the straight line reduction needed to be 
thought through. If the United States was as far from the line as the 
Soviet Union at year five (when the Soviets were 500 warheads over), 
it would mean a total difference of 1000 warheads—­which both sides 
should agree would be too much. While the United States had pro-
posed that the maximum allowed deviation be 50 warheads, Burt was 
prepared to recommend that the gap be 100 on each side for warheads 
and 50 for delivery vehicles. Burt argued that such an arrangement 
would still allow for flexibility, if not as much as under the Soviet plan. 
2 Not found.
3 See Document 120.
