Afghanistan 689 254. Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, April 17, 1980 Afghanistan: The Soviets Settle In Since their invasion in December, the Soviets have encountered more resistance and instability in Afghanistan than they anticipated. Yet, despite several thousand Soviet casualties and continued international criticism, there are no indications that Moscow is seriously considering any change in its basic policy of preserving a pro-Soviet regime in Kabul. Its words and actions suggest that it hopes to ride out the present difficult situation, slowly—very slowly—rebuild the Afghan army and government, and avoid being forced to commit still larger numbers of Soviet forces to achieve its aim. Insurgency Continues, Regime Shaky Three months after the Soviet-engineered coup that brought it to power, the Babrak Karmal regime has still been unable to garner significant popular support and remains in power only because of the presence of Soviet troops. The insurgents continue to threaten major urban areas, while constantly ambushing and engaging Soviet and Afghan troops in the countryside. Within the government itself, there remains a bitter Khalqi-Parchamist rivalry, and recently, new rumors of coup plotting have surfaced. Internationally, the Babrak Karmal regime has failed to win any important recognition outside of the Soviet bloc and its hangers-on. Although the rebels cannot stand up to concerted Soviet military strikes, their hit-and-run tactics have thus far made any Soviet gains temporary. Soviet forces can pacify an area or province, but once withdrawn, the rebels return. While the Soviets have been able to restore a semblance of order in Kabul after last February’s riots and general strike, they have only been able to do so by assuming more and more of the security burden themselves.2 Even with this greater Soviet role, however, there is no guarantee that Kabul and other cities will not erupt again. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Newsom, Lot 81D154, folder 3. Secret. Drafted by Limberg (INR/EEA), April 16. An unknown hand initialed for Spiers. A stamp on the memorandum indicates Newsom saw it on April 18. 2 See Document 217.
