1072
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
319.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs (Pickering) and the Director of the Policy Planning
Staff (Lake) to the Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, Science, and Technology (Benson)1
Washington, October 26, 1978
SUBJECT
U.N. Water Decade: U.S. Approach and Strategy
As a result of efforts which you helped to stimulate, and AID’s
own examination of water issues, Governor Gilligan has now approved
a 10-year program to support the 1981–90 U.N. Decade for Water
Supply and Sanitation, and a consensus has been developed between
AID, OES and S/P on our basic approach. If agreed to by OMB and the
President, this program will represent a significant move towards im-
plementation of the Administration’s basic human needs policies as
well as the President’s commitment to give priority to water and sanita-
tion in his message to the World Health Assembly.2 It will also provide
a major impetus towards achieving the U.N. Water Conference goals of
reaching 1.2 billion people by the end of the U.N. Water Decade. The
10-year program would concentrate on the rural poor and would be of
great benefit in improving the health of these people, particularly by at-
tacking diarrheal diseases among children. The development ben-
efits—through increased productivity—will also be significant.
In essence the strategy and program aims at an expenditure of $2.5
billion during the Decade period, with funding subject to the LDCs’
own efforts, support of other donors, adequate projects and future AID
budget levels. This sum could be increased later if experience shows we
can do more. (See Summary of Program at Tab A.)3 This level of effort
represents a significant increase in our support for this key area of de-
velopment. Our efforts would of course be integrated with other health
and rural community projects.
The next steps in obtaining the Administration’s endorsement of
this strategy involve submitting the proposed 10-year program to OMB
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 4, TL 10/16–10/31/1978.
Unclassified. Drafted by Blaney on October 25; cleared by Donald King, Katcher, and
Shakow.
2 See Document 313.
3 Attached but not printed is the undated summary of program, entitled “U.S. Rural
Community Water and Sanitation Initiative (CWS).”
