July 13 To the British Chargé U. S. accord with British opinion that China must be impressed with the necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability to suppress disorders and protect foreigners; feeling, however, that existing conditions in China can best be met by consistent and scrupulous observance by the powers of the obligations undertaken by them at the Washington Conference. Further exposition of U. S. attitude on the instructions to be given the Commission on Extraterritoriality. Opinion that the present is not an opportune moment for a joint public declaration such as proposed by the British Government in its note No. 683, July 7. (Footnote: Substance repeated to the representatives in Japan, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and Portugal.) [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 650] Undated From the Japanese Embassy Memorandum presented July 16 stating willingness of the Japanese Government to support a policy looking toward a readjustment of treaty relations in China conjointly with the other powers, provided the Chinese Government shows a determination to carry out its obligations and provided certain questions are settled. [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 651] July (277) From the Minister in China (tel.) Opinion that the United States should welcome any offer from the British and Japanese to work as far as possible in harmony with them, but should carefully avoid any commitments or obligations which might hinder the maintenance of U. S. policies and views regarding China. [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 652] July (157) To the Minister in China (tel.) Secretary’s concurrence in the Minister’s opinion as to the attitude that should be taken by the United States; view that there should be no agreement with the powers whereby the U. S. general policy would be varied. Request for views as to the desirability of a separate note in reply to the Chinese note of June [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 654] July (701) From the British Chargé British Government’s opinion that it would be inadvisable to delay acquainting China with attitude of the powers. Outline of the statements which the British Government feels should be contained in the reply to the Chinese Government. [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 654] July (702) From the British Chargé Amendments suggested by the Japanese Government to the joint [Pg. 790 includes portions of
