400
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
(low-level) contact with the GDR and that there may come a point
when such contact will prove useful to us.2 (C)
Of course, I will abide by your decision and not attend the recep-
tion. I simply wanted to suggest some factors which should be taken
into consideration in the future. (C)
2 Brzezinski underlined “there may come a point when such contact will prove
useful to us” and wrote in the margin “yes, but not yet for the NSC. ZB.”
129.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the German Democratic Republic and Federal Republic of
Germany1
Washington, May 8, 1979, 0011Z
115852. Subject: Goodby-Nier Consultations: May 4 Developments.
1. (C) Entire text.
2. During May 4 plenary session, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Goodby and GDR Deputy Foreign Minister Nier initialled German and
English text of separate exchange of letters on Consular Convention.
Text is same as para 4 reftel2 except that final, non-substantive sentence
of one of two letters has been changed by adding new final sentence
which reads: “I am authorized to declare that your letter and this reply
constitutes an agreement between our two governments.” Three-man
U.S. team will arrive Berlin May 9 to begin negotiation of final technical
details of Consular Convention, which negotiation we hope to have
finished in time for May 17–21 visit of GDR State Foreign Trade Secre-
tary Beil. Neither side intends to publicize fact that we have discussed
Consular Convention until such time as agreement is ready for signing.
FYI: We anticipate signing in Washington. End FYI. We will give FRG
promised note at time of signing the Consular Convention and before
public announcement of signing.
3. Nier and Postmaster General Bolger signed Parcel Post Agree-
ment May 4. Agreement contains U.S. fallback language in Article 1
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790207–0903.
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Gray; cleared by Edminster and in INM; approved
by Vine. Sent for information to Paris, London, West Berlin, and USNATO
2 Not further identified. See footnote 3 below.
