1062  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
which should be appealing if evaluated logically. He said, however, 
that emotions are likely to prevail over logic and wondered whether, 
because of this, the inclusion of the 50–50 formula was sound. The feel-
ing is fairly general, he said, that the 50–50 formula is on the way out 
and the Peruvian Government’s acceptance of it, as something almost 
passé might cause it problems and might be one of the reasons for its 
holding back.
Messrs. Brisco and Haider thought the point was well taken and 
merited study even though they thought that the proposal was an emi-
nently fair one in the Peruvian context. Mr. Brisco then said that he 
should like to make it clear that IPC’s position is flexible and that it 
would be most happy to receive a counter-­proposal from the Peruvian 
Government on which it could negotiate.
Mr. Siracusa said that he was certain the visitors were aware that 
Ambassador Achilles had been actively interested in their problem and 
had, in fact, discussed it on numerous occasions with the President and 
the Minister of Finance. Although both of these gentlemen assured the 
Ambassador of their intention to take necessary action, the Ambassador 
is not convinced that they will actually do so. In fact, he tends to believe 
that their actions will be much less courageous than their words.
Mr. Siracusa then said he felt it would be timely to support the 
Ambassador’s efforts at Lima. He would propose that Mr. Rubottom 
call in Ambassador Berckemeyer specifically for the purpose of dis-
cussing this case with him, indicating the Department’s strong inter-
est, and urging him to recommend that his Government press for an 
acceptable solution.2 He said that in discussions with the Ambassador 
he felt it would be appropriate to bring up the importance of solving 
the petroleum problem to Peru’s balance of payments problem, and 
thus to its credit-­worthiness for the kind of development loans which it 
will be seeking shortly from the U.S. and other financial institutions. He 
said while such a relationship would not be mentioned as a quid pro quo, 
the fact that Peru’s ability to service loans will be affected by the petro-
leum situation made it logical and fair that the matter should be raised.
Mr. Brisco and Mr. Haider expressed their pleasure at the proposal 
to consult with the Ambassador. While they raised some questions 
about Peru’s desire for development loans, they did not in any way 
challenge the expressed intent not to make an IPC solution a quid pro 
quo for the loans. They left with Mr. Siracusa copies of a study recently 
made by the company reviewing the history of the problem and 
2 A memorandum of conversation of February 2 stated that Assistant Secretary 
Rubottom told Ambassador Berckemeyer that the IPC’s pricing problem in Peru was “an 
extremely serious one which was having an adverse effect” on the investment climate in 
Peru. (823.2553/2–259)
