demarcation of the boundary between Panama and Costa Rica. Your Excellency states
that this matter has been pending for many years without any advance having been
made in its final determination, and that the Government of Costa Rica is naturally
anxious to settle it in order to avoid disagreeable and regrettable frontier incidents.
Your Excellency suggests that now that there are new administrations in both Panama
and Costa Rica, since the painful incidents of 1921, it should be possible to dispose of
this matter without further friction.
Finally Your Excellency states that your Government would be happy to have Panama
appoint its engineer to delimit, in conjunction with those named by the arbitrator and
by the Government of Costa Rica, the frontier as set forth in the arbitral award.
 
In reply I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that Panama also earnestly desires
to end forever the boundary question with Costa Rica; but as the Republic of Panama in
1921 was the victim of an unjustifiable aggression which at that time obliged it to make
heavy expenditures, my Government feels that the settlement of the pecuniary claim
should be considered a question precedent to the demarcation of the frontier.
Once this question has been settled the Government of Panama would be disposed to
proceed with the delimitation, in accordance with the line fixed in the arbitral award,26
from the mouth of the Sixaola River to the point near the ninth degree of north latitude
beyond Cerro Pando, and would accept the rest of the delimitation as far as the Pacific
coast, it being always understood that in making this delimitation of the territory a just
line will be established which protects the interests of the Panamans who live or hold
properties in the region in controversy, permitting, as far as may be practicable, the
lands of the said inhabitants or owners to remain within the frontiers of Panama. This
could be done by the mere signing of a protocol in which would be incorporated the
instructions which could be carried out by the Boundary Commissioners. The proposed
solution does not involve any new feature inasmuch as the President of France, in
explaining his decision at the request of Costa Rica, declared that the lines of the award
were general, and that they remained subject to the changes which the Boundary
Commissioners might consider necessary to make when setting the landmarks, taking
into consideration the best interests of the two countries.
To carry out the proposed solutions along the lines above described, Panama is
disposed to enter into direct negotiations with Costa Rica as soon as possible. My
Government wishes to have it understood, however, that in making these proposals it is
animated by a spirit of pure conciliation, and that this attitude does not imply in any
manner that Panama accepts the validity of the arbitral award, to which, it is
understood, the note of Your Excellency refers.
