198
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
RECOMMENDATIONS:
A. That you sign the memorandum at Tab A to Reinhardt3 and
Vance. (C)
B. That you brief the President on the realities of the challenge we
face in international broadcasting.4 (C)
3 The memorandum was retyped to address only ICA Director Reinhardt. In a
February 9 memorandum, Brzezinski asked Reinhardt to undertake a review of program-
ming and resource allocation and report his finding by March 7; he also asked that
transmitter needs for the next decade be reviewed and a proposal submitted by May
1. (Ibid.)
4 Inderfurth circled “the challenge we face in international broadcasting” and wrote
“ZB, If you sign the memo at Tab A—which is a good initiative—I will write an appropriate
DR item for the President. Rick.”
62.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 4, 1979
SUBJECT
Tensions between RFE/RL and BIB (C)
The calm and good sense which have characterized the relationship
between BIB and RFE/RL was too good to last. It has been disrupted
by a new bout of scheming by the BIB Staff in which Gronouski,
unfortunately, has let himself become entangled. (C)
You will recall that Glenn Ferguson some time ago named Bill
Buell Vice President in charge of the radios’ Washington Office with
the aim of having him concentrate on congressional relations. Though
this action was taken in consultation with, and with the blessing
of, Gronouski, it was resented by Walter Roberts and his staff. Buell
arrived here from Munich a couple of weeks ago and took up his
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 1–9/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the
memorandum: “I never seen an outfit in which there is more stupid infighting. I’m
getting tired of it. ZB.”
