392
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
find it advantageous in present situation again to become supporter of
Govt. In that event there need not be so much concern re son.2
10. Mosadeq referred to visits of Point IV officials to northern Iran.
He said that Russians had been protesting to him at presence Amer-
icans in North and he was afraid that they might also insist upon Soviet
nationals being allowed engage in activities in that area parallel those
of Point IV. He therefore hoped that Point IV work in northern Iran wld
be carried on from Tehran exclusively by Iranian officials. Mosadeq ap-
parently was not aware that Point IV offices were operating in North.
He seemed particularly interested in Azerbaijan. We explained to him
that Point IV office had been opened in Tabriz many months ago; that
American Point IV personnel were directing its activities; and that
these activities were being carried on for most part through Iran Govt
agencies. We pointed out that thus far there had been no serious reper-
cussions because of presence of US Point IV personnel in Azerbaijan.
Mosadeq finally stated he wld not insist upon withdrawal these offi-
cials but he hoped that they wld carry on their work quietly and not at-
tract undue attention to themselves. He also again expressed hope no
high Point IV officials wld visit northern Iran since such visits wld be
sure to cause sharp Soviet reaction. Soviet Union likely to bring further
embarrassing pressure on him. It might even instigate acts of violence
against Point IV residents or visitors in northern Iran. It wld be disas-
trous to Iran if any Point IV officials in northern Iran shld suffer phys-
ical injury. Warne said that neither he nor any visiting high Point IV of-
ficials wld go to Azerbaijan without first consulting with PriMin.
Henderson
2 In telegram 1893 from Tehran, November 7, Henderson reported the following:
“Mosadeq sent word to me today that after careful investigation Zahedi he con-
vinced latter had been engaged in activities incompatible with his duties employee TCA
and shld be separated from that organization.
“Accordingly, Warne is informing Zahedi today that he is being removed at least
temporarily from role active employee.” (Ibid.)
