206
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
National Frontists have responded to communist propaganda which
obviously holds no place for the Shah in Iran’s future.42
When the National Front became a minority in the Majlis, one of its
most repeated themes was criticism of Court corruption and intrigues.
Princess Ashraf was a favorite target; and, although the Shah, by his
position, was free from direct attack, the National Front did not fail to
blame him indirectly for his Court’s iniquities. Kashani never opens his
numerous “proclamations” with the customary courtesy—“under the
auspices of his Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah”. Hosein Maki, a histo-
rian of some repute in Persia, has written biting criticism of the Pah-
levis. Haerizadeh always called the first Pahlevi, “Reza Khan,” in his
speeches in the 16th Majlis, and he led National Front attacks on
Princess Ashraf’s reputation. Nariman publicly criticized the Shah in
1950 when Razmara was appointed to the premiership without a Majlis
vote of inclination.
Prime Minister Mosadeq’s Control of the Shah When Mosadeq became
Prime Minister, he was aware that his popularity and a strong Majlis
vote of inclination had forced the Shah to appoint him. He later re-
ported to the Senate43 that his pro-British rival, Seyid Zia, had been
waiting with the Shah when the news arrived that Mosadeq had been
acclaimed by parliament. Mosadeq knows the Shah’s propensity for in-
trigue and his natural enemity of strong premiers. Mosadeq found an
antagonist in the Shah and he had to move carefully to prevent effective
use of the potent pressure which the Shah could have brought to bear
upon the Government and the issues of the day.
Again, Mosadeq used to his advantage what seemed to be a threat-
ening force. The very reason why the Shah had undermined previous
Prime Ministers was his fear of being overthrown by a successful
“strong man”. Mosadeq took the problem by its horns and underlined
the Shah’s own fears, pointing out that, if the Shah removed him, the
forces of nationalism which he represented would in turn throw out the
Shah.
It is not admiration for the National Front which has kept the Shah
silent when he could have weakened and perhaps overthrown Prime
Minister Mosadeq. It is a fear that Mosadeq out of power would be
more dangerous to the dynasty than he now is. The Shah recognizes the
dangers of the Government’s present policies, but he feels, as a Court
source recently observed, “He cannot go against the national current”.
42 All National Front leaders signed, in 1950, the communist-sponsored “Peace Peti-
tion” and all pronounced themselves opposed to UN intervention in Korea. [Footnote is
in the original.]
43 Address to the Senate, September 5, 1951. [Footnote is in the original.]
