Romania Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Mr. Andrei felt the U.S. should establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam. He noted that Vietnam had dropped all conditions. They were now ready to accept the U.S. position and establish relations in U.S. terms. How did Mr. Andrei think that the Chinese would react to the establishment of relations between the U.S. and Vietnam? Mr. Andrei replied that he could not speak for the Chinese. In his (personal) opinion, the Chinese had not always acted wisely toward the Vietnamese. He did think, however, that Vietnam would eventually reach an independent position. He also noted that President Ceausescu had urged Vietnam to establish relations with the United States. Dr. Brzezinski then asked about the situation in Cambodia and some of the stories of inhuman conditions there. Mr. Andrei noted that many of these stories were true. The present leadership in Cambodia was not the leadership Vietnam had hoped for. The regime was strong, however, and an independent intermediary would be needed to help settle the dispute. In conclusion, he emphasized that the situation was very complex, both internally and externally. Dr. Brzezinski again pressed Mr. Andrei about the establishment of diplomatic relations with Vietnam. Did he think it was a good idea? Mr. Andrei replied yes, he did. While he could not speak for the Chinese, he felt they should realize that it was not good to have Vietnam dependent on one power. The establishment of relations with the U.S. was not an anti-Chinese move and the Chinese should recognize this. Dr. Brzezinski expressed the hope that at some point he might be able to visit Bucharest. Mr. Andrei assured him he would be welcome. Mr. Andrei then stated that he had a request from President Ceausescu. The Romanians would welcome a short visit of Secretary Vance or the President when they were in Europe or the Middle East. Dr. Brzezinski said he would bear it in mind and would support such a request. He then thanked Mr. Andrei for the opportunity to discuss the various issues in such an open and frank manner.
