of affairs. It is equally true that in the case of Germany the term for filing claims has expired while it has just begun for Austria. But on the other hand the organization of the Tripartite Claims Commission experienced such an unusual delay that most of the claims against Austria had been presented at the Department of State before the beginning of its functions, which is born out by the fact that only comparatively few additional claims have been filed since the commission has been constituted. From the number, extent and nature of the claims filed and from the precedence, established in the German-American procedure, some conclusion could be arrived at. It may be stated with reasonable safety that the final extent of Austrian liabilities arising from the aforementioned sources will be so insignificant as compared with the large sums involved in the seized property that it hardly can have any influence or bearing on the financial plans and transactions to be adopted by the Treasury after enactment of the Mills bill. In fact, the Austrian liabilities will in all probability comprise a total which may be safely termed a “negligible quantity” in the round sums submitted to Congress by the Treasury Department, smaller even than the amount of the still unawarded German claims, which has not been considered large enough to warrant a postponement of the return of German property. As to the second reason I beg to recall Your Excellency’s attention to the first part of my note which deals with the 30 Million Dollars of earnings from deposits made by the Alien property Custodian with the Treasury. I am confident that a careful computation of the earnings derived from Austrian property will reveal an amount which in the future will cover a large, if not the larger portion of the total of claims to be awarded in due course to American nationals by the Tripartite Claims Commission. There is every reason to believe that this amount will more favorably compare with the final total of Austrian liabilities than the remainder of the 30 Million Dollars together with the Dawes annuities do compare with the total of German liabilities. As to the residue of the awards not covered by these earnings derived from seized Austrian property, I can assure Your Excellency the willingness of the Austrian Government to negotiate for a fair and suitable adjustment.
