Afghanistan 89 rebels will need some outside assistance if they are to sustain the insurgency at its present level. The USG could increase the prospects of the Taraki regime being overthrown through a variety of covert action techniques, ranging from propaganda support to clandestine arms supply. The risks to the U.S. would be largely dependent upon the type of techniques adopted. Covert Action Options: (1) Generate a worldwide media campaign publicizing the regime’s problems, exposing Taraki and his colleagues as pawns of the Soviet Union. Condemn Taraki for attempting to force an atheistic philosophy on a sincerely religious population, and for violating their basic human rights. Such a campaign would be virtually risk free, but probably would have little impact within Afghanistan itself. It would, however, establish the groundwork for additional CA proposals, including influencing Saudi Arabian and other prospective donors of aid to the rebel cause. (2) Expand the above program to include radio broadcasts in Dari beamed into Afghanistan from neighboring countries. This would almost certainly require the cooperation of the Governments of Pakistan and/or Iran, either of which might be difficult to secure. In the past the GOP has beamed propaganda into Afghanistan from a radio station in Quetta. If relations between the two countries deteriorate, the GOP might resume such broadcasts. [less than 1 line not declassified] shortwave broadcasts also reach Afghanistan, and we could explore the possibility of putting our message on this medium. (3) Encourage and assist Afghan rebel groups with representation outside of Afghanistan to oppose the regime. CIA officers currently are in contact with a small number of Afghan exiles who at this time are being exploited only for intelligence collection purposes. Other potential exile leaders have been identified and could be approached in due course. One of these is an Afghan, long resident in the U.S., who already is believed by emigre leaders to have some form of secret U.S. support. Some of these individuals could be used as conduits of funds and material support to rebel groups operating from the Peshawar area. We also might establish connections with a member of the ruling family of Chitral, the Pakistan princely state which lies just across the border from Nuristan where most of the guerrilla activity is taking place. This could give us the possibility of utilizing the natural smuggling routes through Chitral to support the rebels directly, thus bypassing the emigres. Saudi Arabians, who may have some connections with the dissidents, might be asked to front for us in supporting the insurgency. Any proposed material assistance to dissidents would have to be carefully weighed from the policy standpoint. Aside from
