along the same lines with us and are even ready to make further concessions to our
views so as to maintain solidarity with us. The British Government likewise has for the
same reason shown a willingness in the past to work in harmony with us. The United
States, Great Britain, and Japan, apart from Russia, have the largest interest in China
and as a result are more disposed to take long views instead of seeking small temporary
advantages, as the Italians, for example, do. It seems to me, therefore, that there is an
opportunity for these three powers to coordinate their general policies toward China
and whenever possible harmonize their individual actions with the purposes which they
hold in common.
5. I somewhat fear, however, that the Japanese may have in mind some more definite
object involving some sort of tripartite agreement which would deprive us of a freedom
of action we would not be willing to relinquish and which would also produce a
psychological result that might outgrow the scope of the original agreement, as did the
Anglo-Japanese Alliance. My doubt on this score is increased because Yoshizawa
seems to have given some emphasis to the differentiation which Japan made between
her interests in Manchuria and in the rest of China. There would seem to be no
occasion at present for Japan to seek assurances as to the validity of her vested interests
in Manchuria, whatever may be the fact as to the greater amount of concern which she
may have reason to feel respecting her interests in that area. As the experience of the
Anglo-Japanese Alliance, the Lansing-Ishii Agreement, and Consortium negotiations
indicated, it is not possible to give public recognition to any special concessions or
claims regarding a particular region in China without laying the basis for
misunderstandings. I consider the chief value of the four-power Pacific pact to be that it
replaced the Anglo-Japanese Alliance with an understanding clearly disconnected with
the continent of Asia. Furthermore, the Washington Conference prepared the way for
the cancelation of the Lansing-Ishii Agreement. I would consider it unfortunate for us
to become involved in any new understanding which would in any degree revive the
effects of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance and the Lansing-Ishii Agreement.
6. I fear that any agreement definitely identifying ourselves with Great Britain and
Japan would be a positive disadvantage to our interests, apart from any question of
reviving the understandings mentioned above. This is particularly true at a time when
Chinese feeling against both the British and Japanese is aroused to an unexplainable
and unnatural degree. I do not think we should seek to disassociate our responsibilities
and interests from those of the British and Japanese and, in fact, I have taken the liberty
of assuring the British Chargé that we do not intend to try to exploit the agitation
against the British to their disadvantage. Nevertheless, I am becoming daily more
impressed that it would be unwise to place ourselves in the position of espousing the
cause either of the British or of the Japanese. In the present undeveloped stage of
Chinese political thinking, hatred first of the British and secondly of the Japanese is the
consuming passion. The United States is being eagerly watched to see whether it is pro-
Chinese or whether it is pro-British or pro- Japanese. I think we can work honorably
