He said to me frankly that he was unable to answer the questions I put to
him, except in this general way. He urged me not to think that he was
seeking to avoid giving an answer, and that I should not regard as final what
he did say; he suggested that I see Lord Robert Cecil61 who, he thought,
was in a position to speak more definitely. He then arranged an interview
with Cecil for me.
At the outset of my conversation with Cecil he stated that the committee of
experts which had been studying the agenda and entire subject for many
months was only just beginning to formulate its report; that until this report
had been submitted to Cabinet, and accepted, no final decision on any point
could be reached.
Cecil’s personal view on peace strength and visible armament was that they
furnished too narrow a basis. He preferred, as clearer and more satisfactory,
mobilizable strength or striking force. He thought, too, that other items,
such as industrial strength, must also be taken into consideration. He did not
see any logical connection between land strength and naval strength and he
hoped that consideration of these two separately would be possible, but he
recognized that in the end this might prove impracticable.
I pointed out to him that as the United States was not a member of the
League of Nations, our delegates could hardly be expected to discuss such
matters as sanctions or the aid to be given by the League to a nation
suffering attack. Cecil agreed. I then asked his personal view on whether he
thought it possible to [disassociate] the League from the agenda. He said,
frankly, that he did not think it possible. He could perceive no reason why
question such as disarmament could not be discussed formally without
direct reference to the League of Nations, but nevertheless, looked at from
European standpoint it must in fact be related to League activities. Greatest
difficulty Cecil saw was way of working out a sound ratio for ascertaining
armed strength of each nation, but he believed attempt must be made to do
this.
I asked him if he thought that the French had control of the Conference. He
replied that he did not. He had not studied the rules governing conduct of
