September 1953–December 1954
823
largely vitiated by the corrupt and venal politicians who surround him.
He felt that, since his own Workers’ Party had extensive information re-
garding the Communist organization leadership and activities in Iran,
the Security Forces undoubtedly had much more complete informa-
tion, as well as the means to use this information in suppressing the
party and disrupting its organization. Citing his five years of active op-
position to Communism, Baqai stated that this experience made him
one of the best qualified men in Iran to discuss Communist activities
and the best ways of combating them. Several times in this presenta-
tion, Baqai affirmed that he had made his position clear to General
Zahedi and that the General agreed with his estimate of the situation
but was prevented by his entourage from acting effectively.
When Baqai had completed his commentary on the Zahedi Gov-
ernment, the Ambassador asked him for his views on the recent state-
ment by Foreign Minister Anthony Eden of Great Britain regarding the
necessity for free intercourse between Iran and Britain and the
desirability of re-establishing diplomatic relations.5 The Ambassador
pointed out that General Zahedi had emphasized Iran’s desire to be
on friendly terms with all countries, and asked Dr. Baqai’s reaction to
this statement. Baqai said that he certainly agreed in principle6 with
Zahedi’s stand and felt that diplomatic relations with Great Britain
should by all means be re-established. However such recognition must
be proceeded by at least the beginnings of an oil settlement in order to
prevent the British from using their diplomatic mission to foist upon
Iran an unfair settlement and to exercise again improper influence on the
internal affairs of the country.
The Ambassador then turned to the concept of an oilless economy
for Iran, which Dr. Baqai’s newspaper Shahed has advocated editorially
on a number of occasions. He asked the Deputy if he really believed
that in present circumstances such an economy was desirable or even
feasible. Obtaining the Ambassador’s permission to explain his stand
in some detail, Baqai launched into an explanation of the history and
background of his advocacy of an oilless economy.
When the 16th Majlis was elected some four years ago and the na-
tional movement first came into prominence, one of the movement’s
major objectives as listed in Shahed was the settlement of the oil ques-
tion. By this, Baqai explained, he meant the reaching of an under-
standing with the AIOC if that company were willing to grant Iran a
fair share of the proceeds from its oil; otherwise, he advocated eviction
of the British and nationalization of the oil industry. British intransi-
gence unfortunately aroused public anger in Iran to such a pitch that
5 See Document 331.
6 Richards underlined the phrase “Baqai said that he certainly agreed in principle.”
