North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
815
forums (UNCTAD, UN Center for Transnational Enterprises) where
appropriate technology is discussed. Probability of inducing change in
Soviet behavior: zero. Prospects for criticism of Soviets: unknown.
6. Energy
It has traditionally been assumed that the Soviets could only make
mischief over energy, favoring higher prices to benefit their own oil
and gas exports and giving rhetorical support to the demands of the
more extreme OPEC and G–77 members. (See 1976–77 Transition Paper
for example).8 Although the CIA predicts a drop off in Soviet oil pro-
duction by 1985, it is not certain how this, if it occurs, will affect Soviet
energy policy. There might eventually be an opportunity to bring them
into a producer-consumer energy dialogue on the side of the moderates
(and in opposition to Iraq and Algeria.) Probability of success: wholly
unknown.9
8 Not found.
9 In a June 27 memorandum to Brzezinski, Thornton characterized Lake’s memo-
randum to Vance as “a sensible and basically negative piece, not very imaginative” and
stated that his “main criticism is the persistent concern to use North-South fora to ‘show
the Soviets up’. We should not get involved in this. They are doing a fine job on their own
in this regard and we will unnecessarily cheapen ourselves if we start making propa-
ganda shots. It is also likely to deflect us from more serious matters.” (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Subject File, Box 101,
North/South: 2–12/77)
268.
Memorandum From President Carter1
Washington, June 27, 1977
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 26,
PRM–08 1 of 3 [2]. Confidential. Hutcheson sent this memorandum, as well as an alterna-
tive version that incorporated changes proposed by Lance, to Carter under cover of an
undated note. Lance’s changes included removing military assistance from the study, as
well as a separate study on official and private assistance. (Ibid.)
