the Conference but he felt that when a general agreement was not reached
no recommendations by Conference could be made.
My conversations with both Chamberlain and Cecil were carried on in a
most friendly spirit. Both gentlemen evidently desire to work with us in
most open and cordial manner and mean to keep the American delegation
fully advised of their attitude on every point as it develops.
The conclusion I draw is that we are about to take part in a Conference
whose decisions will be determined, necessarily, in part at least by
considerations of general policy which have no direct interest to the United
States, and that unless we follow the British in concessions they feel it wise
to make, the American delegates are likely to find themselves standing
alone and thus responsible for making an agreement impossible. We shall
not be able to count upon an inflexible British position or policy; they will
do their best, I think, to keep disarmament within the limit of easily
ascertainable facts and also to keep naval disarmament and land
disarmament as distinct as possible.
 
They may easily be forced to compromise. I need hardly point out that any
such compromise on our part might easily lead logically and directly to
relations with the League of Nations. My conclusion in this respect is
perhaps a prejudiced one, and it is quite possible that we may find spirit of
fairness and conciliation ruling the Conference when it actually convenes,
but I am doubtful. As matters stand I believe that the real importance of
Conference lies no longer entirely in working out of a standard by which a
measure of disarmament may at last be obtained, but in maneuvering us into
a position when our relations with the League of Nations will be
substantially modified. Only if the nations represented desire disarmament
is it possible. There is no one here who believes for a moment that either
France or Italy, to say nothing of the others, is ready to decrease its military
strength. All are willing to talk about disarmament and to express their
hopes that it may be obtained; but until financial need actually forces them
to reduce their armies and navies I fear that there is little reason to hope for
any substantial reduction of either.
