490 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI have to be maintained. From this point of view there are two matters that particularly trouble me. (1) The decision to limit experiments to a few pounds4 of high explosive equivalent—rather than, for example, a few hundred tons5—limits sharply the degree of interest of such experiments to the scientists and technologists on whose continued skills and continued professional dedication to nuclear weapons design we would depend when tests are resumed. (2) Second, the five-year period of the treaty instead of a three-year period that had alternatively been proposed also reduces the chances of keeping viable nuclear laboratories together. The laboratory directors have told the JCS that, given a commitment to resume testing, they can maintain relevant laboratory effectiveness for three years, but probably not for five. I therefore urge that these two issues be reexamined as part of the development of the safeguards program you requested by June 30.6 Harold Brown Attachment Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Jones) to Secretary of Defense Brown7 JCSM–188–78 Washington, June 1, 1978 SUBJECT Presidential Decision on Comprehensive Test Ban (U) 1. (S) Presidential Decision (PD)/NSC 388 announced that in view of the importance of maintaining confidence in safety and reliability of US stockpiled nuclear weapons, the President has decided that the United States should propose a fixed-duration Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) treaty of 5 years, with provision for nuclear weapon experiments of a few pounds yield. In forwarding the treaty to the Senate for ratification, the President would state that the United States intends to resume testing at the expiration of the treaty, for safety and reliability purposes only, unless testing is shown not to be necessary. Any further 4 Carter underlined the phrase “a few pounds.” 5 Carter underlined the phrase “a few hundred tons.” 6 Carter highlighted both point (1) and point (2) and wrote in the left margin “(1) I don’t feel strongly about this,” drawing an arrow pointing at the sentence for point (1), and “might help with this (2),” drawing an arrow pointing at the sentence for point (2). 7 Secret. Brown wrote “5/30 HB” to the right of the memorandum number. 8 See Document 200.
