20
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
yet decided whether to seek Congressional approval for Kissinger’s
OECD “safety net” or go an alternative route.
Our discussions provided many opportunities to express support
for a wide range of important international institutions: EC, IMF,
OECD, GATT (for MTN) and the multilateral aid agencies (notably the
World Bank/IDA). The institutional framework for world economic
management seems to be holding up quite well.
North-South: All countries were intensely interested in whether
your Administration will be “more forthcoming” to the LDCs, on com-
modity agreements and other issues, as the LDCs expect. The French
hope/believe we might be moving toward them; the others basically
fear that we may “leave them alone,” and hence looking negative.
We indicated that no new policies had been adopted, that we were
hard at work on the issues, and that we would consult with them before
adopting any new policies. I did note your intention to increase U.S.
contributions to the multilateral aid agencies, and hit the French—pos-
sibly with some success—on the proposed cutback in their share. One
specific issue is timing of the pending Ministerial meeting.
You should keep your options open on whether CIEC should be held be-
fore or after the Summit. Though all the other countries, including
Canada, favor a CIEC meeting before the Summit, Giscard argued
strongly against it being held before the Summit. He feared it would re-
veal splits among the Allies on North-South issues and create a crisis
atmosphere for the Summit. This is essentially a tactical issue and you
should reserve your position in CIEC timing to see how the developing
countries’ position and Summit preparations develop.11
The Europeans and Japanese are looking to us for leadership and it
is important to engage in a more intensive consultative process,
working toward a common position among the industrialized nations.
[Omitted here is discussion of NATO and security issues,
non-proliferation, reduction of arms sales, the Middle East, Cyprus,
Berlin, Concorde, Iceland, Italy, U.S.-Vatican relations, and Portugal.]
Japan: Fukuda’s March 21–22 visit to Washington can have more
than symbolic meaning if we use the next 7 weeks to prepare to move
forward on several matters of substantive concern to them.
My trip allowed the Japanese to place their positions on such hot
domestic Japanese issues as nuclear proliferation, Korean troop with-
drawals, China policy, potential US countervailing duties, fisheries—
they feel that the fees we will be charging under our new domestic leg-
11 On Mondale’s February 2 memorandum (see footnote 3 above), Carter wrote “Let
Canada & Venezuela co-chmn take lead—CIEC before Summit seems better” in the
margin adjacent to a slightly different version of this recommendation.
