so as to subject Consular officers to prosecution for “offenses locally
designated as crimes other than misdemeanors”, is accepted. The amended
paragraph will therefore read as set forth on page 3 of the Department’s
Instruction No. 552. Dr. Schüller is inclined to agree that the paragraph as
amended does meet the criticisms of the original paragraph made by the
Austrian negotiators.
The Austrian Government notes that the Department confirms my
explanation to the Austrian experts that the proposed treaty provision will
effect no change in existing judicial procedure as respects courts in which
Austrian consular officers in the United States may be impleaded.
With respect to the suggestion made by the Austrian negotiators that in
criminal cases consular officers may be required to testify only as to matters
of fact, etc., as set forth on page 2 of my despatch No. 419 of March 4th,
1924,88 I went over with Dr. Schüller the provision in the original draft, to
wit:
“In criminal cases the attendance at the trial by a consular officer
as a witness may be demanded by the prosecution or defense. The
demand shall be made with all possible regard for the consular
dignity and the duties of the office; and there shall be compliance
on the part of the consular officer.”
He seemed to regard it as satisfactory and did not press his objection. I
think we shall hear nothing further from the objection, but I did not judge it
advisable to discuss the matter at length in view of Schüller’s attitude. I
may say in this connection that Schüller was at first reluctant at this time to
discuss any of the consular provisions in the absence of Dr. Leitmaier, Chief
of the Bureau of Affairs of International Law, but he finally concluded that
some articles could be discussed, especially after summoning Baron
Sammaruga [Sommaruga] of this Bureau who participated in the latest
conference.
Article XVI. Neither Dr. Schüller nor Baron Sammaruga [Sammaruga], after
examining their memoranda, appeared to desire to press the objection raised
to the first paragraph of this Article as set forth on page 20 of my despatch
No. 374. I am assuming that the language of the original draft of the first
