March 1952–February 1953
333
(7) Decree certain high priority reform laws (e.g. relating to the ju-
diciary, taxes, public elections, etc.)
(8) Arrest for orderly trial a considerable number of government
officials or ex-officials who have been conspicuous for misappropria-
tion of public funds, and against whom there is substantial ground for
indictment.
(9) Make known through all available propaganda channels that it
is his intention to exercise his constitutional powers and Royal preroga-
tives to establish responsible government within the country, aimed at
the security and well being of the people.
Immediately following these initial acts by the Shah must come
our own public statement, from the President or Secretary of State, in
the effect that the Shah’s democratic views and sincere interest in the
welfare of his people have long been known, and that after a consider-
able period of admirable restraint while allowing the politicians and
government officials an opportunity—which they had failed to take—
to meet the recurring crises threatening the country, he had at last exer-
cised his constitutional powers and his responsibilities as Sovereign in
a manner that earns the commendation of all freedom loving peoples.
. . . or equivalent).
A corresponding statement by the British would be desirable.
The Shah and his new Government must then actively undertake
the program discussed elsewhere, aimed at changing the psychological
climate from despair and hostility to hope and confidence, in prepara-
tion for the material economic reforms in which we would aid.
The first few months would be devoted to extensive organizational
work in administrative, and executive agencies, and to the prosecution
of the program aimed at our first “psycological” objective. Substantial
progress must be made toward this objective before we can shift from
“psychologic” to “economic” criteria to guide our efforts (or those of
the Shah).
Until emotional hysteria has subsided to a point where it no longer
determines national behaviour, and no longer provides subversive in-
terests with a powerful instrument in opposition to orderly gov-
ernment (and to our own aid efforts), it will be futile to attempt a rea-
sonable settlement of the oil dispute and unwise to endanger the
broader program by raising the issue.
If the British are prepared to accept the program outlined here (or a
generally equivalent one) they may be prepared also to extend financial
assistance as necessary to carry the Shah’s program along to a point
which makes an oil settlement possible, provided of course that this in-
tention on the Shah’s part (and our own) from the beginning.
Whether the British contribute financially or not, we would have to
help the Shah restore a reasonable measure of financial stability within
his country, pending the resumption of oil revenues.
