Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
209
68.
Memorandum From the Director of the International
Communication Agency (Reinhardt) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 26, 1979
SUBJECT
VOA Broadcasting
With reference to your memorandum of November 16,2 we have
undertaken on a priority basis the identification and use of appropriate
additional materials on the treatment of Muslims in the Soviet Union.
The initial focus of our effort, beyond our ongoing news reporting,
will be a special VOA series examining the status of Islam beyond the
Islamic heartland.
This series, to be produced for broadcast in December3 will focus
on the quality of life within minority Islamic communities around the
world. It will be organized around topics such as:
—the size and growth of Islamic communities;
—the degree of Islamic integration into the surrounding cultural,
political and economic environment;
—their sense of freedom and security;
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 10–12/79. Confidential. Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum to Carter
under a handwritten note that reads: “I have been pressing VOA for this since early
fall.” Carter initialed the memorandum, indicating he saw it.
2 On November 8, less than a week after the U.S. diplomats were taken hostage in
Tehran, Brzezinski asked the ICA to include in the VOA broadcasts to the Middle East
information about the treatment of Muslims in the Soviet Union including “references
to the Soviet policy actively discouraging religious belief and practice.” Brzezinski also
requested a report to Carter on what VOA was doing along those lines and what
augmentations to VOA programming were being implemented. (Ibid.) In a November
15 memorandum to Brzezinski, Reinhardt reported that ICA was “studying various
approaches to augment present programming and broadcasting.” (Ibid.) On November
16, Brzezinski signed a memorandum to ICA requesting a concrete report for the Presi-
dent, which should be submitted by November 26. (National Security Council, Carter
Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–023, SCC Meeting Folders, 79–80, SCC (i) Meeting
on Broadcasting and Related Issues, 11 December 1979) On November 28, Brzezinski
wrote Reinhardt that the November 26 ICA proposals appeared to have potential and
reemphasized the need to urgently implement VOA programming to Muslims. In a
handwritten note, Brzezinski added that he “needs periodic updates for the President.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 10–
12/79)
3 Brzezinski underlined “in December” and wrote an exclamation point in the
margin.
