1504 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Senator Gore’s proposal is based on the stated assumptions that: 1. Present U.S. goals at the Conference are unattainable. 2. Nuclear testing to date has caused an “antisocial contamination of the atmosphere” which has led to world-­wide fear of fall-­out which is Russia’s most powerful propaganda weapon against the United States. 3. Present detection systems are technically efficient in the detec­ tion of atmospheric detonations. The Working Group considers that the Gore proposal would not be a sound position for the United States to take at this time. Although the assumptions listed above are inaccurate, the proposal has some ele­ ments which may be useful in developing a fall-­back position in the event that the current negotiations fail. Comment on Assumptions. There is no reason to believe at this time that U.S. objectives in the Conference are unattainable. The basic U.S. objective is a two-­fold one: to obtain an agreement for suspension of nuclear tests under effective international control, or to expose the unwillingness of the Soviet Union to accept international control as the basis for failure to reach agreement if this is the result of the Con­ ference. It is not possible at present to say that an agreement will not be reached despite current unacceptable Soviet positions, since seri­ ous negotiation has just commenced and the Soviet Union professes to accept the report of the Geneva Experts on a control system. We remain confident on the basis of discussion so far that, if the Confer­ ence breaks down, the blame will clearly rest on the Soviet Union. While the Soviet Union has used fear of radioactive fallout as a propaganda weapon, world-­wide concern with nuclear testing is not confined to this one aspect. The discontinuance of nuclear testing is seen more and more as an important first step toward disarmament. A proposal for anything less than stopping all nuclear weapons tests would evoke an immediate Soviet charge that we were motivated pri­ marily by a desire to evade a suspension, and would not serve as a basis for negotiation with the Soviet Union. The present nuclear test detection system is not adequate for mon­ itoring atmospheric tests. The Geneva technical conference clearly established the requirement for stations within the Soviet Union if atmospheric bursts down to 1 kiloton are to be detected. The Gore Proposal as a U.S. Position Now. In view of these consider­ ations it would be undesirable for the United States to advance the Gore proposals at this time. We would give the Soviet Union an excuse to escape from showing its true position on acceptance of international controls and it would be unlikely to have major propaganda value. It would almost certainly lead to a break in negotiations advantageous to the Soviet Union and would thus remove such chance as there is of obtaining international inspection within the Soviet Union. The USSR would accuse the U.S. of walking away from the stated positions in mid-­negotiation.
