January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1285
tant to us, to Jordan, and to others. He had talked with Brown before
His Majesty arrived. We are grateful for His Majesty’s role. He (the
President) will be going to Venice,3 and for two days before that he
would stop in Rome, and would see the Pope. Venice is primarily about
economics—e.g. the stability of the monetary system and dealing with
energy. (At this point, Dr. Brzezinski brought a plastic model of the
space shuttle into the room).
The President said that this is a model of the space shuttle, which
His Majesty can take with him.
King Hussein said thank you.
The President (pointing to the model) said that it would be
launched from here, and then separate.
Dr. Brzezinski pointed out the rockets and the solar panels.
The President said that this is a good-sized model; and is an inter-
esting thing.
King Hussein said thank you.
The President said that at Venice they would talk about economic
matters, such as inflation and unemployment—and particularly about
energy. We have cut down our imports of oil. We have had a success
since the Tokyo Summit.4 We promised to reduce imports by 5% and
did so; we were the only country to meet its commitment. This year, in
the first five months, we reduced oil consumption by 12%, which is
about 1 million barrels per day. At Venice, they would discuss how to
continue, and make a recommitment to reduce imports between 1980
and 1985. Also they would talk about how to produce more energy,
from coal, nuclear, shale, the sun, crops—including trees. We got
through the Congress an amount over 10 years equal to $227 billion in
taxes for these purposes, and were setting up corporations to en-
courage synthetic fuels—technology we would share with our Euro-
pean Allies; we are eager to cooperate with Jordan on any projects it
has. We are planning the biggest photo-voltaic project in history, jointly
with the Italians. With other countries we will cooperate, and as tech-
nology evolves, we will be eager to share it with Jordan. We can learn
both ways.
On other items at Venice, they will talk about how to deal with the
Soviet presence in Afghanistan; about Iran; and dealing with the LDCs,
regarding the devastating impact of oil prices on their economies.
Countries like Turkey and Brazil are importing about as much oil as
their total exports. As a result, debt is a serious problem; inflation is
3 See footnote 8, Document 384.
4 Reference is to the G–7 Economic Summit Conference, which took place in Tokyo
June 28–29, 1979.
