Chapter 2, January–June 1989 81 preserving our options to deploy SDI even if this risks blocking a START agreement? The paper sets forth alternate views on (a) the need to have a treaty right to deploy SDI, (b) the need for the broad interpretation, and (c) whether Defense and Space concessions are needed for START. The paper establishes consensus on the value of retaining the ABM Treaty for now and of seeking a cooperative transition to a world of strategic defenses.14 As with other elements of the review, the Defense and Space issues are complicated and detailed for the amount of time available to devote to them. Moreover, as we will be but three weeks from resumption of negotiations when the NSC considers the paper, we will be hard pressed to make significant changes in our negotiating position in an orderly fashion. Furthermore, most of the issues raised by the review (e.g. Defense and Space objectives versus seeking a START agreement) need to be borne in mind when making future decisions, but are not now ripe for decision. Thus, we suggest you seek consensus on the following hypotheses: — The review raises the right issues about the Defense and Space Talks. — However, given that we are not at endgame in either START or D&S, there is no need now to make decisions on how we would resolve fundamental tradeoffs. — As the negotiations proceed, we will continue to review the issues raised in the paper. — For the time being at least, the following objectives remain valid:15 a) to preserve the U.S. right to pursue the SDI program within the obligations of the ABM Treaty in order to determine the feasibility of Strategic Defenses; b) to discuss with the Soviet Union a cooperative transition to effective strategic defenses; and, c) to establish the right to deploy strategic defenses if we choose to do so, at a future time without further reference to the ABM Treaty16 — We can also reaffirm the consensus on the value of retaining the ABM Treaty for now and of seeking a cooperative transition to a world of strategic defenses. If people are not willing to endorse these objectives, it will be important to have the bluntest possible discussion at the Deputies 14 Gates wrote in the right-­hand margin below this paragraph: “cost, access, doability.” 15 Gates underlined “the following objectives remain valid.” 16 Gates drew a bracket in the left-­hand margin beside points A-C, placed a checkmark to the left of the bracket, and wrote: “reaffirm.”
