540
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
the hostages, issue a statement condemning the Shah and American
interference in Iran.
In an attempt to head this off, the Commission planned to see Bani-
Sadr and ask him to tell the Imam that such a statement would be
unacceptable. As the Commission members were leaving the hotel
Monday morning to see Bani-Sadr, however, Khomeini’s statement
had already been made.3 According to Waldheim this was the final
straw; most Commission members were angered and lost confidence
in the word of their Iranian interlocutors.
When the Commission members met with Bani-Sadr, he said he
disagreed with Khomeini’s statement and suggested that the Commis-
sion stay on for one to two days to see whether the issue could be
worked out. The Commission was adamant in its intention to leave
and went to a meeting with Qotbzadeh to inform him that they would
depart on Tuesday morning. Qotbzadeh told the Commission members
that Bourguet had just called with a new formula and suggested the
Commission stay on for 24–48 hours.
The Commission agreed that Bedjaoui could then meet alone with
Bani-Sadr and Bourguet to discuss the new scenario, which was as
follows: within 24 hours the Commission would (1) meet with the
Revolutionary Council; (2) meet with the Imam, accompanied by Bani-
Sadr; (3) issue a joint communiqué which would, inter alia, condemn
the Shah and the United States; (4) see the hostages at the Embassy.
The Commission responded that this was not acceptable. Qotbzadeh
made one last attempt to turn the Commission around at 11:00 p.m.
on Monday night, but the Commission remained firm and departed
on Tuesday morning.4
The Secretary asked whether the Commission had completed work
on the first part of its mandate. Waldheim responded that no report
has yet been prepared. The Commission believes it has heard all it
needs to and all that remains is to put the report together.
In response to the question of how we proceed, Waldheim said he
had discussed this with Bedjaoui who noted that Bani-Sadr had told
him that the matter would be settled soon—perhaps in ten days to two
weeks (by March 21st or 22nd). Bani-Sadr implied it is not necessary
to wait for the establishment of Parliament; he may be able to move
after the first round of elections on Friday. This is predicated, however,
on Bani-Sadr’s expectation of strong support from the electorate. With
this new mandate he could go to the Imam and get a favorable decision
on the hostages. Bedjaoui therefore feels that the Commission should
3 See Document 203.
4 March 11.
