Human Rights 575 gestions, or a modified version thereof, could serve as the starting point for discussion. One last observation is that we have a sound procedural basis on which to build—i.e. the Working Group, the Inter-Agency Group, and the close consultation and information transfer process already established with Treasury and A.I.D. Suggestions for Improving the Procedures of the Inter-Agency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance —The Working Group should identify upcoming projects at least two months before action is due to be taken to implement them. (In the case of MDB projects this will result in some inefficiencies as projects identified even this close to Board action will sometimes slip or be re-structured). —The State Department should develop action plans on a quarterly basis which include current assessments of the human rights situation and set forth recommendations on appropriate action on all upcoming assistance for the following quarter. Such action recommendations will be based on an analysis of tactical and legal considerations, both bilateral and global. Action plans should be prepared on all countries to which the U.S. has opposed assistance over the past two years as well as those countries which have come up consistently for review by the Inter-Agency Group3 for the Word Committee.4 —The Inter-Agency Group should review projects identified by the Working Group in the context of the State Department’s Action Plans. In the case of MDB projects, the group will make a recommendation on appropriate USG action, at least one full week in advance of Bank Board consideration. —In cases where dates for project consideration by MDB Boards slip into the timeframe of the next quarterly review of the action plan, and if there is no State Department consensus as expressed in the action plan to support the recommendation of the Inter-Agency Group, the Working Group shall re-submit the project for Inter-Agency review in accordance with the above delineated time constraints. Other agencies participating in the Working Group can also recommend resubmission to the Inter-Agency Group. —In those few cases where major and essential changes occur in the human rights situation in a country prior to Bank Board consider- 3 The countries involved are: Argentina, Central African Empire, Chile, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Korea, Laos, Mozambique, Paraguay, Philippines, Uruguay, Vietnam, Yemen (PDR), Nicaragua, Haiti, Afghanistan, Zaire, Romania. [Footnote in the original.] 4 Presumably Bova is referring to the Inter-Agency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance; the phrase “for the Word Committee,” is an error.
