Yugoslavia 793 248. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 15, 1978 SUBJECT Tito Visit: Economic Cooperation Larry Eagleburger proposed the setting up of a government-togovernment economic commission with Yugoslavia,2 to replace the current non-governmental one, as part of Tito’s visit. We asked State, Commerce, and Treasury for a recommendation. (See Tab II.)3 They have recommended that there be two working groups, instead—one here and one in Belgrade—which could meet alternatively every few months.4 Commerce Assistant Secretary Weil would co-chair the one here; and Eagleburger there. This course was chosen because: —the nature of the Yugoslav economy does not require the same kind of apparatus as for Poland, Romania, or the Soviet Union; —the Yugoslavs would probably prefer having an arrangement different from that of other states; and —once meetings start at a high level, they cannot then be downgraded. We sought a further judgment on this point, especially in view of Larry’s initial recommendation. State says that he now concurs, and thus so do I. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–3/78. Confidential. Sent for action. 2 Noting the successful development of relations between the United States and Yugoslavia during the first year of the Carter administration, Eagleburger proposed the creation of a joint economic/trade commission chaired at the Assistant Secretary level to better coordinate U.S. policy in the economic field. (Telegram 8574 from Belgrade, December 5, 1977; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770450–0304) 3 Attached but not printed is a December 28, 1977, memorandum in which Brzezinski requested the opinion of the Department of State on the idea of establishing a Joint Economic Council with Yugoslavia. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–3/78) Hunter initially proposed setting up both a Joint Economic Council and a Joint Defense Council, but both Brzezinski and Aaron opposed the idea of a Defense Council. (Ibid.) 4 Tarnoff forwarded the Department’s concurrence in a memorandum to Brzezinski on January 16. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–3/78)
