International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
681
corded in ounces as a memorandum item on the Account’s books or
valued only at the price necessary to cover any net worth shortfall.
Guarantees. Even if the gold issue can be resolved satisfactorily,
gold does not provide the whole answer: it is conceivable that the
amounts of IMF gold available to the Account may become insufficient
to maintain the Account’s financial position, and participants will insist
on a contingency provision to cover this possibility. We have indicated
that, although we are not prepared to make supplementary interest
payments to the Account, we are prepared to consider sharing (propor-
tion not yet discussed) in financing any negative balance in the Account
at the time of a decision to terminate its operations—provided that such
a decision requires the joint consent of the U.S. and other participants,
i.e., that we have a veto. Under such an arrangement, there would be at
least two options in the event IMF gold became insufficient to balance
the Account’s financial position: the Account could terminate at that
point and redeem its obligations in full without any calls on guar-
antees; or it could continue operations (creating new SDR claims on it-
self to cover any current interest shortfall) and balance its accounts
through claims on the ultimate guarantees.
Some countries, while indicating there is a need for an ultimate
guarantee at liquidation of the Account, have gone further to argue that
guarantees should be callable periodically—before liquidation of the
Account—to provide for “maintenance of value” on a current basis.
This would mean that someone—presumably the U.S. and depositors
in some agreed proportion—would have to pay money into the Ac-
count each year a shortfall occurred. The U.S. has argued that current
maintenance of value is unnecessary, given the permanent/indefinite
maturity of the Account’s obligations and operations, and that the ulti-
mate guarantees should suffice to maintain the integrity of the Ac-
count. We have also said that there is no realistic prospect that the U.S.
would be able to obtain legislative authority to make maintenance-
of-value payments on a current basis. It is also doubtful whether other
countries would in fact be prepared to make such periodic payments to
the Account.
Legislative Implications
Although we cannot determine precise legislative requirements at
this point, some form of legislation would probably be necessary under
any variant of the Account that could be negotiated.
—Authorization would be required for the U.S. to participate in a
joint guarantee to be activated upon termination of the Account. It is
also possible, but not certain, that the Congress would require some
form of appropriations action, even though a call on the U.S. commit-
ment would be subject to U.S. veto. (If appropriations were required,
