1034 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on December 4, 1979, Ambassador Sol Linowitz paid his first “get-acquainted” visit to Egypt and Israel in his new capacity December 8–13. Linowitz provided an overall summary of his trip in an un-numbered telegram to multiple posts, December 13. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 4, Autonomy Talks: 12/79) Arriving first in Cairo on December 8, Linowitz initially met with Egyptian Prime Minister Mustapha Khalil and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat. Characterizing these talks as “very good and helpful,” Linowitz reported to President Jimmy Carter and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance his impressions of both men and their respective outlooks on the peace process. Sadat, Linowitz noted, “remains fully committed to the negotiating process in which Egypt, Israel and the United States are engaged and believes that things can fall into place,” despite his view that the moment “when difficult issues in the negotiations must be addressed” was “now approaching.” The Egyptian President “defines the ‘big issues’ which he wants to see resolved as Jerusalem, full autonomy and self-determination,” attaching particular significance to Jerusalem “in light of its significance to the whole Arab world from which he feels understandably isolated.” In contrast, Linowitz continued, Khalil viewed Palestinian self-determination as the key issue and “has a definition of this controversial term which he obviously hopes we can be persuaded to agree to—not an independent Palestinian state but the right for the Palestinians to determine their own future through a freely-accepted link with Jordan.” Khalil “agreed that if this concept were accepted almost all other problems—including those of South Lebanon and the PLO—would fall into line.” (Telegram 3944 from Jerusalem, December 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850074– 1585) Linowitz reported on further conversation with Egyptian Minister of State Boutros Boutros-Ghali on December 8 in telegram 25140 from Cairo, December 9. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840140–1797; N790009–0728) An additional meeting was held with Egyptian Minister of Defense Hassan Kamel Ali. From Cairo, Linowitz travelled to Tel Aviv for his first meetings with Israeli officials. His first meeting was with Israeli Minister of the Interior Josef Burg on December 10, which he summarized in telegram 3981 from Jerusalem, December 12. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850074–1558) The next day, December 11, Linowitz met with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, who Linowitz found “responsive and even effusive at times,” for one and three-quarters hours. Linowitz reported to Carter and Vance that while his main objective “was to establish a rapport of friendship and confidence,” he also wanted to “start a process of suggesting new ways of thinking about some of the key issues.” “On the matter of Begin’s concern that autonomy might lead to an independent Palestinian state,” Li-
