704
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
minister in Washington,3 we clearly saw the difficulties. If there were
not difficulties, we would have solved these problems long ago. But I
hope to have a complete treaty text. On Articles 6–2 and 6–5, there is
substantial agreement. There are some minor problems. On the target
date there has been some controversy. We also need to clear up the
letter.
President Sadat has told me that if the negotiations are successful
based on what he needs to protect Egyptian interests, he would come to
Jerusalem to sign the final documents, and he would invite Prime Min-
ister Begin to Cairo to sign them. This could be done in the next couple
of days, after assessing the remaining issues, the Egyptian positions are
sufficiently forthcoming for Israel to accept. We are prepared to spend
the time that is needed to reach an agreement on the remaining issues. I
told Sadat that I would give him a report this afternoon. I need not
trouble you with describing the strategic advantages of the treaty. A
treaty would improve the prospects for better relations between us on
economic and military matters. It would help two of our best friends
not to continue to be in a state of war.
Prime Minister Begin: As you remember in our private talks, we can
proceed by talking about either procedure or substance. I told the Presi-
dent that we had taken decisions in the Cabinet to hold debate in the
Cabinet on our proposals for autonomy in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza,
before the signing of a treaty. We also had a commitment to the Knesset
to have a debate before any signing. This stands. This is not an insur-
mountable problem, but we need some time to hold a debate in our
Cabinet. We can discuss this. I suggest first we hear from you on all of
the Egyptian proposals on all of the outstanding issues. We agreed in
Washington to certain formulations on Article 6, paragraphs 2 and 5,
and on the target date. The Cabinet approved of these proposals by a
majority vote. We also need to discuss the question of oil. Sadat has
made some proposals. Then I will reply.
President Carter: There are three basic questions on substance. They
involve the West Bank and Gaza letter and Article 6, paragraphs 2 and
5. Secretary Vance has worked with Egypt most directly on these ques-
tions. We feel that there should be a slight modification on Article 6. It
should be acceptable to you. If these changes are made, it should be
possible to reach agreement. You can look at the letter. The procedure
for handling the other Camp David Framework is important. There is a
question of whether Gaza and the West Bank should be kept together,
or separated, as well as the degree of Egyptian presence in Gaza, and
whether there could be a small number of Egyptians to help prepare for
3 See Documents 190 and 192.
