Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
629
fill the vacuum with issues that are not necessarily worth your own
attention.
Since you have announced your intention not to serve in the
second Carter Administration, you need more than ever to show a com-
mand of the important continuing issues as well as an energetic ap-
proach to new areas, so as not to be perceived, in the final months, as a
lame duck.5
We do not suggest that the coming months will provide fertile
ground for dramatic new successes. There isn’t much money avail-
able—indeed, we will be fighting to avoid real cuts in our foreign
policy resources. And the domestic political climate as we head into the
election is obviously difficult.
We do believe, however, that you can be extremely effective in a
number of areas in which you can leave a lasting imprint, by defining
new substantive longer-term goals, influencing public opinion, or
strengthening the institutions of your office and this building.6
I. Priority Old Issues.
In this category are issues that have, from the beginning, repre-
sented cornerstones of the Administration’s foreign policies. Your ac-
tive involvement is needed in each case either to build on a partial
success or to keep the pressure up on finding solutions. In certain cases,
your presence is necessary so that other agencies or other advisors do
not counsel the President in ways that could lead to dramatic policy re-
versals or sharp increases in international tensions.
A. Middle East: No issue continues to present more difficulties and
dangers.7 Clearly your involvement is crucial even with Strauss’s ap-
pointment.8 We are concerned that the U.S. is moving in the direction of
dealing with the Palestinians without adequate study of the effect of
such moves on: Israeli flexibility on the West Bank/Gaza; Israeli doubts
about the U.S. at a time that a change in government may be near in Je-
rusalem; and the 1980 Presidential candidates who may polarize this
emotional issue within the U.S.
5 Vance underlined “you need more than ever to show a command of the important
continuing issues as well as an energetic approach to new areas,” and wrote “I agree” in
the left-hand margin next to this sentence. En route from the Middle East to Rome on
May 27, Vance informed reporters that he would serve only one term as Secretary of
State. According to The New York Times, Vance asserted: “After four years in office, you
get too tired, you lose freshness and imagination. After four years, you ought to get out
and turn it over to someone else.” (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Makes It Clear He Won’t
Stay On After 1980,” May 29, 1979, p. A–2)
6 Vance underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “by.”
7 Vance placed a checkmark in the left-hand margin next to this heading and
sentence.
8 See footnote 3, Document 121.
