884
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
about 650,000 barrels per day which was reached prior to the shut-
down in 1951.
13. The refining situation in Iran presents a parallel condition to
that which exists in crude oil production. The trend in recent years has
been toward refineries located close to points of consumption rather
than at sources of production. In many cases governments have forced
this relocation of refineries either by direct legislation or by means of
tariff differentials. In 1945, 82 percent of all the oil refined in the Eastern
Hemisphere was processed in the Middle East. By 1953 this volume
had declined to 19 percent of the total. The European refineries in 1945
processed only 6 percent of this total, but by 1953 their proportion had
risen to 63 percent. Large additional refining capacity is now under
construction in Europe, South Asia, and the South Pacific. In every case
these refineries are close to their consuming markets.
14. The Abadan refinery, largest in the world, formerly had a
through-put in excess of 500,000 barrels per day. Since the shut-down it
has fallen into considerable disrepair, and an expenditure variously es-
timated from $30,000,000 to $60,000,000 will be required to place it back
into partial operation. Even with a reduced through-put of 300,000
barrels per day a severe marketing and distribution problem will be en-
countered. This will be especially true in view of the trend, already
noted, of processing at points close to consumption rather than at the
sources of production. The only outlet for such a large volume of re-
fined products is through the combined marketing systems of the
major oil companies operating in the Eastern Hemisphere. Further-
more, this refinery can be operated and managed most efficiently if it
becomes an integral part of these distributing organizations.
15. Since Iran does not have the marketing facilities or the re-
sources to acquire them, it can only be considered as a supplier. As a
supplier, Iran must compete with other Middle East sources of petro-
leum in order that marketing companies, with which Iran must deal as
shown above, will not be penalized in shifting their requirements from
their own sources in the Middle East to Iran.
16. Before any sales agreement could be entered into, assurances
would undoubtedly be required by any marketing company that there
would be performance by the supplier in accordance with the strict
standards of the industry. This requirement is generally interpreted by
the industry to mean that there must be effective foreign management
of Iranian oil production. Techniques to accomplish this, within the
framework of the nationalization law, range from suggestions that the
IBRD be an intermediate agent to consideration of the restoration of a
foreign oil concession in Iran under some terms of contract with the Na-
tional Iranian Oil Company.
