Afghanistan
251
of the countryside would probably not prompt a DRA cry for Soviet
help, because political power here resides in Kabul and the major cities,
and because insurgent control of the rural areas would not necessarily
constitute a direct threat to the survival of the regime. Moreover, we
concluded that for domestic and foreign political reasons, that neither
Moscow nor Kabul would want to face the “Soviet troops” decision
until other, less dramatic, means to counter the insurgents had been
exhausted. Finally, should Soviet troops arrive, we believed they would
be used to establish the security of Kabul and the major cities, and
would probably not be deployed into the countryside where they could
become bogged down in endless fighting over extremely rough terrain.
4. The arrival now of several battalions of Soviet airborne and
motorized rifle troops raises a number of questions, especially since
the domestic situation here does not quite fit the scenario we envisaged
earlier this year. Despite the many headaches and political upheavals
of the past few months, there have been no urban uprisings or garrison
mutinies in any of the major cities similar to those which occurred in
Herat in March or Kabul in August and October. Kabul, by far the key
to political control of the country, has remained generally untouched
by the fighting in the countryside, although there has recently been a
dramatic upsurge in urban terrorism aimed at Khalqi officials and
Soviet citizens. The key military units in and around Kabul appear to
remain loyal to the regime. Moscow would appear, therefore, to have
responded to an Afghan appeal for direct military help in a situation
which seems not to include an imminent threat to the revolution or
even to the Amin regime in Kabul, and I can arrive at only a few
reasons for this development.
5. Kabul and Moscow hope to “preempt” the development of any
serious threat to the regime. In my opinion, the regime’s overall security
situation has gradually deteriorated over the past few weeks, caused
primarily by a growing military manpower shortage (e.g., the draft age
has been lowered from 22 to 20 years), an increase in urban terrorism
in Kandahar and Kabul, indications that morale in the military officer
corps may be eroding, and persistent reports that alienations within
the PDPA resulting from the Taraki-Amin schism may be worsening.
In this situation of gradual, rather than sudden, deterioration, the DRA
leadership and Moscow may have decided that an infusion of Soviet
combat troops now may provide the necessary “stiffener” for the
Afghan military, in order to avoid any abrupt collapse or to protect
the key northern approaches to Kabul should DRA units fighting in
Samangan and Badakhshan Provinces disintegrate. In this regard, they
may have believed that a shot in the arm at this point would be sufficient
to bolster the regime until winter weather dampens activities on both
sides, something which has not yet taken place.
