988
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
there recommendations about how to increase the effectiveness of its
programs.
Likewise, there is almost a total absence of priority setting4 with re-
spect to international health problems, particularly in our assistance
programs.
The relationship of the health sector to our entire development
assistance strategy5 seems to lack definition and analysis with respect
to the interaction between various sectors. There is no real under-
standing expressed in the report of how, for example, health problems
relate to food and nutrition and even, more importantly, to tough ques-
tions such as provision of community water services, education, and
urbanization. The assumption seems to be that health is somehow over-
arching many of these sectors and basically subservient to them. This
perspective is in part reflected by one of the recommendations in put-
ting environment and population under a Bureau of International
Health. It seems to me this is a mistaken approach since it does not give
adequate acknowledgement of the variety of forces at work in the de-
velopment process or indeed of the problem of political and social envi-
ronmental change which is fundamental to any development strategy.
Clearly, health is vital to any development strategy but it is not the sole
basis for either a human needs or a human rights policy.
In this same way, there is no recognition of limits to resources and
personnel that6 might be available to the health sector. In a period of
personnel and budgetary constraint within the USG it seems to me the
process of priority setting is all the more urgent but there is little recog-
nition of that reality. Further, there is no examination of appropriate
funding levels for our bilateral and multilateral assistance programs.7
This, together with any substantive priorities in terms of international
health problems (tropical diseases, cancer, toxic substances, air pollu-
tion, etc.), makes for a very serious deficiency in the policy usefulness
of the report.
The characterization of the relationship between “health criteria”
and human rights8 in evaluating the establishment and nature of rela-
4 An unknown hand underlined the phrase “priority setting.”
5 An unknown hand underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with the
word “relationship” and ending with the word “strategy.”
6 An unknown hand underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with the
word “to” and ending with the word “that.”
7 An unknown hand underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with the
word “no” and ending with the word “programs.”
8 An unknown hand underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with the
phrase “ ‘health criteria’ ” and ending with the word “rights.”
