Afghanistan 71 seems too sanguine.2 I think the Soviets are likely to assert their position in Afghanistan forcefully if they see a counter-coup coming; they would be too fearful that a reactionary take-over would be anti-Soviet and put a regime friendly to the US right on their borders. Given the composition of the population on their side of the border, this is an especially distressing thought. State, with NSC clearance, has done some modest contingency planning in terms of demarches to be made, etc., should the Soviets intervene. Nobody has been able to come up with ideas on what we should or could actually do in that contingency. Short of that, we can move cautiously to capitalize on the one bright spot in the picture— India’s recognition that the Kabul regime means trouble for them too. (A separate memo is enroute on this.)3 Another issue also arises: how long can we, in good conscience, continue AID programs on the assumption that Afghanistan is not a Communist-controlled state? I hope that we can continue to do so since, if there is to be a break, I would like Kabul to bear the blame. If I were asked about this under oath, however, I would be very uncomfortable. I have no recommendation that you do anything at the present time. Mainly, I want to make sure that you are keeping this unfortunate situation in mind. You could, however, decide that you want to have an inter-agency meeting (mini-SCC?) to consider two points:4 —How close are we to a situation where Taraki’s control breaks down and the Soviets intervene? Are there any more imaginative ways of responding than we have come up with so far? (The responses will almost inevitably be negative since State and CIA claim to have been giving serious thought to this.) —How close are we to a situation in which we have to accept the fact that Taraki is beyond redemption and for one reason or another we should begin to pull back? (This, however, would be a dangerous 2 Not further identified and not found. No cables from Moscow were found conveying the Ambassador’s “sanguine” view regarding the possibility of Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. 3 Not further identified. 4 Inderfurth drew a line under “mini-SCC” and wrote in the margin: “good idea.”
