276  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
CH–27.	
Despatch from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the 
Department of State1
 
Santiago, January 8, 1960
No. 489.
REF: CA-1486, August 14, 19592
SUBJECT
Object and Operation Plan for Chile3
Relations between the Governments of the United States and 
Chile have reached a point of cordiality which is unusual in interna-
tional relations. For the first time in 20 years, the Chilean Government 
is sincerely desirous of emphasizing free enterprise in the economy of 
the country and is making a sincere effort to cope with the economic 
problems which face the country because fiscal improvidence in years 
gone by. Chile has given valuable support to the United States posi-
tion in the United Nations, particularly in such delicate problems as the 
seating of Communist China. The political philosophy of the Chilean 
Government is as strongly democratic and as opposed to all forms of 
totalitarianism as is our own.
The election of Sr. Jorge ALESSANDRI Rodriguez as President of 
Chile in September 1958 by a very slender margin brought into exis-
tence a businessman’s government which has utilized some of the best 
brains in Chile in an attempt improve the country’s economy. But a 
slight change in the vote would have brought into power a government 
of the extreme left, dedicated to socialistic forms of economic organiza-
tion, and to collaboration with the communists; that such a government 
would have posed serious problems for the United States goes without 
saying.
It must therefore be the primary political objective of our policy 
in Chile to do everything we properly can to ensure the success of the 
Alessandri Administration politically and economically. We should 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.25/1–860. Secret.
2 The referenced Department of State Instruction transmitted the “Regional 
Operations Plan for Latin America,” approved by the Operations Coordinating Board on 
July, 1, 1959. (611-20/8-145[illegible in the original]
3 The following individuals participated in the preparation of this despatch: 
Ambassador Howe, William L. Krieg, Counselor of the Embassy, who drafted the doc-
ument; Donovan Q. Zook, First Secretary of the Embassy; Charles Katsainos, Second 
Secretary; Norman M. Pearson, Labor Attaché; Victor Algrant, Commercial Attaché; 
Ralph W. Richardson, Minerals Officer; Capt. Arthur M. Savage, Naval Attaché; Col. 
Walter P. Goodwin, Army Mission Chief; Hewson A. Ryan, USIA Political Affairs Officer; 
and L. Paul Oeschli, ICA Deputy Program Officer.
