March 1952–February 1953 279 clear to Qavam that help was only for interim period necess for him to arrange negots. Makins went on to say there are two points of tactics which require careful consideration. Firstly, FonOff feels there shld be public Iranian request before we announce any such aid. In this same connection, it wld probably be best from Qavam’s point of view if publicity minimized. Secondly, there is question of timing of any announcement. FonOff feels these questions shld be fully discussed with Qavam in advance any announcement in order assure tactics are worked out in manner which will be most calculated help him and minimize opposition attempts exploit sitn by representing aid as indication US and UK brought him to power. FonOff will let us know later today of Eden’s reactions and we shall then inform Dept. FonOff will also be notifying Brit Emb Wash. Gifford 91. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, July 20, 1952, 3 p.m. 276. 1. Natl Front Deputies have been pursuing unparliamentary tactics in order prevent functioning of Majlis. Some of them including Kashani who has made appeal to Armed Forces not (rpt not) obey Qavam’s orders and Ghanatabodi who has publicly threatened personally to kill Qavam if given opportunity, are also endeavoring promote disorder and even full-scale revolution. In Tehran members of Iran Party, one of most important components of Natl Front, has joined forces with Tudeh and new coalition is extremely active, particularly among youth. They are denouncing not only Qavam but Shah himself. 2. In view these rapid developments, Qavam insists he must have free hand to act quickly and decisively. He sent msg to me this morning that yesterday afternoon during audience with Shah, he had asked latter for authority in his discretion to dismiss Majlis at moment’s notice in case it shld become clear that Majlis unable function because of obstructive tactics of opposition Deputies some whom were hiding be- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.21/7–2052. Secret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 10:50 a.m.
