86 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ETA–31. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, March 31, 1960. SUBJECT Financial Assistance for Latin America PARTICIPANTS The Under Secretary Vance Brand, Managing Director, DLF Assistant Secretary Rubottom I asked the Under Secretary if I could give a brief outline of my concept of the problem regarding financial assistance to Latin America without going into specific cases, and, on obtaining his favorable reply, I said: Latin America did exceptionally well from an economic standpoint during World War II and up until the last half of 1956, due largely to the good prices obtained for the raw materials exported; a decline set in in the last half of 1956 which was not arrested until the last half of 1959, this having come about by virtue of improved world market conditions and our own efforts in the commodity field, witness coffee and lead and zinc; most Latin American leaders still adhere to our own belief that investment and loans should be the main source of development capital, plus, of course, their own savings, but the longer we remain in the grant-­aid business elsewhere in the world the more we will have to face the factor of the “invidious comparison” since all our efforts to explain the difference have been unsuccessful if we were to face the truth; unless we step up the tempo of loans to Latin America and increase the priority of the DLF in the area, we are almost certain to have amendments added by the Congress requiring that we do certain things in Latin America and we run the risk that certain countries, notably Guatemala, will successfully appeal directly to the Congress for grant aid. Neither Mr. Dillon nor Mr. Brand voiced any contrary view to the above line. Both said that they felt that more needed to be done for Latin America. Mr. Dillon referred to the recent letter of Graydon Upton to me urging that we try to develop a “flow of funds” chart for Latin America,2 showing repayments as well as loan disbursements in view of his fear that this year and in the near future we may on a net basis be lending little if anything to Latin America and this at a time when they need more than ever before. 1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations, Lot 64 D 199. Confidential. Drafted by Rubottom, and initialled for approval by Dillon on April 4. 2 The reference letter from Graydon Upton was not found in Department of State files.
