142 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII us. Then there is the nuclear problem and a lot of other issues with them.4 I do not know how to sort it out. In a different context we have settled on a 4-pronged approach to Pakistan which is in the process of being implemented by the Department of State. One element of that involves reiteration of our commitment of the late 1950’s without permitting the Pakistanis to engage in hypothetical exercises as to what we might do under certain contingencies. We are trying insofar as possible to separate contentious issues from issues where we have a common interest—one of these being preservation of the countries to the south of the Soviet Union in this part of the world and expressing sympathy for the insurgency in Afghanistan. The question is whether any of these proposed activities would further our policy regarding Pakistan and whether it would have the effect of complicating the takeover of Afghanistan itself—not to speak, perhaps, of the ultimate objective which would be to reverse the takeover and keep the situation boiling the way that they (the Soviets) have kept it boiling for us in other parts of the world. DN: I would like to raise a more general question. Right now there is an active insurgency going on in Afghanistan. All indications are that the Pakistanis want to maintain a posture that they are now [not] involved. If we go ahead with anything that requires a Presidential Finding and reporting to seven committees under Hughes-Ryan procedures, we are running a risk.5 The American role is likely to come out—knowledge of the American role could change the prospects as far as the Soviets are concerned. They could react differently. I want to raise this question, for we run the risk of upsetting the Soviets if we undertake these covert activities. ZB: That risk is there and its implication is that we should not undertake covert activity at all. GB: Then we would be out of business. FC: There is considerable concern on the Hill about just that point now. Congress has raised it with us. They say they intend for us to engage in covert action and they feel that they need to do something about cutting down access to sensitive information to minimize the chances of leaks. In a recent SSCI meeting I was asked why we in CIA were not doing something in Afghanistan. 4 See footnote 4, Document 42. 5 A reference to procedures required by an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1974. Also called the Hughes-Ryan Amendment after its co-authors Harold E. Hughes (D–Iowa) and Leo Ryan (D–California), the legislation obligated the President to find that a particular covert action was important to U.S. national security. The finding and “a description and scope of such operation” must be submitted “to the appropriate committees of the Congress” in “a timely fashion.” (P.L. 93–559, 88 Stat. 1795)
