World Hunger and Food Policy olic leaders equate Christian responsibility and peace with development of the poor countries. These considerations suggest that your visit to Rome, the Vatican and Venice is a propitious occasion for mobilizing greater international effort to relieve and avert famine. Such action is urgently indicated by starvation in northern Uganda, the spreading drought across the waist of Africa, the continuing plight of some two million refugees in East Africa, Southwest Asia and Southeast Asia, and the glacial scourge of malnutrition in all poor countries. The immediate needs of the international emergency aid agencies in Uganda are for about $1 million in cash to rent trucks and about 3000 additional tons of food. The World Food Council meeting on June 6 concluded that most of the countries across the waist of Africa face a second crop year of drought this summer and fall. The immediate action indicated is to ask the FAO for a comprehensive analysis of the food supply outlook in the drought-afflicted African countries, to call for increased contributions by potential donors to the World Food Program’s International Emergency Food Reserve, and to ask the WFP to coordinate an international African relief effort beginning this fall. The spreading food crisis in Africa dramatizes the need for comprehensive preventive action to improve food security in vulnerable countries and to alleviate chronic malnutrition among hundreds of millions of people in poor countries. This is one of the major thrusts of the draft Venice Summit declaration,4 your Presidential Commission on World Hunger and the Brandt Commission.5 Talking Points with the Pope —The tragic famine in northern Uganda and the threat of drought for a second year across the center of Africa are grave challenges to the international community’s conscience and vivid reminders of the need for more effective cooperation in preventing hunger. —I understand that the World Food Program is running short of food in its Uganda relief operation, and all the agencies there urgently need cash to rent trucks at very high daily rates. I suggest, therefore, that the United States (and Italy) and Catholic Relief Services support the appeal of the World Food Program for emergency aid. We have asked the World Food Program to send a senior relief coordinator to Uganda.
