Romania
621
Syria and Jordan. The Palestinians must be given an opportunity to
determine their fate. The Begin proposals on this issue are far from
acceptable.
Also related is the problem of the PLO. The Palestinians must
be represented in the negotiating process, and the PLO is the only
organization which can speak for the Palestinians. The Romanian Presi-
dent said that Dayan was not unyielding on recognizing the PLO. Just
before leaving Romania a representative of the PLO told Ceausescu of
the organization’s wish for direct talks with the US. Ceausescu feels
that the PLO is following a policy that will permit recognition of Israel’s
right to exist.
The present framework of the Egyptian-Israeli talks do not permit
the participation of Syria, Jordan, and the Palestinians, thus it would
be useful to consider convening a Geneva conference to permit wider
participation, including that of the USSR. Both Begin and Dayan have
indicated a willingness to consider that possibility.
The President said that there were certain differences of view with
the Romanian assessment. The US does not support complete Israeli
withdrawal since some border modification would be useful, and we
do not favor an independent Palestinian state. The US has long sought
to convince the PLO to renounce its committment to the destruction
of Israel and accept UN Resolution 242, but we have found no evidence
that the PLO is willing to modify its position.
Israel has put forward proposals on the West Bank that are inade-
quate. The next step is for Egypt to make a counter-proposal in order
to determine precisely where differences exist. We also feel that formu-
lations can be found to bridge the differences over the statement of
principles. We wish to encourage progress, but our influence over Israel
is overestimated.
The President asked Secretary Vance to comment on these issues.
The Secretary said that our experience has been that the Israelis are
much more rigid on the PLO question than Ceausescu indicated—
Begin in particular, but also Dayan. We fully agree that a way must
be found to widen the circle to include other states in direct negotiations
in order to achieve a comprehensive settlement. Agreement on a set
of general principles would be a first step in this direction.
The President said that US and Romanian goals in the Middle East
are the same—peace and Israeli withdrawal. We are not discouraged
since there is greater evidence of progress today than a year ago.
President Ceausescu reiterated his concern that a way be found for
the PLO to participate in the negotiating process. He also repeated the
assurances of PLO willingness to talk with the US.
