286
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Recommendations
The interagency Trade Policy Staff Committee (TPSC) has re-
viewed the USITC, Commerce, and Labor advice regarding reduction
or termination of relief. The TPSC (acting on behalf of the Cabinet-level
Trade Policy Committee) has a statutory responsibility to make recom-
mendations to you on import relief actions. Set forth below for your de-
cision are the options recommended by one or more TPSC agencies.
No TPSC agency recommended that you terminate specialty steel
import relief. All TPSC agencies recommend that you remove chipper
knife and RM 81 (band saw) steel from coverage under the alloy tool
steel quotas. These two minor products are available only in limited
quantities from American manufacturers, and shortages are currently
endangering the operations of domestic firms which consume these
materials. The domestic specialty steel industry supports exclusion of
chipper knife steel and only two firms might oppose exclusion of band
saw steel. Sweden has expressed particular interest in the exclusion of
chipper knife steel from the quotas.
All TPSC agencies further recommend that, to compensate for the
removal of chipper knife and band saw steel from quota coverage, the
Swedish and EC third year quotas be reduced. We would consult with
the EC and Sweden before making such an adjustment. This adjust-
ment would be small in relation to the total specialty steel quotas due to
the small import volume of these two products in the base period but
would reduce adverse domestic reaction to the exclusions.
Option I: The TPSC recommends the following action:11
Retain the specialty steel quotas for all product categories at their
current levels.
I support this recommendation along with the Departments of
Treasury, Commerce, Labor, Interior, Defense, and Agriculture. Eizen-
stat concurs.
The TPSC recommends no increases in quotas for the following
reasons: (1) domestic specialty steel employment conditions have not
fully recovered from depressed 1975 levels; (2) most of the domestic in-
dustry economic recovery has occurred during the first half of 1977 and
this recovery was not sustained in the third quarter of 1977; (3) produc-
tion levels in the third quarter of 1977 were the lowest since 1975 and
11 A typed notation in the margin adjacent to this sentence reads: “See Tab B.” See
footnotes 15 and 16 below.
