1980 915 the same proportion of their new SS–20 capability. But the major Soviet concern is probably that of being entrapped in the masses of Chinese in the event of war. This is what forces the Soviets to maintain its heavy dispositions in the region. Thus, what we ought to be addressing is whether it is helpful or harmful to worry the Soviets further about the U.S.-Chinese military relationship. Issue #5 I feel as strongly as Harold does about this. It’s crucial for our international security posture, and it’s crucial for maintaining domestic support for our foreign policy and defense efforts. I happen not to think it makes sense to raise the NATO spending goal to, say, five percent. Doing so, while the Allies are still at or worse than three percent would tend to show that these goals aren’t real. We also face the real problems that the Socialists and other “left” electorate in Europe remain strong. We must press our Allies as firmly as we can but calibrate our pressure carefully so we do not end up with Governments in European capitals even less sympathetic to our objectives. Our interest is to strengthen Europe and our ties with it, and to get the Allies to do what is feasible; we will defeat all our objectives if the focus of foreign policy tension becomes U.S.–European rather than Allied-Soviet. I’m also beginning to think we should look for some concept other than the “division of labor.” It tends to accentuate European views that Europe is or can be an “island of detente” insulated from U.S.–Soviet competition in Southwest Asia. Moreover, I’m not sure the American public will be satisfied—­and supportive of our efforts—­if the Allies aren’t bearing more of the burden and running the same risks as we in the Persian Gulf. I agree that we want the Europeans to fill the gap in NATO, but we have to involve them more in Southwest Asia. Finally, we are unlikely to revive Saudi aid to Egypt absent significant progress on Palestinian issues or an unwelcome Egyptian move back toward the Saudi positions on Jerusalem, etc. Issue #6 I agree fully both that we make every effort to keep our technological edge and that we tighten up on technology transfer. Issue #7 I would add here only that for their own reasons, our Allies are likely increasingly to point to the absence of an American draft as undercutting our case that the security situation is getting more acute and requires more sacrifices from everyone.
