World Hunger and Food Policy
773
—The issues involved are complex and require priority attention.
Among them is the relationship between worldwide hunger and mal-
nutrition and the maldistribution9 of worldwide food resources.
—It is in our interest and that of the entire world to address the
problem. Better food populations have less incentive for conflict and
greater capacity for economic development which makes them better
trading partners.
—In order for us to make our contributions toward alleviating
hunger most effective, we must have a well-defined and coordinated
food and development policy reflecting the relationship between do-
mestic and international hunger and malnutrition.
—Reaffirm your deep interest in the problem of World Hunger.
On June 4 of last year you instructed Chip, Zbig, Stu and I 10 to get to-
gether and let you know what could be done. A White House Working
Group was formed and its recommendations will be submitted to you
within the next two weeks. You have directed the Secretary of Agricul-
ture to form a working group on Food and Agricultural Policy com-
prised of State, Treasury, AID, OMB, NSC, and the Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers.11
—They will want you to agree to set up the Commission. I feel it
would be an important vehicle for mobilizing public awareness and
support for a U.S. effort to deal with world hunger and an important
mechanism for building broader support for foreign aid as you recom-
mended in the development assistance memo,12 including involving
entertainment and other public figures including your mother who is
working with Richard Harden on the issue.13 Our working group will
recommend creation of the Commission. I understand your reserva-
tions in general about establishing commissions, but believe this is one
which should be established.
9 The President underlined “malnutrition” and “maldistribution.”
10 See footnote 1, Document 212. The President underlined the names and changed
the typewritten word “I” to “me.”
11 See Document 230. The President underlined “working group,” “State,” “Treas-
ury,” “AID,” “OMB,” “NSC,” and “Council of Economic Advisers.”
12 The memorandum is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.
13 According to a December 9, 1977, memorandum summarizing a White House
meeting on world hunger, Lillian Carter—the President’s mother—and actress Shirley
MacLaine had previously met and “recounted their experiences about living in poverty
in India.” MacLaine expressed interest “in lending her talent and status to raising con-
sciousness about the problem of world hunger, its causes and some possible solutions.”
(Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject Files, Box HE–6, Executive, HE–3,
9/30/77–12/31/77)
