doubt as to the actual rights possessed by Council members under their
procedure, and as there is doubt as to whether the unanimity vote does exist
in this particular case; we are prepared to ask the Court for an opinion on
this point so that they can tell us what the position really is”.
The Venezuelan representative said that his government would omit no
endeavor to secure the adherence of the United States to the Court. While
the United States might find itself in a privileged position, he asked whether
such a privilege did not derive from a high significance which should be
attached to the adhesion to the Court Statutes of the most powerful
democracy in the world. He believed that the fifth reservation could only be
considered in connection with everything implied by the first reservation.
The obligations and rights established by the Versailles treaty could not be
modified according to the first reservation. The relations of the League and
the Court could not be changed by an adhesion expressly given outside the
constitutional charter of the League.
The Norwegian representative believed that the United States reservation
was acceptable when the United States was party to a dispute. It became
more difficult to admit the power of veto when it was not a party, especially
when the Council might ask an advisory opinion by a majority vote. He did
not believe that the Swedish proposal for counter-reservations to the
American reservations was necessary, because a League member was
protected by actual law. The United States, through reservation 4, reserved
itself the right to withdraw from an arrangement. It followed that Court
signatories, on their side, could withdraw also. Consequently, the “juridical
consequence” of the fourth reservation might be drawn and accepted
without it being necessary to formulate reservations opposing the American
conditions.
The Rumanian delegate said that his country was quite ready to accept the
reservation if it read in the sense that the United States simply desired to
retain and exercize the same rights as other non member States on a footing
of equality. He then made the important suggestion that a sub-committee be
drawn up to define the exact meaning of the second part of the fifth
reservation. The sub-committee of 14 members was then appointed,
composed of the representatives of the following countries:
