National Security Policy 357 For these reasons, the most complex of the military tasks facing this country, and the task most needing careful balancing and inter­ relating of many components, is without an adequate structure for its management. Is an effort to improve the effectiveness of defense as a whole likely to fail without more centralized management? The subsequent paragraphs of this section examine some specific technical issues. B. Active Defense 1. Nike-Zeus Is this system effective enough as planned at present to permit pro­ curement plans to proceed, or should hardening of a fraction of SAC be undertaken instead, while R & D on the Zeus system is carried on at the highest practical rate? A large ICBM can carry more than a dozen appropriately designed warheads which reenter separately and must be countered individu­ ally. The cost of an effective defense by Nike-Zeus then depends crit­ ically upon the cost of furnishing the necessary fire power. Does this fact, together with the fact that the radars of the Zeus system are neces­ sarily soft targets, suggest that hardening may be both a cheaper and a more dependable alternative? 2. Nike-Hercules Should this defense system, now becoming available, be installed to defend population centers or be used principally for the defense of SAC bases? Would economy result from concentrating on the use of this weapon for SAC base air defense during the early time period when the manned bomber threat to SAC is predominant, and would this be militarily wise? 3. Super Hawk What effectiveness will this weapon offer over other ground-­to-­ air missile systems? Could this added effectiveness be bought more cheaply by increasing the use of Nike-Hercules or other existing weap­ ons systems? These questions seem particularly relevant in view of the similari­ ties between Super Hawk and other air defense weapons, and in view of the fact that development costs are always high. 4. Bomarc Since this system is controlled by the ground environment, is it so vulnerable to ICBM attack as to represent a questionable air defense? Alternatively, should greater reliance be placed on more nearly autonomous weapons systems (including manned interceptors) with appropriate armament, designed for this mode of operation?
