Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 15 4. Remarks by Jimmy Carter1 Chicago, March 15, 1976 OUR FOREIGN RELATIONS In a presentation to the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, March 15, 1976, Mr. Carter said: I am pleased to speak to you today. This council is the oldest, the largest, and the most active organization of its kind in the country. For over 50 years you have helped make this city and this region better informed about a world which the St. Lawrence Seaway now brings to your doorstep. Men like Adlai Stevenson, Paul Douglas, and Frank Knox studied the world through this council and went on to make history. I want to take this opportunity to explain how I shall approach the problems of foreign policy if I am elected President: How I see our international situation today; What our role in the world should be; How we should approach our relationships with different kinds of international neighbors; What kinds of policies, and what kind of policymakers we shall need so that our international relations can be true expressions of the goals and the character of the people of our country. Our recent foreign policy, I am afraid, has been predicated on a belief that our national and international strength is inevitably deteriorating. I do not accept this premise. The prime responsibility of any President is to guarantee the security of our nation, with a tough, muscular, well-organized, and effective fighting force. We must have the ability to avoid the threat of successful attack or blackmail, and we must always be strong enough to carry out our legitimate foreign policy. This is a prerequisite to peace. Our foreign policy today is in greater disarray than at any time in recent history. 1 Source: The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I, part I: Jimmy Carter, pp. 109–119. Carter spoke before the members of the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations in the Prudential Auditorium. (Sean Toolan, “Might Send U.S. Troops to Africa, Carter Says,” Chicago Tribune, March 16, 1976, p. 3) On March 16, Carter won the Illinois Democratic primary; see Jim Squires, “A Big Bouquet for Carter and a Wreath for Reagan,” Chicago Tribune, March 17, 1976, p. 17.
