Afghanistan
361
Vietnam with forces roughly the size of that we had there in 1971 for
an indefinite period (a commitment of the kind which the Soviets are
obviously ready to make in Afghanistan), then we would clearly have
“won” in Vietnam. (S)
In sum, the war aims of the Soviets in Afghanistan are clear, limited,
and achievable in short order. All decisions that we make have to be
based on this supposition. My fear is that Afghanistan will not be the
Soviet Vietnam; that it will be the Soviet Entebbe.3 (S)
3 A reference to the successful hostage rescue operation conducted at Entebbe
Airport, Uganda, by the Israel Defense Forces against Palestinian hijackers, July 4, 1976.
Time magazine declared it “one of the most daring, spectacular rescues in modern times.”
(“The Rescue: ‘We Do the Impossible,’” Time, July 12, 1976, pp. 21–22)
133.
Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
NSC on Afghanistan (U)
Despite the obvious strategic and historic importance of the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, there will probably be a tendency to deal with
the event in isolation. This will focus debate on such issues as 1) how
to impose political costs on the USSR, 2) should we increase support
to the Afghan insurgents. (S)
To combat that tendency we need to articulate an understanding
of the broader crisis and a strategy for dealing with it. Because it so
illuminates the weight of Soviet land combat power in the north and
Soviet willingness to use it in the most cynical way, the invasion sharply
increases the prospect of eventual Soviet military domination of the
greater Middle East and US exclusion from the region, except perhaps
from Israel. Next we shall very probably see civil strife in Iran with
direct Soviet involvement, a PDRY take-over of North Yemen, increased
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security,
Ermarth, Box 1, Afghanistan. Secret; Outside the System. Sent for information.
