Afghanistan
523
anyone who really had doubts on that score should know that Brezhnev
had clearly denied it.
The Sakharov case, Gromyko said, was a domestic affair which
the Soviets were not prepared to discuss with any outsiders.
The Minister interspersed his basically hard-line response with
appropriate indications of indignation, ridicule, and regret, but for the
most part he seemed relaxed throughout the lengthy meeting. As was
probably to be expected, there was no indication in anything he said
of any give on Afghanistan in the near future. There was one concilia-
tory note at the end of his presentation, when he picked up our reference
to the President’s willingness to search for areas of cooperation and
reduce the risks of conflict. If we were sincere, he said, we would
find that the Soviets would not hold back, as this had always been
their policy.
Although State 26328, on your meeting with Dobrynin, arrived
after I had seen Gromyko,3 I did not receive any clear intimations of
interest in providing guarantees with regard to Iran and Pakistan—
unless his observation that Brezhnev had already assured the world
that they have no designs on other parts of the region could be consid-
ered such. As for Soviet withdrawal, his assertion that this would not
occur until outside aggression ceased seems more categorical than
Dobrynin’s hint that limitations on assistance to insurgents might suf-
fice. Yugoslavia did not arise in the conversation. End summary.
3. Gromyko received me at 4:30 p.m. January 30 for a two hour
and fifteen minute meeting. I read to him the talking points on U.S.-
Soviet relations and Afghanistan from refs A and B and then also made
the instructed démarche on Sakharov, leaving copies of the talking
points on both subjects as non-papers.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
15. Calling it his 7th point, Gromyko took up Afghanistan, noting
that I had singled it out for “special treatment” in my statement.4 He
observed first of all that Afghanistan is not an American province. I
might reply, he said, that it is not a Soviet province either. This is true,
and the Soviets never claimed that it was. But the Soviets resolutely
reject all efforts to deny the Afghanis the right to decide for themselves
questions of how they are to live, what kind of leadership they are to
have, and so forth—and the U.S. is claiming the right to do that.
3 Telegram 26328 to Moscow, January 30, reported on Vance’s January 29 meeting
with Dobrynin. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P910096–1937)
4 Presumably Watson was referring to the de´marche, not to a separate statement,
which was not found.
