406
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
can have and weigh this in its calculations of gains and losses before
it continues on its course. Again, it is useful for us in our efforts to
establish the credibility of our desire for a long-term human rights
dialogue to demonstrate the ongoing nature of our interest in and
concern for such issues.
Background
The present situation has been building for some months. How
much it represents a planned policy, how much a response to a series
of incidents, is difficult to estimate. The larger issues, as Embassy Berlin
points out in its most interesting Berlin 36522, center, however, around
a concrete aspect of the modern German reality: “. . . the red thread
running through most of the speeches is the Western media and its
exploitation by and of GDR dissidents.” The seriousness with which
the GDR approaches these issues is suggested by the recent article in
the West German Weekly, “Die Zeit,” which characterized the impact
of FRG media on virtually all facets of East German life as “the electronic
reunification of Germany.”
Against this background, the series of steps taken by the GDR since
mid-spring suggests a renewed effort to give teeth to First Secretary
Honecker’s separation (Abgrenzung) policy, to manage the GDR’s inte-
gration into European and world politics and its relations with the FRG
in a fashion that keeps the society sufficiently isolated from Western
influences to maintain internal stability and satisfy the ever anxious
Soviets. These steps include:
—New restrictions on the activity of Western (primarily FRG) cor-
respondents in East Berlin and the GDR, including a requirement for
permission to interview any GDR citizen and to announce intended
internal travel 24-hours in advance.
—Expulsion of FRG correspondents for illegal interviews with
GDR citizens in violation of the new regulations and refusal of permis-
sion under the regulations for correspondents to cover or exercise any
journalistic activity with respect to the trial of prominent dissident
Robert Havemann on currency charges.
—Denial of permission to several leading writers including Stefan
Heym and Rolf Schneider to travel to the FRG for routine literary
functions.
2 In telegram 3652 from East Berlin, June 29, the Embassy described the ongoing
and very public debate taking place in the German Democratic Republic surrounding
the expulsion of nine East German writers from the Writers’ Union. The debate, the
Embassy suggested, contributed to growing awareness of instability in the East German
cultural community. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790298–
0907)
