1978 285 face political pressures from the East. Should they lose confidence in NATO’s ability to cover the flanks as well as the Central Front, they may find it more tempting to reach individual accommodations of one kind or another with the Soviet Union—­to become “Finlandized”. Once that process of political fission starts, it is hard to predict where it might end. We have not neglected the flanks in spite of our concentration on the Center. However, on the Southern flank, the problems between the Greeks and the Turks, and the uncertainty of the future complexion of Italian governments make it difficult to develop any firm fundamental plans. To the north, the CG recommends planning for the augmentation of Norwegian defenses with Marine forces and Air Force tactical air, as well as planning to assure that the Soviets could not overwhelm Iceland in an effort to control the Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom gap—­the site of one of our most important barriers to the entry of Soviet air and naval forces into the Atlantic. Nonetheless, the proper balance between attention to the Central Front and attention to the flanks is also a subjective matter. Our present concentration on the former is due to a conviction that that is where we face the greatest threat, and that that is where we risk the most serious defeat. I cite all this not to give the impression that the cause is hopeless. I believe, in fact, that it is more hopeful today than it has been at any time in the recent past because I believe NATO is beginning to take the threat seriously, and to do something about it. The problem is soluble; it will take time, and money, and—­most importantly—­our leadership, but I believe we are on the right track. Just as we have a difficult judgment to make, within our planning for NATO as a whole, as to how much of our effort and attention we should concentrate on the center as opposed to the flanks, we face a similar question as to how much of our effort and attention we should concentrate on NATO as opposed to other contingencies. There are three other geographical areas of primary concern: the Far East; the Middle East; and the Persian Gulf. With some exceptions, our analyses of potential contingencies, our understanding of the effects that different kinds and amounts of military force might have, and our exploration of the military alternatives for the United States in those areas are far less well-­developed than they are in the case of the Central Front of NATO. We are working to make progress here before the issuance of next year’s Consolidated Guidance. In the Far East, the CG notes that our withdrawal from Southeast Asia, and our planned drawdown of ground forces from Korea, have led to concern on the part of nations in that area—­allied with us and otherwise—­as to our continued interest and commitment. The CG
