March 27–December 31, 1979
1033
—Our total economic assistance to Egypt is today over dols 1 bil-
lion a year. We have provided over dols 5.5 billion in such assistance to
Egypt since 1974.
—Looking to the longer term, aid has obligated dols 200 million
for various agricultural programs which, when combined with steps
your government is considering, should facilitate increased yields, thus
promoting more effective use of Egypt’s land and water resources. My
government is now studying how we might best facilitate cooperation
between your public and private sectors and American companies in
the development of new agricultural lands as well.
—As for the other commodity requests which Vice President Mo-
barak presented during his Washington visit, these have been carefully
studied, and the President has asked me and members of the Embassy
staff to discuss with your ministers opportunities that exist for making
the best use of resources already in hand or now being programmed.
As you know, we have in the last few months signed up some dols 335
million for commodity assistance. With congressional completion of ac-
tion on the 1980 funds, we will soon be in a position to discuss the best
way of using these funds, relating them to the substantial progress
which Egypt has achieved in enhancing its foreign exchange earnings.
—As you may be aware, over dols 2 billion exist in the aid pipe-
line; these are funds obligated for use in Egypt’s development but still
not put to use. There would thus seem to be some room to speed up im-
plementation of existing, agreed projects. There would also seem to be
an opportunity to accelerate the designing of new projects. If your gov-
ernment and mine can obligate funds sooner in the year, Egypt would
benefit sooner from funds which our Congress has already approved.
—Again, I want to emphasize that we are indeed mindful of
Egypt’s needs and of our commitment to help as we can. That has been
our objective on the offers we have been able to make to date and this
will be our intent with future programs. While our efforts may fall
short of our own wishes—and Egypt’s expectations—we do expect to
be able to assist in maintaining your military strength and improving
the welfare and prosperity of the Egyptian people.
Vance
316.
Editorial Note
Following the formal approval of his appointment as the Presi-
dent’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations by
