150  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
27.	
Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Gates)1
Washington, June 6, 1989
SUBJECT
Deputies Committee Meeting, Wednesday, June 7, 1989, 3:00 p.m.—START Limits 
on Air Breathing Systems and Nondeployed Missiles
This Deputies Meeting will be the second of three meetings to 
review the specifics of our START position before the negotiations 
resume June 19. In all of the START papers, the PCC has attempted 
to focus on issues where changes are necessary because we could not 
take “yes” for an answer; or where we see an opportunity to put a Bush 
imprint on START. In certain cases, options not meeting these standards 
have been included because an agency favors the option. We recom-
mend that you guide the meeting through the issues in the order they 
are presented in the papers. Your goal should be to get the Deputies 
to winnow the options to a more manageable number and ensure the 
remaining alternatives are fairly stated.
1. Air Breathing Systems. A fundamental premise underlying the 
PCC’s work on this issue is the longstanding U.S. opposition to tight 
constraints on ALCMs and other bomber weapons. The NSC meet-
ing earlier in the day may take up the underlying policy question of 
whether it is in the long-­term U.S. interest (a) to encourage the Soviets 
to increase their emphasis on air breathing systems, and (b) whether 
our current approach, which emphasizes U.S. force flexibility at the 
expense of verification and constraints on Soviet breakout, makes the 
best tradeoffs among our competing objectives.
We agreed to limits on ALCMs and other bomber weapons under 
the 6,000 warhead limit only on the understanding that they be heav-
ily discounted. While we and the Soviets have agreed to count all the 
bombs and short-­range missiles on each bomber as one warhead under 
6000, we have not agreed on several ALCM provisions. This liberal dis-
counting approach to air breathing systems ensures that we will have 
enough weapons to meet our deterrence “requirements” notwithstand-
ing the cuts mandated in START.
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSC/DC Meetings Files, NSC/DC 032—June 7, 1989—NSC/DC 
Meeting on NSR–14 re: U.S. Start Position on Air Breathing Systems and Non-Deployed 
Missiles. Secret. Sent for action. Sent through Kanter. A stamped notation indicates Gates 
saw the memorandum.
