350 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX vious commitment from the United States to consult on such matters. He said that he had received copies of the answers only two days earlier and had an opportunity only to begin his study and that he is finding new things in the document every time he reads it. He expressed an intention to write to President Carter, implying that he would deal with some of the points on which he disagrees. 7. The next hour of the meeting was given over to Begin’s pointby-point discussion of his disagreement with specific aspects of the US replies. It was agreed that he would proceed through the document without my responses until the end. Begin’s comments, keyed to question numbers, follows. 8. Question 2 rpt 2, para 2 rpt 2, sentence beginning “It is expected. . . . : Begin observed that the previous reference to groups or organizations could apply to the PLO and the language used in the answer could suggest that the US commitment5 of 1975 regarding contacts with the PLO had been weakened, since what had been expressed as conditions (acceptance of UNSC resolutions and Israel’s right to exist) in 1975 had now become expectations. This was a violation of President Ford’s commitment. 9. Question 3 rpt 3, para 2 rpt 2: noting the use of the phrase “legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,” Begin argued that at CD this expression had been accepted only after the Israelis had won agreement to the inclusion of the word “also” to reserve Israeli “rights.” The current formulation, without “also” is not rpt not what was agreed at CD. He would not have agreed to this wording at the summit. Begin said he had made it clear in his discussions at Camp David that at the end of the 5-year transitional period, Israel will claim sovereignty over Judea, Samaria and Gaza. At CD, he asserted, it was agreed that the question of sovereignty would be set aside and left open to deal with the human problems of the territories. At the end of the transition, if there is agreement on Israeli sovereignty, fine. If there is no agreement, autonomy will continue and Israel will have security while the Palestinians will have autonomy, “and there will be no harm to anybody.” He noted that all the Arabs, including Sadat, are interpreting the phrase “legitimate rights” as meaning an independent Palestinian state. He would never have agreed to this interpretation at CD, Begin asserted, and would never have incorporated the phrase into the CDA without the inclusion 5 In the September 1, 1975, Memorandum of Agreement Between the Governments of Israel and the United States, the United States agreed to “adhere to its present policy with respect to the Palestine Liberation Organization, whereby it will not recognize or negotiate with the Palestine Liberation Organization so long as the Palestine Liberation Organization does not recognize Israel’s right to exist and does not accept Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338.” (Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXVI, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1974–1976, Document 227)
