Hungary are such that it will be difficult for opponents to justify that we should continue to retain another country’s symbol of nationhood. A. An early return of the Crown will enhance our position and our influence in Hungary. Aside from MFN, this issue, which has been pending for over 30 years, is the only major unresolved bilateral problem we have with Hungary. Return will strengthen our hand with the Hungarian Government and undoubtedly will generate substantial good will from a nation and people which continues to harbor considerable friendship for the United States. B. Return will buttress the framework of expanded bilateral relations we have developed with Hungary during the past five years, thereby increasing Hungary’s stake in maintaining this relationship and detente as a whole. Return of the Crown, which really is a relic of the Cold War, would be fully consistent with our efforts to broaden and continue detente. This step would be especially timely during a period in which overall East-West relations are buffeted by the winds of the human rights debate. Furthermore, we believe that achievement of this Hungarian objective would provide an important additional inducement for them to defend with the Soviets their improved relations with us. C. Return to the Hungarian people of this paramount symbol of the Hungarian nation and its independence will concretely support our longrange goal of encouraging greater autonomy in Eastern Europe. Already a leader within the Warsaw Pact in developing its own distinct national paths in economic management and in its consumer-oriented “goulash Communism”, we believe evolution toward increased Hungarian national identity would be supported by the Crown’s return. D. Bilateral relations have improved substantially, thus meeting our stated condition for reviewing the issue of return. US-Hungarian relations have improved markedly since Cardinal Mindszenty left Embassy Budapest in late 1971. We have concluded consular and claims agreements; a cultural/scientific exchanges agreement is just about ready for signing.3 With an eye on the Crown as well as on the Johnson Act,4 Hungary has taken special pains to do everything it can to clear away all outstanding financial issues, including payment last December of its sole remaining debt arrearage to the USG. 3 On April 6, during his visit to Budapest, Hartman signed the “Agreement on Cooperation in Culture, Education, Science and Technology” with Rudolf Ronai, President of the Institute of Cultural Relations. The purpose of the agreement was the “promotion of cooperation between institutions of higher learning of the two countries, the exchange of scholars and artists, and the translation, publication, and presentation of artistic works of each country in the other,” as well as cooperation in scientific programs
