998 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Problems These studies, handled through the Bourne channel, present a number of problems: 1. Bourne is, in effect, using studies and decisions in broad functional areas to drive policies affecting a disparate set of domestic and international programs. Indeed, the scope of the recommendations of both studies go well beyond issues falling into the functional areas of health, or hunger, for example: —one recommendation in the hunger memo would require a radical reorganization of our agricultural trading arrangements, probably including the establishment of a government grains board to control trade. —the health study recommends setting up a Bureau of Health in the Department of State. Moreover, these recommendations are not related to other studies or efforts to develop policy elsewhere in the bureaucracy which deal with the same issues. 2. The quality of the analysis produced by both the hunger and health working groups is inadequate and, at times, dead wrong. The Department is nevertheless put in somewhat of a defensive position in having to address the analytical flaws in the studies, thereby diverting attention and energy from the recommendations and from devising new ideas in these areas. 3. These studies have thus far unfortunately produced few new initiatives which can be justified on substantive grounds. What may finally result from these efforts is a focus on existing organizations or institutional arrangements for dealing with these problems which could be futile at best and disruptive at worst. 4. The process in which these studies and recommendations have been developed is troubling: —these working groups threaten to short-circuit the normal policy making process (i.e., NSC, PRC, OMB, etc.) on a number of issues where a more adequate and careful consideration of the issues is planned or underway. —it is not always clear when final memos are scheduled to go to the President or whether agencies will have an opportunity to review them before they are sent. Conclusion Neither study or draft decision memo is yet complete and objectionable statements or recommendations may yet be removed. Nevertheless, at some point we may wish to attempt channeling these exercises into the PRC or other NSC mechanisms, although Bourne would probably resist this strongly.
