1146
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said there is no water rights problem in Gaza. What
may happen is that we will set up the SGA in Gaza, and the Camp
David Accords say the Israelis withdraw. Therefore Begin does not
want to go forward in Gaza, so that he will not have to go forward with
the process on the military side. Did this come up in Cabinet, or get
discussed?
Ambassador Linowitz said no.
Secretary Vance said that there was some discussion at the end of
the Egypt-Israel treaty negotiations. It went to the Cabinet, which voted
no, so it was not put in the (joint) letter.
The President said the first he had heard the idea was on the phone
after Camp David with President Sadat.5
President Sadat said that he heard from Weizman—who is agree-
able. Also the Israeli editors saw it as a happy solution.
The President said that we should pursue it as an alternative option.
It sounds good, to avoid a breakdown. It may be acceptable to Israeli
public opinion.
President Sadat agreed.
The President said that he hears that some Israeli military com-
manders have turned over some responsibilities, with no publicity.
General Ali said that some Cairo officials were there too, dealing
with pupils, students, and passports.
Minister Butros Ghali said that this was not implemented.
President Sadat said the Gazans are against it.
General Ali said it was in his last report.
Minister Butros Ghali (disputing that report) said that the Gazans
were still delaying.
President Sadat said they were resisting it.
The President said that some Israeli military commanders, without
publicity, were turning over some powers: e.g. some police functions
and schools.
Secretary Vance said Moshe (Dayan) had told us.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Mayor Shawaa confirmed this, and
also discussed Gaza first.
President Sadat asked what the answer was.
Ambassador Linowitz said at first there was no interest. Then
Shawaa indicated that this might be possible if we had not finished the
West Bank. He said that this would have to mean there were not much
time lapsing, however.
5 See Document 132.
