First Responses losing world opinion, yet we must stand up at some point. He had no answer as to when. Jody Powell agreed with Harold Brown that the danger to our people increased over time, and our position at home is eroding. Time works against us and appears to work for Khomeini. He favored taking some action to reverse this situation. However, such action would not only put our people in danger but it was unlikely Khomeini would respond positively in the near future. We should know what we intend to do if any of the hostages are harmed. A rescue operation—even if unlikely to succeed—might be desirable. We should not go after Chapter 7 sanctions unless we think there is a good chance we will succeed. A Soviet veto would be undesirable. Hamilton Jordan agreed, noting that other things we might do could also damage SALT. Mr. Kirbo said that as long as we know our people are safe, the public will stay with us.8 If they pull people out of the compound, there will be rumors that they are being killed one at a time. We should not take drastic actions as long as we are fairly sure they are there. If that vanishes, it becomes very difficult. He was unsure about the Soviets. Cutting off supplies might do the job, but if the Iranians kill someone, we must kill someone. Khomeini was the only one he wanted to hit. Dr. Brzezinski summarized the following points of agreement: 1. Any such act (mining or military) increases the danger to the hostages. 2. If any hostages are killed, we should react forcibly. Mining was not enough. (Our act should be precise, not indiscriminate.) 3. We should exhaust all diplomatic recourse. 4. We should take the first four steps now. Secretary Vance agreed we should do points 1 and 2 on the President’s list, but felt that we should not ask other countries for embargo until all diplomatic recourse has been exhausted. That will take three weeks to a month. Secretary Brown said we should not wait for one thing: we should insist immediately—perhaps in the press conference tonight9—that there be daily visits to the hostages by neutral observers. 8 Carter underlined most of this sentence and made a checkmark in the margin
