748
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
positive—as State’s is—then he believes we should be prepared to
listen to what the Soviets want to talk about so that we can talk to them
about what we want. He therefore recommends that we hear what the
Soviets have to say on Korea, ask whatever questions are necessary to
clarify the proposal, and indicate that we will comment at the next
round. He added that Ambassador Gleysteen had been asked his views
on this. Gleysteen felt that the government of South Korea should be
consulted in advance, and if they did not strongly object, we should
proceed as the State Department proposed.3 Christopher quoted Gley-
steen’s conclusion that: “We—and to a lesser extent the Soviets—play a
crucial role in moderating the North-South Korean arms race, and we
should not close our minds entirely to a rather passive exploration of
the issue.”
Secretary Brown remarked that his view was more negative and he
interpreted Gleysteen’s cable as more negative also. Since the US is the
major arms supplier to South Korea, and the Chinese to North Korea,
mutual US-Soviet restraint would greatly upset the ROKG. He didn’t
know how negative we should be: whether we should walk out, or
listen in silence, or try to agree to an agenda in advance. His inclination
was that we should try to agree with the Soviets on restraint in just one
area—Africa—and if we couldn’t agree there, he asked, how can we
agree anywhere else? He noted that he recognized that the US has the
most to gain from mutual restraint in Africa.
Brzezinski asked what views of the group were on Brown’s sug-
gestion of singling out a single non-aligned region for initial agree-
ment. He stated that he believed that the Soviets found these negotia-
tions very attractive because they hold the promise of establishing a
global US–USSR relationship above established allied or emerging po-
litical relationships—at no cost to the Soviets. We have no interest in
promoting that, and on the other hand, have a great deal to lose. He
sees no conceivable interest to the US in listening to Soviet presenta-
tions on China, Korea and Iran. It would make more sense to isolate a
single region where there is the least amount of conflictual interest. He
also wanted to know how far we can move towards agreement with the
Soviets without the extensive involvement of the British and French.
3 In telegram 9189 from Seoul, October 14, Gleysteen said “I would like to empha-
size one other obvious point about the conventional arms talks. If we are ever going to
talk to the Soviets about any kind of mutual restraint agreements in Korea, I assume we
will have the courtesy and good sense to review what we have in mind with the Koreans
before we start talking to Soviets. If we don’t, we will be in deep trouble.” (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780420–0344) He repeated this in telegram
10395 from Seoul, November 20. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780523–0064)
