International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1047
3. Future of the Commission. In view of the concurrent informal
meetings of the Economic and Social Council at which the future status
of the Commission on the Status of Women, as well as that of other
sub-bodies of ECOSOC, was being discussed, the majority of the
members of the Commission agreed that the Commission should take
action to forward its views to ECOSOC to be taken into account in its
deliberations on restructuring scheduled for the spring session. The US
joined other delegations in taking the lead on this issue and along with
Mexico, Thailand and Belgium, cosponsored a draft resolution inviting
ECOSOC to retain the Commission and, at the same time, to redefine its
mandate. An additional draft, cosponsored by Niger, Zaire, Senegal
and France was tabled concurrently and the cosponsors of both texts
combined efforts to produce a consensus text for transmission to
ECOSOC. The final text followed closely the lines of the original US
proposal. The exercise caused some anguish to Sweden, UK and Japan.
Sweden had reservations regarding the continuation of the Commis-
sion while the UK and Japan argued that they did not wish to prejudge
the results of the ECOSOC deliberations. The developing countries
were solidly in support of continuation of the Commission.
4. Political issues. The agenda item entitled “Protection of Women
and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict in the Struggle for
Peace, Self-Determination and National Liberation and Independence”
did not produce the expected vitriolic debate and contentious resolu-
tions which ordinarily ensue from such items. In view of the recent Is-
raeli actions in Lebanon,5 the Western group expected the worst on this
item. The FRG, therefore, decided to take the lead and table a construc-
tive draft resolution on this subject, which focussed on international
conventions and humanitarian relief efforts. While the debate included
strong attacks on Israel by the Eastern Europeans, the Arab delegates,
and the PLO observer, no further resolutions surfaced and the FRG
draft was adopted by consensus with only minor amendments intro-
duced by Byelorussia and Cuba. We have no explanation as to why the
Eastern European spoilers allowed this agenda item to go by without
controversy, but can only conclude that they were unprepared for a
Western initiative on the subject and expected the Arab delegates (in
fact represented only by Libya) would take the lead.
5. The sole issue on which the US cast a negative vote at the Com-
mission and on which the US parted company with the African group
and other developing country delegations was on the apartheid issue.
The African cosponsors of a draft resolution on the effects of apartheid
5 Reference is to the Israeli attack on southern Lebanon on March 14, in response to
an earlier Palestinian attack on Israeli soil. (Richard Homan, “Israelis Launch Attack into
Lebanon,” The Washington Post , March 15, 1980, p. A–1)
