162
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
especially since one part of the Soviet motivation may have been to
deflect us from anti-regime activities. (S)
CIA will make a special effort to see what they can pick up in
Kabul that would confirm what the German told us and they will try
to learn if a similar message has been passed to [less than 1 line not
declassified]. Finally, FBIS will see if there has been a cutback in Soviet
propaganda alleging US involvement in the insurgency. (S)
Late note: FBIS confirms that there has indeed been a dropoff—
perhaps related to the Summit, but they also note that Soviet propa-
ganda sometimes declines as an issue becomes more critical. (S)
56.
Editorial Note
In August 1979, the Central Intelligence Agency issued a number
of reports assessing Soviet intentions with regard to Afghanistan and
the increasingly precarious position of the Afghan Government. While
stopping short of predicting with certitude the ultimate collapse of the
Taraki-Amin regime and consequent military intervention by the Soviet
Union, intelligence reporting noted two fundamental and interrelated
trends: the Afghan Government was weakening in the face of the
growing rebel insurgency, and in response the USSR was steadily
increasing its efforts to equip and train the Afghan military in an
attempt to contain and ultimately defeat the insurgency.
In intelligence memorandum SR M 79–10094, August 1, the Asia
Branch of the Regional Analysis Division noted that control of Afghani-
stan was effectively split: “Anti-government forces control most of the
countryside, while the Afghan Army controls the cities and main
roads.” Further, the division of control was not necessarily static; the
Afghan Army, the memorandum reported, was experiencing high rates
of casualties and desertions—a manpower problem exacerbated by
political purges of field grade officers from the previous year. The
Afghan Air Force was suffering “acute shortages of qualified pilots
and maintenance technicians.” The memorandum also observed that
the presence of the Soviet military in Afghanistan had “more than
doubled” since Taraki came to power in 1978. Soviet military advisers
numbered between 1,000 and 2,000, and according to a field report by
the Chief of Station in Kabul, July 31, the Soviet advisers have “virtually
taken command” of the Afghan military units to which they were
assigned. Further, the Soviets expanded the military supplies to
Afghanistan, including increased shipments of tanks, artillery, and
