480 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI The Secretary commented that the Soviets were proposing a ratio. The U.S. could have whatever number of bombers it needed and the Soviets would be allowed to have 40% more. Was this correct? Ambassador Burt said that, as it had been explained by Marshal Akhromeyev, the Soviets wanted a specific ceiling on both sides, with the Soviet figure 40% above that of the U.S. The Secretary said the U.S. could agree that the Soviets would be allowed 40% more ALCM-­equipped bombers than the U.S., but he was unwilling to lock the U.S. into a specific number today. That would constrain our flexibility down the road, particularly when there was no constraint on modernization of Soviet air defenses. The Secretary suggested that to meet the Soviet requirements, we could agree to a sliding ratio: the Soviets would be allowed 40% more ALCM-­equipped bombers than the U.S., but the U.S. would not be locked into any particular figure. Akhromeyev said that he had expressed the Soviet point of view. Apparently the 40% figure could be a floating limit. For example, if on the day the treaty were signed the number were 140, this could later be altered but the ratio maintained. The Secretary said that this was his idea: that the numbers could be adjusted. Akhromeyev agreed. The number could be adjusted but the ratio would be retained. The Secretary said that if we had an understanding on this basis, he would like to have a brief conversation with his colleagues. He added that the range element of the Soviet proposal was not something we could live with. As he had mentioned before, we saw our ALCM proposal as a package involving counting rule, distinguishability and range. We had adopted the Soviet approach on distinguishability and seemed to be on the way to resolving the counting rule. On range, however, the Soviets did not appear willing to move in the U.S. direction. We had moved from 1500 to 1000 km, and it was not fair to ask us to go all the way to 600 km. Under Secretary Wolfowitz asked by way of clarification how the Soviet proposal would deal with future heavy bombers capable of carrying more than 10 ALCMs. Under Secretary Bartholomew said he would sharpen this question further. The U.S. had proposed that all future heavy bombers count as having 10 ALCMs. He thought that the sliding 40% rule should not apply to future heavy bombers equipped for ALCMs, since they would be counted equally for the U.S. and USSR. Akhromeyev replied that the Soviets agreed that all future heavy bombers equipped for ALCMs would be counted at 10 with no further limits. All future bombers should be equipped with 10 ALCMs. Future
