Chapter 6, June–December 1990  811
149.	 Memorandum From Arnold Kanter of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, July 24, 1990
SUBJECT
Your July 24 Meeting on Arms Control and Defense Topics
We have proposed more than enough topics to fill the time avail-
able in your 5:00 PM meeting today.2 But since this is the last time that 
you, Baker, Cheney, and Powell will all be in town for the next several 
weeks, your counterparts may want to raise additional subjects. The 
trick will be to get through as much of the agenda as possible in the 
time available while getting clear enough outcomes so that your loyal 
staff can follow through.
Ballistic Missile Downloading
At your request, this issue has been put on hold in Geneva pending 
the outcome of this meeting. We have separately sent you a discussion 
paper on the downloading issue which we also have circulated to the 
backbenchers in State, OSD, and JCS. (Copy attached at Tab 1.) We need 
an agreement at your level so that we can pursue the issue with the 
Soviets.
Under the proposed U.S. approach, each side could download up 
to two RVs on one type of existing ICBM (except SS–18s and SS–24s) 
and one type of existing SLBM. This approach is designed to permit 
us to download the Minuteman III while providing the maximum con-
straint on Soviet breakout. Since there is nothing in the ICBM part of 
our downloading proposal for the Soviets, our fallback position would 
allow them to download up to two RVs from the SS–24.
We want (some would argue must) be able to download Minuteman 
III in order to maintain a viable ICBM leg and/or preserve enough silos 
in which to deploy SICBM later. Retaining Minuteman II would ease 
the requirement to download, but at what the Pentagon argues would 
be a much higher cost to retain a much less capable missile. There is 
no START I requirement to download SLBMs. The main rationale for 
including SLBMs in the U.S. proposal is to create a helpful precedent 
for START II in which SLBM downloading probably will be necessary. 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01646–003, START—July 1990. 
Secret. Sent for information. Gordon initialed for Kanter. A stamped notation indicates 
Scowcroft saw the memorandum.
2 No minutes were found.
