686 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Union and other permanent members may veto action of the Security Council. If the will of the Security Council should be thwarted in this manner, then immediate action would be appropriate in the General Assembly of the United Nations, where no Soviet veto exists.2 In the meantime, neither the United States nor any other nation which is committed to world peace and stability can continue to do business as usual with the Soviet Union. I have already recalled the United States Ambassador from Moscow back to Washington.3 He’s working with me and with my other senior advisers in an immediate and comprehensive evaluation of the whole range of our relations with the Soviet Union. The successful negotiation of the SALT II treaty has been a major goal and a major achievement of this administration, and we Americans, the people of the Soviet Union, and indeed the entire world will benefit from the successful control of strategic nuclear weapons through the implementation of this carefully negotiated treaty. However, because of the Soviet aggression, I have asked the United States Senate to defer further consideration of the SALT II treaty so that the Congress and I can assess Soviet actions and intentions and devote our primary attention to the legislative and other measures required to respond to this crisis. As circumstances change in the future, we will, of course, keep the ratification of SALT II under active review in consultation with the leaders of the Senate.4 2 On January 14, the General Assembly, meeting in emergency session, approved Resolution A/RES/ES–6/2, which deplored the intervention in Afghanistan and called for Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. For the text of both resolutions, see Department of State Bulletin, February 1980, pp. 72–73. 3 On January 2, the National Security Council met from 1 to 3:35 p.m. in order to discuss Iran, the invasion of Afghanistan, SALT II, and Brown’s trip to China. Portions of the minutes are printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Document 245 and Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, China, Document 287. In a January 2 memorandum to Mondale, Vance, Brown, Turner, and Jones, Brzezinski summarized the decisions reached at the meeting, noting that the President’s recall of Watson from Moscow would be announced that day. For the text of the memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 252. At 5:04 p.m., Powell announced the recall, noting that Watson would arrive in Washington on January 3. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 11–12) 4 In his January 2 memorandum (see footnote 3 above), Brzezinski stated: “The SALT II Treaty will be left on the Senate calendar. There will be no effort to bring it to the Floor for a vote. Our public posture will be to reaffirm that SALT is important irrespective of the tone of our relationship with the Soviet Union but, at this time, we do not believe it is advisable to bring it to a vote.” On January 3, Powell read a statement to reporters assembled in the Briefing Room at the White House; in it, he noted that by letter the President had asked Byrd to delay consideration of SALT II. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, p. 12)
