18. All coupons and notes paid shall be cancelled by Lee, Higginson &
Company by perforation and then delivered to the Auditor of the Dominican
Republic for further cancellation.
19. Lee, Higginson & Company shall allow the Dominican Republic
interest on deposits held for the payment of interest and for redemption
requirements at a rate of two per cent, less than the rediscount rate of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with a minimum of two per cent, and a
maximum of four and one-half per cent, while such sums are on deposit
with Lee, Higginson & Company.
20. In acting under this agreement, Lee, Higginson & Company may,
subject to the provisions of these notes, not [act] in accordance with the
written order of the Secretario de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio of the
Dominican Republic, and the drafts, cheques or orders of the said Secretario
de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio shall be full protection to them for
action in accordance therewith.
21. All accounts connected with the service of the Loan shall be kept by
Lee, Higginson & Company, either in their office in the City of Boston or in
their office in the City of New York, and a statement of such accounts shall
be rendered by them to the Auditor of the Dominican Republic within a
reasonable time after the maturity of the issue. Unless objection to this
statement of account shall be made by said Auditor to them within ninety
days, particularly specifying the ground or grounds of such objection or
objections, said statement of account shall be deemed to be correct and
conclusive between the parties. The Dominican Republic shall have the
right at any time to examine and audit the books and accounts of Lee,
Higginson & Company in connection with their note as such Fiscal Agents
and Trustees.
22. In case any of the notes of this issue shall at any time become mutilated,
lost, or destroyed, the Dominican Republic may issue new notes of like
amount, tenor and date, and bearing the same serial numbers, and Lee,
Higginson & Company, at the request of the Department of Finance and
Commerce of the Dominican Republic shall authenticate the same for
delivery in exchange for, and upon cancellation of the notes so mutilated, or
in lieu of the note so lost or destroyed, but, in case of lost or destroyed
