[Document 1]
Mr. Lord to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Buenos Ayres,January 12, 1901.

No. 89.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that I rejected the application of one Mr.

FrankH.Bowersforapassportonthefollowingfactswhichare

respectfully submitted for your approval or revision as the case may

require: Mr. Bowers was born of American parents in the city of Buenos

Ayres, Argentine Republic, on the 17th day of February, 1880, in which city

he has since resided, with the exception of some two years while absent at

school. Being nearly 21 years of age he now proposes to go to the United

States with the intention of making his permanent residence in the city of

Boston, Mass., where he intends to engage in business—probably as the

other end of the business here—and where his mother now resides, having

recently removed from this city to that place. As Mr. Bowers desired to

spend a few weeks traveling in Europe before proceeding to his destination

in the United States, he made application to this legation for a passport as

an American citizen under the provision of section 1993, Revised Statutes

of the United States; but, in view of the provision of section 1 of Article I of

the Argentine law, No. 346, of October 8, 1869, declaring all persons born

within the territory of the Argentine Republic, though of foreign parentage,

to be Argentine citizens, I did not feel warranted in granting his application

for a passport.

I deem it proper to say, upon the facts as stated, that I was first inclined to

grant Mr. Bowers’s application for a passport, intending to inform him that

itfurnishedhimnosecurityagainstanyclaimthattheArgentine

Government might assert to his allegiance or service while he remained

within the Argentine jurisdiction; but a subsequent reading of the opinion of

Mr. Attorney-General Hoar to Mr. Secretary of State Fish, dated the 12th of

June, 1869, led me to the conclusion that persons born of American parents

in the Argentine Republic, which declares them to be citizens thereof, could

not avail themselves of the provisions of section 1993 to obtain a certificate

of their American citizenship while they continue within the Argentine

territory, nor, possibly, until they should come within the sovereignty and

jurisdiction of the United States.

I have, etc.,
WM.P.LORD.

[Document 2]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Lord.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 25, 1901.

No. 34.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 89, of the 12th ultimo,

reporting that you had rejected the application of Mr. Frank H. Bowers for a

passport.

It appears that Mr. Bowers was born of American parents in Buenos Ayres

on February 17, 1880, in which city he has since resided with an exception

of two years’ absence at school. He desired the passport to use in Europe

while en route to the United States, where he expects to reside.

In reply I have to say that the Department is of opinion that you should have

issued the passport, as Mr. Bowers was clearly an American citizen, under

section 1993, Revised Statutes, being born abroad of American parents.

You need not have concerned yourself with the conflict between the United

Statesand Argentinelaws,asitdoesnotappearthatthe Argentine

Government had made any claim to Mr. Bowers’s allegiance, and he was,

moreover, about to leave the Republic finally, and to come to the United

States.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 3]
Mr. Lord to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Buenos Ayres,July 5, 1901.

Mr. Lord reports that the Argentine Government has been constrained to

declare its capital in a state of siege for a period of six months, owing to

public disorder caused by opposition to the bill consolidating the public

debt, pending in Congress.

[Document 4]
Mr. Lord to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Buenos Ayres,July 11, 1901.

No. 128.]

SIR: Referring to my cablegram of the 5th instant, relative to the state of

siege in this capital, I beg to say that the street disturbances or public

disorders which caused the executive power, with the sanction of Congress,

to issue a decree declaring this capital to be in a state of siege for six

months, grew out of opposition to a bill for unifying the public debt.

During the present year there has been considerable discussion in the press

as to the advisability of consolidating the public debt, which consists of

some thirty loans bearing different rates of interest, into one loan with a

uniform interest. In the progress of this discussion, it was not apparent that

there was any serious objection to the adoption of a financial measure

which should accomplish this object without increasing the public debt or

pledging the customs revenue for its payment. While it was not positively

known that a proposition was on foot looking to the unification of these

loans having the approval of the Government, it was surmised—and it was

intimated— that Dr. Cárlos Pellegrini, a leading senator, and Mr. Ernesto

Tornquist, a prominent financier of this city, who were then in Europe, had

been authorized by the Government to treat with its creditors and ascertain

the terms on which a unification of the public debt could be effected. This

supposition led to much talk and discussion concerning the terms and

conditions which should form the basis of a measure of this character and

also to some apprehension, quite freely expressed, that the opportunity

afforded in dealing with such measure would be used for speculation to the

detriment of the Government’s credit and interests.

When Congress opened its session in May last, there was a good deal of

curiosity exhibited to know what the President would say in his message

about consolidating the public debt and a good deal of surprise expressed

that he should have made no mention nor reference to that subject. But, as

Dr. Pellegrini had not returned from Europe to resume his seat in the senate,

it was surmised that he was delayed on account of not having been able to

arrangesatisfactoryterms,andtothisfactthepublicattributedthe

President’s reticence to unification in his message. So the discussion went

on growing more intense, but not heated.

About a month after the opening of Congress, Dr. Pellegrini returned to

Buenos Ayres,resumedhisseatintheSenate,andtookpartinits

discussions, giving no intimation of nor making any reference to the subject

of unification. As the finances were known to be in desperate straits and

someremedyfortheirimprovementconsideredtobeofparamount

importance, the belief still prevailed that some sort of scheme for the

unification of the public debt would be proposed, notwithstanding the

silence of Dr. Pelligrini and the reticence of Government officials. The

consequence was that the press became more vigorous in its comments and

criticisms on the action of the Government and the people more expectant

and agitated.

At last the President sent a message to Congress recommending a bill for

consolidating the public debt, the chief features of which bill were to be as

stated: (1) The decrease of the service of the debt by $5,000,000; (2) the

consolidation of the thirty existing loans into one, with a uniform rate of

interest and an amortization, and (3) the payment of the balance of the

‘floating debt, maturing in this year and next, amounting to $18,000,000

gold. Thepublicdebtisabout$385,000,000andtheunificationbill

included it and some other items, making the whole sum of $435,000,000.

The bill provided that 70 per cent of the customs receipts should be turned

over daily, not into the national treasury, but a certain bank designated by

the creditors, to be applied to the obligations incurred. It will be seen,

therefore, that the scheme for consolidating the public debt increased its

amount and pledged a portion of the only gold revenue of the nation to meet

its obligations. The bill was presented by Dr. Pelligrini in the Senate with a

short speech in support of it. Without further discussion it passed the Senate

with only two dissentient votes, and was sent to the House of Deputies,

where it was referred to a committee, who reported favorably upon it.

The bill was bitterly opposed by the press, and the hostility of the people

began to manifest itself. The object of the bill was to improve the public

credit. It was declared that no logic could demonstrate that an increase of

the public debt combined with the mortgage of the public revenues could be

a betterment of the public credit, nor, on the other hand, that the recovery of

a lost credit could be achieved by mortgaging its revenues. * * *

The public mind was greatly agitated, and a spirit of discontentment began

marched to Congress and presented a petition and protest, which was

evidently written by some older head, and on their return were joined by a

great crowd of the discontented, crying out “Down with the President,”

“Downwiththeunificationbill,”etc. Thiswastheinitiationofthe

disturbances. The President’s house was attacked, and it was rumored that

he and his family took refuge in the Royal Hotel. The mob attacked Dr.

Pellegrini, whom they met in the street, but he was rescued by friends, and

then passed down Florida street, until they reached the office of El País,

when they proceeded to smash its windows, not, however, without meeting

with some resistance from the inmates of the building. Turbulence and

disorder began now to spread and affect the peace and business of the city.

The office of the Tribuna was also attacked, but without much damage. In

the meantime the police were reenforced, and their efforts to disperse the

crowd and restore order partially succeeded. The next day, however, a large

and menacing crowd gathered on the plaza in front of the Government

building, and, not dispersing at the command of the police, a charge was

ordered of mounted police to clear the plaza and streets adjoining, and a

collision took place in which shots were freely exchanged, wounding

several and killing a few. The mob finally began to give way and, being

hard pressed, to break into several bodies, and the police, being at the same

time reenforced by firemen with Mauser rifles, succeeded in dispersing

them and in partially restoring order, though the spirit, of rebellion and

resistance against the constituted authorities was not entirely subdued.

At this crisis the President asked and Congress granted him authority to

declare the city in a state of siege. Troops from the provinces were quietly

brought into the city, quartered in barracks, and reviewed, ostensibly as a

preparation for the usual ninth of July parade (independence day), but

actually to preserve public order in the event their services should be

needed. Sunday morning (July 7) opened on a comparatively quiet day.

There were no large gatherings of crowds nor acts of turbulence.

The President is an able and conciliatory man. He had been popular with

the people, who had shown him frequent manifestations of their favor and

goodwill.Heundoubtedlyfeltthatpopularsentimentagainstthe

unification bill must be appeased. On the 8th instant he sent a message to

the Chamber of Deputies withdrawing the unification bill, which was

awaiting its consideration. The Chamber immediately passed a resolution

adjourning sine die the further consideration of the bill. This action is

supposedtosignifyanentirechangeofthefinancialpolicyofthe

Government.

Still, there were those who thought that a hostile demonstration would be

liable to occur on independence day, and great precautions were taken to

forestall it and preserve the public peace. The President gave his customary

banquet to the diplomatic corps and prominent officials of his Government

on Monday evening, and on Tuesday (independence day) the same officials

attended the Te Deum at the cathedral by his invitation and witnessed the

reviewoftroopsfromthebalconiesoftheGovernmentbuilding.

Everything passed off quietly, peaceably, and in the usual manner, except

that the crowd of citizens was smaller as compared with former occasions

and few cheers greeted the President.

As a consequence of the withdrawal of the unification bill, the minister of

finance,SeñorEnriqueBerduc,tenderedhisresignationwhichwas

accepted by the President. The minister of agriculture, Señor Ezequiel

Ramos Mexía, also resigned in consequence, it is said, of party ties

connecting him with Dr. Pellegrini. The ministers of war and marine also

tendered their resignations in order to give the President an opportunity to

reorganize his cabinet, but they were requested to retain their respective

posts.

The act of withdrawing the bill seems to have given satisfaction to public

opinion. The state of siege still exists, but all evidences of turbulence and

discontent have disappeared. The city wears its wonted aspect of peace,

businesses pursuing its accustomed channels, and public order and quiet

prevail.

With regard to the unification bill, I have never doubted but that the

President was animated by an honest purpose and laudable zeal to better the

condition of finances and maintain the public credit in his support of that

measure, conceding that the bill itself was liable to serious objection. To

sum up, it appears that the recent street disturbances and acts of violence in

this city were caused by the press inveighing against the unification bill,

and producing in the public mind the belief that it boded evil to the good

name and financial credit of the nation, and that the action of the President

in withdrawing such unification bill had the effect to allay popular passion *

* *

I have, etc.,
WM.P.LORD.

[Document 5]
Mr. Lord to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Buenos Ayres,July 31, 1901.

Mr. Lord reports that the state of siege has been raised.

[Document 6]
Mr. Lord to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Buenos Ayres,July 31, 1901.

No. 131.]

SIR: Since the withdrawal of the unification bill, referred to in my No. 128,

of the 11th instant, there have been no street tumults disturbing the public

peaceormenacingofficialauthority.Publicorderandquietprevail

throughout the city. The press generally approves the action of the President

in withdrawing the bill, as well as some recent public utterances in which

he declares it to be his intention to give due consideration to public opinion

in matters of public concern. In view of this condition of things, Congress

passed a law yesterday, which the President approved on the same day,

raising the state of siege in this capital.

I have, etc.,
WM.P.LORD.

[Document 7]
President Roca to President Roosevelt.
[Telegram.]

BUENOSAYRES,September 14, 1901.

denouncing the infamous crime, which deprives the great sister Republic of

the North of its Chief Magistrate and one of its most illustrious and

impressive personalities, sends to President Roosevelt and to the American

people the expressions of its most sincere condolences.
JULIOA.ROCA,
President of the Argentine Republic.

[Document 8]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Lord.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1901.

In the name of the President and his sorrowing countrymen, you will

express to President Roca sincere acknowledgment of his touching message

of sympathy, which voices the affectionate regard of a sister Republic.
HAY.

[Document 9]
aMr. Hay to Señor del Viso, Chargé d’Affaires
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 14, 1901.

SIR: It is my painful duty to announce to you the death of William McKinley,

President of the United States, in the city of Buffalo, at fifteen minutes past

2 in the morning of to-day, September 14.

Laid low by the act of an assassin, the week-long struggle to save his life

has been watched with keen solicitude, not alone by the people of this

country, who raised him from their own ranks to the high office he filled,

but by the people of all friendly nations, whose messages of sympathy and

of hope while hope was possible have been most consolatory in this time of

sore trial.

Now that the end has come, I request you, sir, to be the medium of

communicating the sad tidings to the Government of the honored nation

you so worthily represent, and to announce that in obedience to the

prescriptions of the Constitution, the office of President has devolved upon

Theodore Roosevelt, Vice-President of the United States.

Accept, etc.,
JH
Same announcement to all foreign representatives in the United States.

[Document 10]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Herdliska.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 10, 1900.

SIR: The Department is frequently in receipt of information that naturalized

citizens who receive passports suppose themselves to be thereby rendered

exempt from the operation of the military laws and laws relating to

expatriationofthecountryoftheiroriginupontheirreturn,and

occasionally they complain that they were not informed by the Department

when they received the passport of the limits of the protection it would

afford. Of course, whenever information has been asked, the Department

has given such as it possessed, but it has not heretofore furnished this

information in advance of a request for it. It has been determined to

inaugurate a new system by which no American citizen of foreign birth

shall receive passports without being informed of those general provisions

of law of the land of his birth which it is important for him to know before

he returns to it. He will therefore receive with his passport a brief and easily

bcomprehended statement applicable to his case. Inclosed is the draftof the

notice designed for those of our citizens who were born in Austria-Hungary.

You are instructed to examine it and return it with such suggestions as to its

correctness and sufficiency as your knowledge and experience may prompt

you to make.

It should be borne in mind that the notice must be couched in terms simple

enough for a person of imperfect education and limited knowledge to easily

comprehend,andthattheintroductionofunnecessarydetailsand

discussions must be avoided.

I am, etc.,
JH
Not printed.

[Document 11]
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF AUSTRIA-HUNGARY

WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 1, 1901.

The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

All male subjects of Austria-Hungary are liable to the performance of

military service between the ages of nineteen and forty-two years.

Under the terms of the treaty between the United States and Austria-

Hungary a former subject of that country now a naturalized citizen of the

United States is treated upon his return as a citizen of the United States. If

he violated any of the criminal laws of Austria-Hungary before the date of

emigration he remains liable to trial and punishment, unless the right to

punish has been lost by lapse of time as provided by law. A naturalized

American citizen formerly a subject of Austria-Hungary may be arrested

and punished under the military laws only in the following cases: (1) If he

was accepted and enrolled as a recruit in the army before the date of

emigration, although he had not been put in service; (2) if he was a soldier

when he emigrated, either in active service or on leave of absence; (3) if he

was summoned by notice or by proclamation before his emigration to serve

in the reserve or militia, and failed to obey the call; (4) if he emigrated after

war had broken out.

A naturalized American citizen of Austro-Hungarian origin on arriving in

that country should at once show his passport to the proper authorities; and

if, on inquiry, it is found that his name is on the military rolls, he should

request it to be struck off, calling attention to the treaty of September 20,

1870, between this country and Austria-Hungary.

The laws of Austria-Hungary require every stranger to produce a passport

on entering. This provision is not usually enforced, but may be at any time.

Travelers are usually called upon to establish their identity and are advised

to provide themselves with passports. They do not ordinarily require to be

visaed.

[Document 12]
Mr. Harris to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Vienna,April 26, 1901.

No. 188.]

SIR: On the 18th day of January, 1901, the consul at Reichenberg informed

me that John Richter, an Austrian-born naturalized citizen of the United

States, bearing a passport, had been expelled from his native country, where

he was sojourning.

I sent the consul a copy of the treaty of 1870, with directions to send it to

the bezirkshauptmann at Schluckenau, and to invite his attention to the fact

that Richter was not subject to arrest or expulsion. I also addressed a note to

the foreign office, a copy whereof is inclosed.

InafewdaysIhadaletterfromtheconsulstatingthatthe

bezirkshauptmann had notified Richter that he might return. A letter lately

received from the consul is to the effect that Richter had made no further

complaint, and it is thought he has returned to America.

In the meantime a carefully prepared note came down from the foreign

office, a translation whereof is inclosed.

I would not report the case except for the fact that it will be noticed the

authorities for the first time put a new interpretation on the treaty of 1870,

to the effect that there is no fixed time during which an American may

sojourn in Austria-Hungary, and therefore His Majesty’s Government may

expel any American at pleasure.

I do not entertain this view; but I have felt that it was better to lay the matter

before you for instructions. If you do not consent to this construction of the

treaty, I recommend that a clear and firm protest be made to the foreign

office, so that the case may not be taken as a precedent.

I have, etc.,
ADDISONC.HARRIS.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Harris to Count Soluchowski.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Vienna,January 23, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY: I regret that I am compelled to invite the attention of your

excellency to the following case, reported to this legation from the United

States consul at Reichenberg. He reports: That John Richter was born in

Bohemia in 1873. That at the age of 14½ years he was taken by his mother

as an emigrant to the United States, where he resided continuously until

about the month of October, 1900, when he returned to Schluckenau, the

place of his nativity. He was naturalized as a citizen of the United States on

October 12, 1896, in the circuit court of Cook County, State of Illinois

(Chicago). He holds a passport issued to him by Col. John Hay, Secretary of

State of the United States, dated September 26, 1900.

The consul reports that the bezirkshauptmann at Schluckenau refused to

recognize the treaty rights of Mr. Richter, although shown the said passport,

and ordered him to leave the bezirk within eight days or he would be

expelledbyforce.Thereupontheconsuladdressedalettertothe

bezirkshauptmann caking attention to the fact that Mr. Richter was a citizen

of the United States and had a right to sojourn in this country, and also

instructed Mr. Richter to explain to the bezirkshauptmann the fact that he

waslawfullyatSchluckenau,whichhedid.Whereuponthe

bezirkshauptmann declared “the American representatives in this country

could do nothing in the case,” and required a gendarme to drive him out of

the bezirk, and said to Mr. Richter that he would be arrested if he returned.

Mr. Richter, to avoid further trouble, under protest obeyed the commands of

the bezirkshauptmann and is temporarily elsewhere.

I respectfully ask that your excellency will cause the facts to be inquired

into,andiffoundsubstantiallyashereinstated,todirectthe

bezirkshauptmann to revoke his order of expulsion, and to inform Mr.

Richter, through the consul or otherwise, that his conduct was in violation

of the treaty of 1870, and that he has the right to return to and sojourn in

Schluckenau, and to be treated as a citizen of the United States.

I avail myself, etc.,
ADDISONC.HARRIS.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]
The foreign office to Mr. Harris.
VIENNA,March 15, 1901.

Theimperialandroyalministryforforeignaffairsdidnotfailto

communicate, in due course of time, the contents of the esteemed note of

the 23d of January of this year, concerning the matter of the expulsion of

the naturalized American citizen John Richter, to the imperial and royal

ministry of the interior, in order that the case might be treated accordingly.

The ministry of the interior at once caused the necessary investigations to

be made with reference thereto, which, when examined, result in the

following: John Richter, who, while still an Austrian subject, emigrated in

theyear1887withoutauthorization(accordingtotheprovisionof

paragraph 54 of the law of October 2, 1882, Imperial and Royal Law

BulletinNo.153,theninforce),therebymadehimselfguiltyofa

transgression (according to paragraph 35 of the military law of the 11th of

April, 1889, Imperial and Royal Law Bulletin No. 41, and to paragraph 23

of the Military Regulations, first part, respectively), by his failure to report

for conscription, and of the crime, eventually transgression, of desertion

(according to paragraphs 44 and 45 of the law referred to, and to paragraph

80 of the Military Regulations, first part, respectively). Therefore, if Richter

had remained an Austrian subject, he would have to be called to account for

the said punishable actions, and, moreover (according to paragraph 38, last

item, of the military law), would have to be held to perform his neglected

liability of presenting himself for military examination, with the eventual

consequences of removal from the age class and conscription number and

increased service in the sense of paragraph 44 of the military law.

But in view of the fact that Richter is—according to article I of the treaty

concluded with the United States of America on the 20th of September,

1870 (Imperial and Royal Law Bulletin No. 74, ex 1871)—to be treated as

an American citizen, he can not be held liable to trial and punishment under

Article II of that treaty, for the nonfulfillment of his military duty, nor be

held subsequently to perform this duty.

The provisions of this treaty were in no way violated by the imperial and

royal Bezirkshauptmannschaft at Schluckenau.

It is true that the imperial and royal Bezirkshauptmannschaft did order John

Richter to leave the district within eight days; but this procedure can not be

regarded as in contradiction to the treaty referred to, as the latter contains

no provision with reference to the right of stay in Austria of American

citizens, and in particular does not grant them the right of indefinite stay.

This right of stay is therefore subjected to all those limitations which have

been established by the general binding laws of this country, and by those

which public considerations may require; to this applies in particular item 5

of paragraph 2 of the law of the 27th of July, 1871, Imperial and Royal Law

Bulletin No. 88, according to which persons who are not Austrian subjects

may be expelled either from the entire territory in which that law has

jurisdiction, or from a certain part of it, if their stay in it becomes

inadmissible for reasons of public order or safety.

According to the investigations made, the ostentatious manner in which

Richter evaded his legal duty to do military service is causing public

scandal, and may very easily give others an impetus to similar demoralizing

acts. This apprehension is strengthened by the fact that more than thirty

personsfromthedistrictofSchlukenau,whoareliabletomilitary

presentation, are in America.

In consideration of this fact the procedure of the imperial and royal

Bezirkshauptmannschaft in Schluckenau appears to be legally based, and in

view of the protection required by public interests also appears to be fully

justified; and the imperial and royal ministry of the interior is therefore, to

its regret, not in a position to issue any order in behalf of John Richter.

The undersigned avails himself, etc.,
SZSCEN.
For the Minister.

[Document 13]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Herdliska.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 9, 1901.

No. 7.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of dispatch No. 188, of April 26,

1901, reporting the expulsion case of John Richter, a nat uralized American

citizen of Austrian birth.

Mr. Harris states that the Austro-Hungarian authorities claim that under the

naturalization treaty between the two countries there is no fixed time during

which a naturalized American of Austrian origin may sojourn in that

country, and that they may “expel him at pleasure.” Mr. Harris dissents

from this view, but refers the matter to the Department.

The treaty contemplates that persons of Austrian origin naturalized in the

United States may resort to their native country. It does not, however, fix

the period of their sojourn there.

Whether such persons may be expelled from Austria, and when, would

seemtodependupontheparticularcircumstancesofeachcase.

Undoubtedly the Austro-Hungarian Government has the right to expel from

its territory persons injurious to peace and good order, but it is the

reasonable contention of the United States Government that the pernicious

characterofthereturningpersonshouldbeaffirmativelyshownin

justification of the extreme resort to expulsion, and that the right so claimed

should not rest on a vague and general theory of inconvenient example

which might be stretched to cover the cases of all Austro-Hungarians

naturalized here and returning to their original jurisdiction. The treaty

undoubtedly gives the right of inoffensive return, and that stipulation is not

to be impaired by any construction which would virtually annul the treaty in

an important particular. The Austrian law provides for the expulsion of

aliens whose presence is inadmissible for reasons of public order and safety.

The reason given by the Austrian foreign office for considering Richter’s

stay there undesirable is that “the ostentatious manner in which he evaded

his legal duty to do military service is causing public scandal, and may very

easily give others an impetus to similar demoralizing acts.”

As Richter was only 14 years of age when his mother took him to the

United States, and would not have been subject to military service until he

reached the age of 19, it might be questioned whether he left for the purpose

of evading military duty. However, as Mr. Harris states that Richter was

informed by the Austrian authorities that he might return to the place from

which he was expelled and has made no further complaint, it would not

seem desirable to take up this case with the Austrian Government.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 14]
Mr. Herdliska to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Vienna,July 10, 1901.

No. 10.]

SIR: I have the honor to lay before the Department for instructions the

following case: On the 2d instant, Consul Donzelmann, at Prague, sent to

this legation the application for passport of one Carl Schimaneck, with the

following report:

I have the honor to transmit to you, herewith inclosed, a passport

Schimaneck, who is claimed as having been the father of this

applicant, a certificate of marriage establishing the fact of the

applicant’s parents having been married in the United States, and

a certificate of birth of this applicant. The facts in the case of this

applicant, as he has stated in this consulate this day, are these, viz:

His father emigrated to the United States in 1876, and shortly

citizenship, and having married between the time of declaring his

intention to become an American citizen and his death, as the

issue of this marriage was this applicant who was born in the

United States. The mother of this applicant returned to her and her

deceasedhusband’snativecountry,whichwasBohemia,

belonging to the Emperor of Austria as the sovereign, taking with

her this applicant, her child. The mother never perfected her

American citizenship, as provided by law, and has remained ever

since her return to Bohemia, which was in the year 1881, an

Austrian subject, and the child so brought over here never left

Bohemia, never knew a word of the American language, and has

married here in Bohemia another subject of Austria, thus evincing

every desire to forever remain here in Austria. The facts, then, are

that the applicant was born of foreign parents while they were

sojourning in the United States of America, and under the facts

stated heretofore this applicant did not become an American

citizen simply because he happened to be born in the United

States.Indeed,thedeclarationofintentionmadebythe

applicant’s deceased father is not valid in law, as it states that he

declared himself to have been a subject of the Emperor of

Germany, when in fact he never had been any other than a subject

of the Emperor of Austria. But admitting for the sake of argument

that this certificate is in conformity with the law governing the

same, yet the applicant is not an American citizen because his

mother, as well as himself, never complied with the law of the

United States governing such cases. I do not think that our

Government ought to be charged with the protection of this

applicant, the law not permitting it.

As section 1992, Revised Statutes of the United States, expressly declares

that “All persons born in the United States and not subject to any foreign

power * * * are declared to be citizens of the United States,” Mr. Carl

Schimaneck would appear to be a native citizen of the United States. It is

true that he left the United States when but 4 years of age and has resided in

Bohemia, the native country of his parents, ever since. It is also true that he

has married an Austrian subject, and he does not appear to have any

interests in the United States. And while he declares it to be his intention to

return to the United States within two years, Consul Donzelmann says Mr.

Schimaneck’s real purpose in applying for a new passport is to enable him

to obtain a license from the Bohemian authorities to engage in business in

Bohemia. In the application for passport made before this legation on the 2d

of August, 1894, Mr. Schimaneck also declared his intention to return to the

United States within two years. This intention he did not carry out. But he

has not applied for a passport since and it does not appear that his case is

one where trouble is to be feared from the military authorities. He appears

to desire the new passport solely for the purpose of obtaining a new

concession to enter into business, and I have therefore the honor to lay the

case before the Department with the respectful request that full instructions

may be sent to me in the matter. Copies of the documents in the case as

transmittedtomebyConsulDonzelmannarerespectfullyinclosed

herewith.

I have, etc.,
CHARLESV.HERDLISKA.
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]
CERTIFICATE OF BIRTH.
ST.JOSEPH’SCHURCH,Tremont, N. Y. [undated].

Carl Schimaneck, son of Anton and Fanny Schimaneck, born on the 25th of

February, 1877, was baptized on the 25th of July, 1877.

Witnesses: Franziska Heisler and Joseph and Maria Lauzansky.

Pastor: Rev. H. J. S. Tanner.
[SEAL.]
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]

AntonSchimaneck,ofMirovitz,andFranciscaSimek,ofLedenitz,

Bohemia, were married in St. Nicholas Church, on the 2d of June, 1876, in

the presence of the two witnesses, Joseph Tanzer and Joseph Boder, by the

Rev. H. L. Fuchs, according to the Catholic rite. This is shown by the

register of marriages on file in this church.

[]JPH ,
Rector of St. Nicholas Church.
B NY,June 18, 1881.

[Inclosure 3.]

1876. STATE OFNEWYORK,
In the Superior Court of the City of New York.

I, Anton Schimaney, do declare on oath that it is bona fide my intention to

become a citizen of the United States, and to renounce forever all allegiance

and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state or sovereignty whatever,

and particularly to the Emperor of Germany, of whom I am now a subject.

Sworn this 5th day of June, 1876.

CLERK’SOFFICE OF THESUPERIORCOURT OF THECITY OFNEWYORK.
I certify that the foregoing is a true copy of an original declaration of

intention remaining on record in my office.

In witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name and affixed the

seal of said court this 5th day of June, 1876.

[SEAL.]THOMASBOESE,Clerk.

[Document 15]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Herdliska.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 20, 1901.

No. 10.]

SIR: The Department has received your No. 10 of July 10, 1901, submitting

the application for a passport of Carl Schimaneck, and a presentation of his

case by Consul Donzelman at Prague, who thinks the applicant is not

entitled to protection as a citizen of the United States. It appears that he was

born here; that his father had declared his intention of becoming a citizen of

theUnitedStatesbeforetheson’sbirth,butdiedbeforehesecured

naturalization; that the mother never secured naturalization as a citizen of

the United States, and returned to Bohemia with the applicant when he was

four years of age, and that he has himself never been in the United States

since. He does not speak English, has married a Bohemian, is engaged in

local business, and, as it would seem, is permanently settled in Bohemia. In

considering the case, the question of the citizenship of the applicant’s

parents is not material, as Consul Donzelman seems to think it is, because

birth in the United States of itself confers United States citizenship under

the provisions of our laws. In construing these provisions the legation has

correctly followed the numerous rulings on the subject by this Department

(see The American Passport, pp. 102, 104, 105), and the rulings are

themselves in full consonance with the decisons of the Federal courts. (See

notably 35 Fed. Rep., 354, and 169 U. S., 649.) If, therefore, the applicant

were still in his minority, or were only temporarily abroad, there would be

no doubt of his being entitled to the protection of a passport as a native

citizen of the United States. The question really involved, however, is

whetherornothehasabandonedhisrighttothatprotection.The

Department’s circular instruction of March 27, 1899, on the subject of

“Passportsforpersonsresidingorsojourningabroad,”containedthe

following quotation from Secretary Fish:

When a personwho has attained his majorityremoves to another

country and settles himself there, he is stamped with the national

character of his new domicile; and this is so, notwithstanding he

may entertain a floating intention of returning to his original

residenceorcitizenshipatsomefutureperiod,andthe

presumption of law with respect to residence in a foreign country,

especially if it be protracted, is that the party is thereanimo

manendi, and it lies with him to explain it.

Obviously, these remarks apply with equal force to one who remains in a

foreign country after he has attained his majority. The circular further says:

When an applicant has completely severed his relations with the

United States; has neither kindred nor property here; has married

and established a home in a foreign land; has engaged in business

or professional pursuits wholly in foreign countries; has so shaped

his plans as to make it impossible or improbable that they will

everincludeadomicileinthiscountry—theseandsimilar

circumstancesshouldexerciseanadverseinfluencein

determining the question whether or not a passport should issue.

EachcircumstancequotedaboveappearstobeapplicabletoMr.

Schimaneck, with the additional fact that in applying for the passport issued

him by your legation August 4, 1894, he swore that he intended to return to

the United States, which he has not done, and in his pending application he

makes the same promise, which there is strong reason for believing he will

not keep. The circular also says:

If, in making application for a passport, he (the applicant) swears

that he intends to return to the United States within a given

period, and afterwards, in applying for a renewal of his passport,

it appears that he did not fulfill his intention, this circumstance

awakens a doubt as to his real purpose which he must dispel.

So far from the doubt having been dispelled in this case, it appears to have

been confirmed. The Department is therefore of the opinion that, there

being no additional facts to change the aspect of the case, Mr. Schimaneck’s

application for a passport should not be granted and the applicant informed

that he must renew his residence in the United States which was abandoned

in his infancy, before he can expect to receive the protection of this

Government while he is abroad.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 16]
Mr. Von Callenberg, Chargé d’Affaires, to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

MANCHESTER,MASS.,September 15, 1901.

I am charged, on the occasion of the tragic death of President McKinley, to

convey to the Federal Government the warmest sympathy of His Imperial

and Royal Apostolic Majesty.
VONCALLENBERG,
Austro-Hungarian Chargé d’Affaires.

[Document 17]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Von Callenberg,
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

I have charged the United States minister at Vienna to make on behalf of the

President suitable acknowledgment of the sympathetic message of His

Imperial and Royal Majesty which you conveyed by your telegram of the

15th instant.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 18]
Mr. Hay to Mr. McCormick.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

I am charged to request you to convey in the name of the President and

Government of the United States, through the appropriate channel, grateful

acknowledgment of the message of condolence sent through Mr. Callenberg

by His Imperial and Royal Majesty.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 19]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Townsend.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 10, 1900.

SIR: The Department is frequently in receipt of information that naturalized

citizenswhoreceiveitspassportssupposethemselvestobethereby

rendered exempt from the operation of the military laws and laws relating

to expatriation of the country of their origin on their return. It has, therefore,

been determined to send to each person of foreign birth who receives a

passport from this Department a brief and easily comprehended statement,

showing what treatment he may expect to encounter if he returns to the

country of his origin.

The Department has no information concerning the military or other laws of

Belgium as they may affect a Belgian subject who secures naturalization in

this country and returns, and you are instructed to furnish a report on the

subject at the earliest practicable date.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 20]
NOTICETOAMERICANCITIZENSFORMERLYSUBJECTSOFBELGIUMWHO

CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 5, 1901.

The information given below is believed to be correct, yet it is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Every male Belgian must register during the calendar year in which he

reaches the age of 19 years to take part in the drawing of lots for the raising

of the necessary military contingent.

Anyone who has drawn a number which designates him for military

service, or in case of his absence has had a number drawn for him by the

proper authority, is punishable if he does not answer the call for service.

Under the terms of the convention between the United States and Belgium a

Belgian naturalized as a citizen of the United States is considered by

Belgium as a citizen of the United States; but upon return to Belgium he

maybeprosecutedforcrimeormisdemeanorcommittedbefore

naturalization, saving such limitations as are established by the laws of

Belgium.

A naturalized American formerly a Belgian, who has resided five years in

this country, can not be held to military service in Belgium or to incidental

obligation resulting therefrom, in the event of his return, except in cases of

desertion from organized or embodied military or naval service.

Passports are not usually required in Belgium, but people who contemplate

sojourning in that country are recommended to carry them in order to

establish their identity. They do not require to be viséed or indorsed.

[Document 21]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Townsend.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 29, 1901.

No. 80.]

SIR: I inclose herewith for your information a copy of a letter from Hon. B.

R. Tillman, bringing to the Department’s attention the case of Mr. Thomas

de St. Bris, an American citizen, who was arrested and assaulted by the

police of Middelkerke, Belgium, on suspicion of having stolen some

jewelry.

You will make an immediate investigation of the case, and if the grossly

discourteous treatment of this respectable American citizen by the police is

substantiated, proper reprimand and regrets will be expected.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
T SC,July 20, 1901.

S: I inclose a letter and some newspaper clippings, which you will please

return after reading them. It seems to me that Americans traveling abroad

are entitled to decent treatment as long as they behave themselves, and to

secureredressthroughtheirGovernmentwhentheyarewrongedor

imposed upon.

Since we have become a “world power” it would appear that the national

influence might be carried in this direction, as well as in others, and I shall

be glad if you will offer any suggestions as to how this man shall proceed in

order to make his case one that you can prosecute vigorously.

Yours, truly,
B.R.TILLMAN,U. S. S.
[Subinclosure 1.]
Mr. de St. Bris to Mr. Tillman.
HOTEL DEFLANDRE,Bunkerque, France,June 26, 1901.

DEARSIR: I am over in Europe making historical researches for a new work on

American history, and had a nervous attack from overwork, whereon the

doctor ordered me to go to Middelkerke, a quiet seaside place, to spend a

month. The inclosed extract from an English and French newspaper will tell

you what happened to me, and as my father was a South Carolina man, I

think I ought to let you know. I sent a claim for damages to the Hon.

Lawrence Townsend, United States minister plenipotentiary at Brussels. He

was out of town when I called, but the secretary told me that the Belgian

Government decline all responsibility for the acts of their village chiefs.

The vice-consul at Ghent said that they would give nothing for slapping me

in the face after taking me falsely into custody, and that the consular rules

order all consuls to keep on as good terms as possible with foreign

governments.

In consequence of this United States citizens are constantly arrested, as they

only give a letter of apology for it. These police have thousands of

photographs of thieves for whose capture high rewards are offered, and if

there is any resemblance they try to find some excuse for searching all your

papers. Some time ago a New Yorker (well known) was arrested for

sketching a tree in the country, under the laws ordering arrest for sketching

fortifications. These arrests when known to one’s enemies do tremendous

damage, as they only tell half the story.

There ought to be a law (if our Government do not wish to enforce it)

holding foreign governments responsible for illegal acts of their police

chiefs, and also for unjustified arrests. Of course I would not get large

damages, as I only make $1,500 a year, but I have an income of $1,500

from United States securities.

I don’t want to go to expense about this claim, but if a lawyer could get a

payment I would divide with him half of what I got as compensation for his

trouble.

I believe we are no worse off than any other nation, but it seems outrageous

that we can be so damaged and treated without compensation.

The police only arrest people in moderate circumstances, as it is more

difficult to enforce a claim. I have been so upset by this outrage that I can

not write a decent letter yet.

Perhaps you can lend me a hand in this matter.

Believe me, etc.,
THOS. DEST.BRIS.
[Subinclosure 2.—Newspaper clipping.]
AN AMERICAN WRONGLY ARRESTED IN BELGIUM.
A singular incident has just occurred at Middelkerke, in Belgium, where,

owing to a mistake of a landlady and over officiousness on the part of the

police,anAmericangentleman,vice-presidentofabank,hasbeen

subjected to considerable annoyance and vexation.

It appears that he rented a room with the intention of passing the season at

Middelkerke.Hehadhardlytakenpossessionoftheroomwhenthe

landlady of the house sent men to remove a wardrobe which had been

forgotten. In shifting this wardrobe head downward some jewelry, valued at

500 francs, slipped out of the top drawer and fell into the body of the

wardrobe.

The landlady, on finding the drawer empty, ran to the village police office

occupant of the room, pointed a revolver at his head, and demanded,

“Where have you hidden the stolen jewels?” Of course, he denied all

knowledge of the matter, but he was dragged downstairs and handed over to

a policeman, after being slapped in the face by the chief. He was then

conducted to various shops in the place and asked where he had sold the

jewels. The next step was to take him to the police station, where he was

stripped and all his luggage searched; his private note book was scrutinized

and various indignities perpetrated.

His passport, photograph, and various papers of identification were utterly

disregarded by these village officials and the American banker made to feel

very uncomfortable.

At last it began to dawn upon the mind of the police that a mistake had been

made, and the chief said: “Well, if I am wrong I beg your pardon.”

Then the landlady herself came upon the scene and apologized, for she had

found the missing jewels in the body of the wardrobe.

The American consul then arrived, and the denouement was the discovery

of a mare’s nest.

The American gentleman is naturally very indignant and is lodging a claim

with the Belgian Government. The moral of the story is that travelers

should make themselves acquainted with the furniture and its contents when

they occupy strange rooms in strange places.

[Document 22]
Mr. Townsend to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Brussels,August 16, 1901.

No. 96.]

SIR: In conformity with instructions contained in Department’s dispatch No.

80, of July 29 last, I have transmitted the facts of the case of Mr. Thomas de

St. Bris to the minister of foreign affairs of Belgium, to the end that if, after

investigation, the facts prove to be as represented, “proper reprimand and

regrets” may be expressed for the false arrest of said Mr. de St. Bris at

Middelkerke, Belgium, on June 7 last.

Awaiting the reply of the Belgian Government in this affair, I may add, for

the information of the Department, that when Mr. de St. Bris called at the

legation and stated his case he was informed that his claim would be

submitted to the proper authorities to the end that the policeman might be

reprimanded for his error and that proper regrets might be expressed by the

chief police for the false arrest.

He replied that he did not care whether the policeman was reprimanded or

not, nor did he desire to receive any expressions of regrets.

He wanted money compensation only and desired to institute a claim

against the Belgian Government for heavy damages.

It was pointed out to him that, as a traveler in Belgium, he was obliged to

conform to the laws of the country, and that as a citizen of a friendly power

he had the right to claim and to receive the same treatment at the hands of

the authorities as a citizen of Belgium.

His arrest appeared to be either due to a case of mistaken identity or an

error in judgment on the part of the local policeman, and did not seem to be

in any way due to the fact of his being an American citizen.

Under these circumstances, and with the view of obtaining damages in the

form of a money compensation, his proper course would be to institute a

suit against the local police authorities in the civil court of Belgium, in

which event it would be necessary for him to employ a lawyer. As he did

not appear to have received any bodily injury or be incapacitated in any

way, it was further pointed out to him that it was extremely doubtful if he

would be able to obtain monetary damages in such a suit, and, furthermore,

that the claim for such damages, which he desired to institute against the

Government, would probably only result, if the facts proved to be as

represented, in a reprimand to the policeman and an expression of regrets to

him. Mr. de St. Bris replied that as he did not care for regrets, and as it was

only money he was after, he would not press his claim.

A few days later, i. e., June 25, Mr. de St. Bris wrote a letter addressed to

my secretary confirming this determination of his.

I have, etc.,
LAWRENCETOWNSEND.

[Document 23]
Mr. Townsend to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Brussels,September 13, 1901.

No. 102.]

SIR: Referring to Department’s instructions No. 80 of July 29 last and to my

dispatch in reply thereto, No. 96 of August 18 last, I have now the honor to

transmit herewith a copy and translation of the reply of the minister for

foreign affairs to my request that the case of M. de St. Bris, falsely arrested

at Middelkerke, Belgium, might be investigated and that, if the facts proved

as represented, due apologies might be offered and reprimand administered

by the proper authorities.

The Department will observe that in compliance with my request the

minister of foreign affairs has conveyed to me the expressions of regrets of

the minister of justice, and furthermore, that the officer or police, who made

the arrest in question, was reprimanded by the minister of justice on July 26

last, before my request that such reprimand should be administered reached

the ministry of foreign affairs.

I have, etc.,
L T
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]
M F A ,
Brussels,September 4, 1901.

MM : By letter of August 11 last, your excellency has kindly brought to

my notice “the ill treatment and arbitrary arrest” to which M. de St. Bris has

been subjected at Middelkerke on June 7 last.

As soon as I had learned of the incident in question, by means of the

newspapers of the time, I had on June 19 last requested my colleague, the

minister of justice, to collect immediately official information.

I have the honor to transmit herewith to your excellency copies of the

reports of chief of police of Middelkerke and of the attorney-general of the

court of appeals at Ghent.

The satisfaction which the Government of the United States to-day solicits

has been anticipated by a reprimand which, on July 26 last, my colleague,

the minister of justice, caused to be addressed, through the official channel,

to the chief of police (Pattyn) on account of the lack of tact and perspicacity

which the latter evinced at the time the incident occurred.

Mr. Vanden Heuvel, the minister of justice, moreover requested me to

convey to your excellency the regrets which the facts of the case have

caused him and which necessitated the steps your excellency has taken.

I avail myself, etc.,
DEFAVEREAU.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]
Report of the Attorney-General.
C A G,
Ghent,July 9, 1901.

explanations furnished by the chief of police at Middelkerke in reference to

the facts brought to notice by the minister of foreign affairs.

The attorney of the king at Furnes esteems that there are reasons to

acknowledge the veracity of these explanations; they concord with the

report of the policeman, who certifies that no ill treatment has been inflicted

on M. de St. Bris. On the other part, the latter has left Middelkerke without

making complaint; his present residence is unknown.

One may reproach the chief of police because he penetrated into the

apartment of M. de St. Bris, holding a revolver in the hand. It can only be

owing to a wrong appreciation of the circumstances and to a lack of

judgment that this officer of police thought it necessary to take an attitude

which appears unjustifiable.
P.VANISEGHEM,Attorney-General.
[Inclosure 3.—Translation.]
Report of the Chief of Police.
COMMUNE OFMIDDELKERKE,POLICESTATION,
Middelkerke,June 27, 1901.

MR.ATTORNEYOFTHEKING: By his letter No. 13933, dated the 18th instant, Mr.

Director of the Public Security, has transmitted to me the same article of the

same newspaper, requesting also detailed information in reference to the

incident therein published. This is exactly what I have answered thereto.

The 7th instant, at 10.30 o’clock a. m., was introduced into my office the

named Proot, Remilde, aged 20, living with her parents, who in a few

words, which she, in a halting manner, as she was very excited, made

known to me that a foreigner had just rented a room at her parents’ house

andthatsomemomentsbeforehermotherhadjustnoticedthe

disappearance of all her jewelry. She was unable to furnish more detailed

information.

A few minutes later I was at the house of the baker Proot, Henry, from

whose wife I received the following statement in Flemish: “Yesterday

evening about half past 8, this person (a man), who is still in that room”—

saying this she pointed to the door of the latter—“came to rent the same at

30 francs per month, which sum he paid in advance and for which a receipt

was delivered him by my husband. This room is the one my husband and

myself still occupied last night. Yesterday evening about 9, when we went

to bed, I took off my golden wedding ring, the value of which is 15 francs,

and placed it in the drawer of that wardrobe together with my other jewelry,

composed of a lady’s watch and chain in gold, worth 150 francs; of a

necklace in gold to which was attached a cross of silver adorned with

diamonds, worth 100 francs; a pair of earrings in silver adorned with

diamonds, worth 150 francs, and also three rings of which two in gold and

one in silver adorned with diamonds, the two former worth together 35

francs and the latter 40 francs. I shut the drawer and put the key in my

pocket. This morning, at half past 8, this foreigner of yesterday evening,

whom I regret to have accepted owing to his uncleanliness, presented

himself in view of taking possession of his room from which we had not yet

had time to remove the piece of furniture containing the jewelry above

referred to. We gave him possession. About half past 9 this man, in whose

room the wardrobe was still, came downstairs and went out for one hour. At

his return my sons Lewis and Henry, aged 18 and 16, respectively, entered

the room of this foreigner who helped them to remove the wardrobe, which

was carried to a small room located on the ground floor.

“A few moments later I opened the drawer and noticed that my jewelry,

whichwasinsidethedrawerinanuncoveredcardboardcase,had

disappeared. I am certain that since 9 o’clock yesterday—when I still saw

them—until now, nobody else but this foreigner entered the house.”

Proot, Henry, 52 years old, baker, his daughter Remilde and his sons Lewis

and Henry above referred to, being all persons perfectly honorable and all

of them testifying most decidedly on the point that nobody else had entered

their house; besides, having verified the lock which could not have been

opened except by means of a false key, accompanied by Proot, Henry, I

entered the room of this foreigner. It was then half past 11 in the morning.

The latter was sitting on the wooden floor, busy with warming on a small

spirit lamp a small portion of milk to which were added some parcels of

breadstuff. Not knowing with whom I might have to deal, I had, on entering

the room, a revolver in hand, which, after seeing with whom I had to deal, I

instantly replaced it in its scabbard. Having brought to his knowledge the

statement of Muyle, Clamence, the wife of Proot, Henry, and on my

interpellation this foreigner said: “My name is de St. Bris, Thomas; I am a

literary man, son of Thomas and Xeres Mary, born in 1847 at Onondaga, in

the State of New York, North America. I have arrived here yesterday

evening from Ostend, where I had arrived the same day coming from

Dunkirk. I have not seen any jewelry in this room. The piece of furniture

which has been taken out this room sometime ago and which I have helped

to bring down stairs I have not seen inside. During the time I have been

absent from here I have been to a store which I can indicate, in view of

procuring some milk and spirits of wine to prepare my breakfast. My papers

are in my luggage.”

This foreigner, dressed like a real beggar and of a repulsing uncleanness,

was in possession of such a great deal of old dusty papers that I judged it

advisable—as the room which he occupied was so small—to have his

baggage transported to the police station. In going out the residence of

Proot, to walk over to the communal house (police station) he pointed out to

me the store where he had bought the spirits of wine and the milk and, as it

was located only a few meters from there, I went in with him. There I was

told that he had really been in at the moment indicated, about 9.30, to buy

milk and spirits of wine.

Iconductedtheforeignertothepolicestation,accompaniedbythe

policeman whom I had sent for by one of the children Proot, and who had

arrived at the latter’s house while the baggage of the foreigner was being

taken down stairs; this was at 11.30 o’clock.

I telephoned the matter to the parquet (tribunal) of Furnes. Some minutes

later Mr. Judge of Instruction Feys, of Furnes, asked for news about the

case. This magistrate informed me, while instructing me to continue the

investigations, that he would come up to Middelkerke at 1.50 in the

afternoon and that I had to keep the foreigner in custody.

At my office and with his consent, Mr. de St. Bris was bodily searched.

In the presence of the policeman I continued the verification of the papers

and the investigation of his baggage, when the steam tramway arrived

bringing the members of the tribunal, i. e., the judge of instruction, Feys,

the aid attorney of the King, De Haene, and the secretary, Huyghe.

At the request of the judge of instruction, I conducted the members of the

tribunal to the house where the offense had been committed.

After interrogating the inmates of the house, and especially the wife of

Proot, all of them confirming the statements made to me.

Referring to the wardrobe in question, after having carefully examined the

book, the judge of instruction instructed me to have the drawer entirely

taken out, whereupon I found between the exterior panel and the drawer the

jewelry which was claimed had been stolen.

The members of the tribunal, who were then on their route homeward,

continued their way without seeing the foreigner.

I, accompanied by the plaintiff, Clemence Muyle, hastened to communicate

to St. Bris the news that the jewelry had been found, and while shaking

hands with him I expressed to him my regrets.

The wife of Proot acted in the same manner.

The 12th of the present month Mr. Consul of the “United States of North

AmericaatGhent,inviewofaletterrelatingthesubstanceofthe

newspaper article herewith inclosed, came to Middelkerke for inquiry. The

policeman that I had sent for also protested against the false insinuations

contained in said letter. The persons at whose house De St. Bris had been

purchasing milk and spirits of wine, at whose residence the consul had

obtained information, have told me that Mr. Consul had said to them: “I

believe that this man has not full possession of his brains.”

In reference to the slap he claims I had given him, this assertion is as false

as is his statement that an ovation was made him by the inhabitants of

Middelkerke.

When entering the town hall he was entirely alone with the policeman, who

walked near him, without holding him. Nobody would have supposed that

he was being conducted there. During that time I was watching the

transportation of his baggage which, at my request, was brought in by the

son of Proot.

Leaving the town hall, at about 2.30 p. m., nobody was standing there.

Vandeworen, Hubert, a mason residing in the commune, who at my request

has effected the transportation of St. Bris’s baggage to the Tourists’ Hotel

and who was then just passing by, can certify to this. The named Schefer,

Adolphe, the keeper of the Tourists’ Hotel, at whose house de St. Bris has

had his lodgings until Saturday the 15th instant, can tell you much about the

habits and manners of this peculiar personage.

[Document 24]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Townsend.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 28, 1901.

No. 86.]

SIR: With reference to the Department’s No. 83, of the 3d instant, I have to

acknowledge the receipt of your No. 102, of the 13th idem, with inclosures,

reporting that the Government of Belgium expressed its regret over the

arrest of Mr. de St. Bris, an American citizen, and that the officer who made

the arrest has been reprimanded.

The Department is satisfied with the action of the Belgian Government in

the matter.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 25]
Mr. Wauters, chargé d’affaires, to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

NAHANT,MASS.,September 14, 1901.

I beg your excellency to present, on behalf of the King and Belgian

Government and in my own name, the deepest sympathy and condolence to

the family of President McKinley and to the United States Government.
WAUTERS.

[Document 26]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Wauters.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram conveying

the grief and sympathy of His Majesty the King of the Belgians and of the

BelgianGovernmentandpeople,aswellasofyourself,withMrs.

McKinley, this Government, and the people of the United States in their

recent affliction.

InreplyIassureyou,inthenameofMrs.McKinleyandofthis

Government and people, of their deep appreciation of these delicate tokens

of friendly and sincere sorrow, and request you to convey these assurances

to His Majesty the King and to the Government and people of Belgium.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 27]
Mr. Bridgman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
La Paz, Bolivia,May 20, 1901.

No. 265.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith copy of a letter from George

Melville, an Englishman who has been imprisoned at Corocoro for more

than two months, accused of robbery.

As illustrating the delays mentioned in another dispatch, this case is a good

example. Several letters of the character inclosed have been sent to this

legation, and official and personal appeals made to bring Melville to trial.

One main trouble is disregard of commands from the foreign office by the

local authorities at Corocoro. I can not determine as to the probability of

this man’s guilt or innocence, but believe he states the facts in his letter as

existing.

Similar cases are not infrequent here, and as no provision exists for relief

are quite distressing.

I am sending to-day a second request to his accuser, asking his influence to

bring Melville to trial.

Trusting I may be able to report definitely before long, I have, etc.,
G HB
[Inclosure.]
C J,May 6, 1901.

DEARSIR: I received your letter, and I am very grateful for what you are doing.

I am now here fifty-four days.

Will you do me an act of charity, sir, which I will endeavor to pay when I

get out? I get here 10 cents a day to live on; I am sick, and half starving;

kindly give me a little help. Sir, will you see if any Englishman in La Paz

(Mr. Bowman) will help me?

God only knows when I will be out of here. I have eight more witnesses to

call up on my behalf, but can not do so, because I have no money. The

actuary charges to make the orders calling them; he also charges for

receiving their declarations, and the alguacil I have to pay for notifying the

witnesses.

For pity’s sake, sir, help me if you can, so as to enable me to get my

witnesses up, and so as to be able to get some food.

Again thanking you for all, I am, etc.,
GEORGEMELVILLE.

[Document 28]
Mr. Bridgman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
La Paz, Bolivia,July 1, 1901.

No. 278.]

SIR: I have the honor to state that the British subject, George Melville, who

was imprisoned in Corocoro, charged with theft, has been set at liberty after

repeated requests made by me to the minister of foreign relations.

Melville wrote various pitiful letters, saying he was starving, etc., and

begging money. Quite an amount was sent him, and since then nothing has

come directly from him. I know, however, he has been discharged.

I have, etc.,
GEORGEH.BRIDGMAN.

[Document 29]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Bridgman.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 7, 1901.

No. 160.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 278, of July 1 last, I have now to inclose a copy

of a note from the chargé d’affaires of Great Britain at this capital, of the 1st

instant, transmitting a copy of a dispatch addressed by His Majesty’s

principal secretary of state for foreign affairs to you, thanking you for your

good offices in obtaining the release of George Melville, a British subject,

lately imprisoned at Corocoro on a charge of theft.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Lowther to Mr. Adee.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Newport, R. I.,September 1, 1901.

No. 240.]

S: With reference to your note No. 2223 of the 1st ultimo, I have the honor

to transmit to you herewith a copy of a dispatch addressed by His Majesty’s

principal secretary of state for foreign affairs to the United States minister at

La Paz, thanking him for his good offices in obtaining the release of George

Melville, a British subject, lately imprisoned at Corocoro, in Bolivia, on a

charge of theft.

I have, etc.,

GERARDLOWTHER.
[Subinclosure.]
Mr. Villiers to Mr. Bridgman.
FOREIGNOFFICE,August 19, 1901.

SIR: I have received through His Majesty’s chargé d’affaires at Washington a

copy of your dispatch No. 278 to Mr. Secretary Hay of July 1 last, in which

you report the release of George Melville, a British subject, imprisoned in

Corocoro on a charge of theft.

I have to thank you for your good offices and for all the trouble you have

taken on Melville’s behalf.

I am, etc. (in the absence of the Marquis of Lansdowne),F.H.VILLIERS.

[Document 30]
President Pando to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

LAPAZ,BOLIVIA,September 14, 1901.

The sad death of the illustrious President of your great Republic is sincerely

deplored by Bolivia. May the Government and the American people be

pleased to accept my keenest condolences.
GENERALPANDO,President.

[Document 31]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Bridgman.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

MakethroughproperchannelacknowledgmentofPresidentPando’s

condolence. Thank Minister Relaciones for sympathy. Such tributes highly

esteemed by American people and Government.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 32]
Mr. Bridgman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
La Paz, Bolivia,October 28, 1901.

No. 306.]

aSIR: Referring to despatch No. 111,of March 28, 1899, in which I described

in brief the murder outside of Cochabamba of inoffensive soldiers in a

church by savage Indians at the instigation of a wicked priest, I have to add

this most gratifying news of the exhibition of justice under the rule of

President Pando.

Every Indian who was captured, and when proof could be maintained of

guilt, was executed. The number thus punished was more than 300. The

priest was immediately arrested and has been in prison for two years.

Sentence of death has just been pronounced against him.

This retribution, exhibited in a country so isolated and so thoroughly under

the influence of the priesthood as is Bolivia, is a most decided and

encouraging symptom of liberal government, and consistent with what I

believe to be the honest purpose of President Pando. The influence of this

particular priest is very great and his merited judgment has required the

utmost firmness on the part of the Government.

I have, etc.,
G HB
See Foreign Relations, 1899, page 105 .

[Document 33]
Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
Petropolis, Brazil,April 2, 1901.

No. 313.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you of the departure on the 28th of March of

theBenjamin Constant, a school-ship of the Brazilian navy, from Rio de

Janeiro en route for the United States. She goes under sail and will make

two stops, Pernambuco and Barbadoes, before reaching Newport News, her

first port in the United States. Her commander is Capt. José Martins de

Toledo, who is accompanied by a complement of officers and a large

number of midshipmen.

I visited the ship shortly before her departure to wish Captain Toledo, his

officers, and young men a happy voyage to the United States.

It is a long time since any Brazilian naval officers have had an opportunity

to visit the United States and I am sincerely hopeful that they will bring

back impressions that will be of mutual advantage to both countries.

I have, etc.,
C PB

[Document 34]
Mr. Hay to Senhor Brasil.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 12, 1901.

No. 21.]

honor to state that I have addressed the Secretaries of the Treasury, War, and

Navy, and the governor of Maryland, requesting that the vessel may be

received with the customary courtesies.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 35]
Mr. Hay to Senhor Brasil.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 27, 1901.

No. 22.]

SIR: Referring to your recent interview with the Assistant Secretary of State,

I have the honor to say that the Secretaries of the Treasury, War, and the

Navy, and the governor of New York have been advised of the expected

arrival of theBenjamin Constantat New York, and requested to direct the

authorities there to extend the customary courtesies to the vessel.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 36]
Mr. Hay to Senhor Brasil.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 5, 1901.

at 10 o’clock.

Very sincerely, yours,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 37]
Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Petropolis, Brazil,May 2, 1901.

No. 318.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that on the night of April 14, at Nictheroy, a

suburb of the Federal capital opposite the city and on the harbor of Rio de

Janeiro, a mob sacked a Baptist Mission Church. The organ, chairs, and

Bibles belonging to the American Baptist Missionary Association were

carried into the street and there covered with kerosene, which the populace

ignited, making a bonfire of the association’s property. This and other

violence against the Protestant missions is said to have been occasioned by

the bitterness aroused against an ex-priest whose denunciation and exposé

of former clerical associates greatly incensed the Catholics of Nictheroy.

They attributed to the effects of the ex-priest’s arraignment some alleged

sacrilege of an altar in one of their chapels. Then, in revenge, followed

attacks by a Roman Catholic mob on the Protestant missions, culminating

in the violence already referred to. The American pastor, Rev. W. E.

Entzminger, called on me to solicit my official aid in his efforts to recover

damages for the property destroyed. I told him that before making any

statement to Washington or diplomatic representations here I would have an

unofficial talk with Gen. Quintino Bocayuva, President of the State in

which Nictheroy lies. I first exacted a promise from the missionary that no

publicity through the press be given by him or his associates prior to my

intervention with the State authorities.

The President assured me that he had ordered the Protestant missions well

guarded and that they would continue under police protection. He promptly

asked that I direct my countryman to make a statement to him personally of

the losses incurred by this American Missionary Society, and promised that

after careful examination full redress would be made. President Bocayuva

expressed thankfulness that this legation had endeavored to allay further

excitement in this religious conflict by the quiet procedure of an unofficial

appeal to him, who had always advocated entire religious liberty in Brazil.

I have the honor to inclose herewith, with a copy of his answer, a copy of

my letter to Rev. Mr. Entzminger exhorting him and his religious coworkers

to avoid intemperate language against those who differ with them in

religious belief.

I have, etc.,
CHARLESPAGEBRYAN.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Bryan to Rev. Entzminger.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
Petropolis, Brazil,April 26, 1901.

DEARSIR: Complying with my promise to you, I called yesterday on Gen.

Quintino Bocayuva and I believe accomplished what we desire. Reviewing

the facts related in your written and verbal communications regarding the

attack on your church and the destruction of the property of the American

Baptist Society, I stated that I had come unofficially to him as President of

the State of Rio de Janeiro before making any diplomatic representations on

behalf of my country people. He expressed gratification at this considerate

method of procedure and promised that, if you would send him a statement

of the losses incurred by your society, he would give the same careful

attention. President Bocayuva said that he had ordered prompt police

protection for the other missions, and I inferred that he wishes that full

atonement be made for the outrageous attack on your church. He, however,

expressed indignation at the tone of the ex-priest’s utterances in regard to

his former religious associates. This violent talk the President regarded as

having provoked the lamentable attack of which you and your congregation

were the innocent victims.

I can not too strongly exhort my countrymen in Brazil to use moderation of

speech regarding the religion and institutions of the land where they are

living. They likewise would do well to counsel their colaborers of other

nationalities to pursue a like course of Christian charity. I feel sure this is

the policy you yourself have been following.

Hoping all will come right for you, I am, etc.,
CHARLESPAGEBRYAN.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Entzminger to Mr. Bryan.
RIO DEJANEIRO,April 27, 1901.

MYVERYDEARSIR: Your kind and considerate favor of the 26th instant received

and contents carefully noted. Please accept my hearty thanks for the service

rendered, which promises to end well. I am glad to say that I am in full

agreement with your observations about prudence in attacking the religion

and institutions of the country. So far as I am acquainted with the work in

general this is the policy in vogue, with possibly some exceptions. The list

you request to be sent to the President of the State will be attended to

promptly. For the present our services are entirely suspended in Nictheroy

from the lack of a house and the necessary furniture. I can do nothing

toward the equipment of another hall until remunerated for the property

destroyed.

Wishing you every happiness, etc.,
WEE

[Document 38]
Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
Petropolis, Brazil,May 20, 1901.

No. 323.]

SIR: Referring to the subject of my No. 318, of the 2d instant—the attack

upon the Baptist mission church in Nictheroy—I have the honor to report

the gratifying information that, as promised me by General Bocayuva, the

president of the state, the authorities of Rio de Janerio promptly paid the

amount of damages demanded by the American Baptist Society for the

destruction of their property by the mob. In confirmation hereof I inclose a

copy of a letter from Rev. W. E. Entzminger.

I have, etc.,
CHARLESPAGEBRYAN.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Entzminger to Mr. Bryan.
RIO,BOX252,May 17, 1901.

MDS: It becomes my delightful duty to inform you that the matter

between myself and the president of the State of Rio, His Excellency Gen.

Quintino Bocayuva, was promptly and satisfactorily dispatched by his

excellency.

I take occasion to once more express my hearty appreciation, and to return

thanks for your very kind offices.

Very respectfully,
WEE

[Document 39]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Bryan.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 31, 1901.

No. 241.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 318, of the 2d instant,

reporting the sack of an American Baptist church by a Catholic mob at

Nictheroy and your unofficial conference with the president of the State,

during which you discussed the case.

In reply I have to say that the Department approves your course thus far,

and will be glad to learn of the further developments of the case.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 40]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Bryan.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 19, 1901.

No. 244.]

SIR: The Department has been gratified to receive your No. 323, of the 20th

ultimo, reporting that the government of the State of Rio de Janeiro has

promptly settled for the damages done by the mob to the American Baptist

mission at Nictheroy.

The course pursued by you in the matter is commended.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 41]
Mr. Bryan to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
Petropolis, Brazil,July 3, 1901.

No. 339.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that serious disturbances occurred in Rio de

JaneiroonthenightofSaturday,June18,andthereafteralmost

continuously until the night of Wednesday, June 22, when quiet was at last

completely restored.

Under the terms of its contract recently concluded with the Government the

São Christovão Street Railroad Company, one of three large companies

operating street-car lines in the city and suburbs of Rio de Janeiro, raised its

fares. Its lines serve the commercial and the poorest residental portions of

the city, and this increase of fares met with determined and forcible

resistance. Attacks were made on the cars on the night of the 18th, and

some of them were burned. A large body of police succeeded in dispersing

the crowd of rioters, but on Sunday the disturbance continued, and on

Monday six cars were burned in the Largo de São Francisco, which was

finally cleared by the police only after several persons were wounded. On

Tuesday, the 22d, barricades were built in the Ouvidor and other important

business streets in the vicinity of the Largo de São Francisco, which is an

important square in the heart of the city, and the streets were kept clear only

by repeated charges of both cavalry and infantry. On Wednesday much the

same sort of occurrences took place as on the preceding day, but before

nightfall quiet had been restored by the company’s announcement of a

return to the old schedule of fares.

During the five days’ disturbance at least five people were killed and the

number of wounded is variously estimated at from one hundred to over two

hundred. In spite, however, of the serious nature of the disturbances, any

attemptsthatmayhavebeenmadebydisaffectedelementsinthe

community to swell them into a revolutionary movement were entirely

abortive. Popular indignation against the company limited itself to sporadic

attacks on the company’s property and seemed not to concern itself with the

demonstrations against them were entirely unorganized and almost puerile.

They were apparently directed, too, against the police as individuals rather

than as constituted Government authorities, and the only legal questions as

yet growing out of the disturbances have been suits instituted against

individual police officers and men for undue violence. The fact that order

was completely reestablished immediately upon the reinstatement of the old

fare schedule is sufficient proof that the disturbances had no political

significance whatever.

I have, etc.,
CHARLESPAGEBRYAN.

[Document 42]
President Campos Sables to the Vice-President of the United

States.
[Telegram.]

RIO DEJANEIRO,September 14, 1901.

I desire to extend to your excellency expression of my profound sorrow at

the loss which the American nation has just suffered in the death of its First

Magistrate.
M.FERRAZ DECAMPOSSALLES,
President of the United States of Brazil.

[Document 43]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Bryan.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

Please express in the name of President Roosevelt heartfelt thanks for

condolence of President Campos. Our people greatly esteem Brazilian

sympathy.
HAY.

[Document 44]
Mr. Lenderink to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Santiago,March 25, 1901.

No. 185.]

SIR: I am in receipt of an application for a passport from Isadoro Solis

Marrero, a native of Porto Rico, who claims to be a loyal citizen of the

United States. The applicant has resided in Chile since the year 1884, and

now proposes to return to Porto Rico, within two years, to perform the

duties of a citizen there.

As section 7 of the act to provide revenues and a civil government for Porto

Rico, approved April 12, 1900, provides “that all inhabitants continuing to

reside therein, who were Spanish subjects on the 11th day of April, 1899,

and then resided in Porto Rico, and their children born subsequent thereto,

shall be deemed and held to be citizens of Porto Rico, and as such entitled

to the protection of the United States,” I am rather doubtful whether I am

authorized to issue a passport to this applicant, he not residing on the island

at the time specified in the law. For that reason I beg to refer the matter to

the Department for its instruction.

I have, etc.,
HJL

[Document 45]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Lenderink.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 29, 1901.

No. 188.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 185, of the 25th ultimo,

reporting the application for a passport of Mr. Isadoro Solis Marrero, a

native of Porto Rico, who has resided in Chile since 1884, and who

proposes to return to Porto Rico within two years.

You ask for instructions from the Department. In reply I have to say that the

language of the Porto Rican law is to be construed in its general legal sense,

inwhichcontinualpersonalpresenceisnotnecessarytoconstitute

continuous residence. A native of Porto Rico who makes it the place of his

permanent domicile does not, therefore, lose the benefits of the act because

he was temporarily abiding elsewhere when it went into effect.

As regards the protection which you should accord, a Porto Rican is entitled

under the law to the fullest protection. The legation should see that the

applicant enjoys every right and that no obstacle be placed in the way of his

contemplated departure from Chile for Porto Rico. It is deemed wise, at this

time, to defer issuing passports to Porto Ricans until the Supreme Court of

the United States shall have rendered its decision defining their status. In

explanation of the Department’s attitude on this subject, I inclose a copy of

a letter to Messrs. Mulholland and Hickcox, of New York, dated April 24,

1901.

I am., etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]

Mr. Hay to Messrs. Mulholland and Hickcox.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 24, 1901.

GENTLEMEN: The Department has received your letter of April 23, resubmitting

the application for a passport of Mr. Pedro A. Fernandez with corroborative

testimony of two witnesses, who state that he is, as he alleges, a native of

Porto Rico and now resident in the United States, this testimony being in

reply to the Department’s request therefor of April 20.

The truth of Mr. Fernandez’s allegations thus appears to be established, and

he is under the law entitled to the protection of the United States as a citizen

of Porto Rico. The precise status of citizens of that island is, however, now

awaiting judicial definition by the Supreme Court of the United States, and

theformofthepassportwhichthisDepartmentmightissueinMr.

Fernandez’s favor would be materially affected by the decision of the court,

which is daily expected. It is not, therefore, deemed advisable, at this time,

to issue a passport in Mr. Fernandez’s favor, but you are advised that he

may proceed upon his travels, and in case of his requiring such protection

as a diplomatic or consular officer of the United States may properly render,

he is authorized to apply to the nearest one and present this letter as his

authorization for so doing.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 46]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Lenderink.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 28, 1901.

No. 183.]

extended to him by the Chilean authorities in removing the remains of

Lieut. Selim E. Woodworth, United States Navy, from the cemetery at

Valparaiso.

You will advise the Chilean foreign office that this Government sincerely

appreciates the courtesies extended.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Long to Mr. Hay.
ND ,
Washington,March 23, 1901.

S: The Department transmits herewith for the information of the State

Department a copy of a report from the commanding officer of the U. S. S.
Philadelphiain regard to the exhumation at Valparaiso, Chile, of the

remains of the late Lieut. Selim E. Woodworth, United States Navy, and

their subsequent burial at sea.

The Department invites particular attention to the eighth paragraph of the

report, and would be gratified if it should meet with the view of the State

Department to communicate to the Chilean Government its appreciation of

the courtesies rendered by Chilean officials in connection with this matter.

Very respectfully,
JOHND.LONG,
Secretary.
[Subinclosure.]
Captain Mead to Commander in Chief.
U.S.S.PHILADELPHIA,At Sea,February 18, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to report that in obedience to Navy Department’s order

to the commander in chief, United States naval force, Pacific Station,

directing that when a vessel of his command visits Valparaiso the remains

of the late Lieut. Selim E. Woodworth, United States Navy, be exhumed and

buried, I have this day buried, at sea, in position indicated by latitude and

longitude given above, and about 15 miles off the coast of Chile, the

remains of the late Selim E. Woodworth, United States Navy.

On arrival at Valparaiso it was learned, through the United States consul,

that a law of the country prohibited the exhumation of a body before the

expiration of one year from the date of burial. As Lieutenant Woodworth

died only about six months previous, there might be some difficulty in

obtaining the necessary authority.

Application was, however, at once made to the intendente of Valparaiso and

by him referred to the minister of interior of Santiago, who immediately

granted my request for the removal of the remains.

Lieut. G. H. Burrage, United States Navy, attached to this vessel, was

placedinchargetomakeallarrangementsforthedisintermentand

embarkation of the body, having as an assistant Dr. McCullough, United

States Navy. These officials engaged the same undertaker who officiated at

the original burial, and were thus assured as to the correct location of the

body, which had been placed in the Protestant cemetery in a numbered

cemented niche, as is the custom in Chile.

OnthemorningofFebruary18,1901,LieutenantBurrageandDr.

McCullough witnessed and attended the removal and embarkation of the

body. A municipal regulation required the casket to be inclosed in a zinc-

lined case before removal from the cemetery, and this was attended to by

the undertakers.

When the body was placed in the boat our flag was half-masted, in which

mark of respect we were joined by the Chilean squadron of five vessels at

anchor in the bay.

After the reception of the body on board, this vessel proceeded to sea, and

at 2.45 p. m. the remains of the late Lieut. Selim E. Woodworth were

committed to the deep with the burial service of the Episcopal church, read

by Chaplain Boorom, United States Navy, all hands being called, and the

ceremonies observed as prescribed in the United States Navy Regulations.

The body was left in the original casket, this being inclosed in the zinc-

lined case, and all sunk by a heavy weight lashed securely.

In concluding I wish to call special attention to the courtesy of the Chilean

officials in connection with this matter. It was necessary to waive the law

governing disinterment, yet I everywhere met with the most cordial and

friendly assistance, and experienced no difficulty in obtaining the necessary

permit, which I herewith inclose, as it may be of interest to the family of the

late Lieutenant Woodworth.

Very respectfully,
WWM,
Captain, United States Navy, Commanding.

[Document 47]
Mr. Lenderink to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Santiago,May 13, 1901.

No. 191.]

appreciation of, the Government of the United States for the courtesies and

aid extended by the Chilean authorities to the officers of the U. S. S.
Philadelphiain the removal of the remains of Lieut. Selim E. Woodworth,

United States Navy, from the cemetery at Valparaiso.

In compliance with your instructions I have addressed a note to the minister

of foreign relations expressing the sincere appreciation of the Government

of the United States for the courtesies extended to the officers aforesaid.

I have, etc.,
HENRYJ.LENDERINK.

[Document 48]
Señor Morla Vicuña to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION DECHILE,
Washington,June 26, 1901.

SIR: The Chilean training shipGeneral Baquedano, recently returned to

Chile from a voyage of instruction along the west coast of South and North

America and over the eastern seas of Japan, China, and Australia, is being

sent out again on a similar voyage along the coasts of America on the

Atlantic Ocean. In the course of her voyage theGeneral Baquedanowill

visit the port of New York on the first days of September next, and shortly

afterwards that of Philadelphia, and my Government instructs me to request

from the Government of the United States, through the State Department,

the permission necessary for the commander, officers, and naval cadets

belonging to the said training ship to visit the naval establishments existing

in the two above-mentioned ports.

With renewed assurances, etc.,
C.MORLAVICUÑA.

[Document 49]
Mr. Hay to Señor Morla Vicuña.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 11, 1901.

No. 43.]

SIR: In reply to your note of the 26th ultimo, I have the honor to say that I

am advised by the Secretary of the Navy that he has instructed the

commandants at the New York and Philadelphia naval stations to offer all

possible facilities for their inspection by the commander, officers, and naval

cadets of the Chilean training shipGeneral Baquedano.
Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 50]
Señor Infante to Mr. Adee.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OFCHILE,
Washington,October 9, 1901.

MR.SECRETARY: I am in receipt of instructions from the Government of Chile

directing me to take such steps as may be required to obtain for the

commander and officers of the training shipGeneral Baquedano, at present

anchored in the bay of New York, permission to deposit in the Washington

Monument, on behalf of the people of Chile, a plaque commemorative of

that illustrious leader of the American independence and founder of the

Republic of the United States of America.

I shall be thankful if your excellency will kindly apply to appropriate

authorities for the permission to place the said plaque, provided there

should be no objection on your part.

It is for me a pleasure, etc.,
E.INFANTE.

[Document 51]
Mr. Hay to Señor Infante.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 11, 1902.

No. 51.]

SIR: In further reply to your note of October 9 last, stating that the

commander and officers of the Chilean training shipGeneral Baquedano
desired to place in the Washington Monument a plate presented by the

Government and people of Chile, I have the honor to say that I have just

received a letter from the Assistant Secretary of War, stating that the

SecretaryofWarhasapprovedtherecommendationoftheChiefof

Engineers that the tablet shall be accepted, and the Superintendent of Public

Buildings and Grounds has been instructed to give it an appropriate place

within the Monument.

It gives me pleasure to assure you that the Government of the United States

deeplyappreciatesthecordialspiritoffriendshipmanifestedbythe

Government and people of Chile in the presentation of this tablet, and that it

accepts it in the same spirit in which it is offered.

Accept, etc.,
JH

[Document 52]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Santiago, Chile,July 14, 1901.

Funeral of President Tuesday.
WILSON.

[Document 53]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wilson.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 15, 1901.

The President of the United States conveys through you to the Government

and the family of the late President Errázuriz his sincere sympathy.
HAY.

[Document 54]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Santiago,July 23, 1901.

No. 203.]

aSIR: I have the honor to confirm my telegramof the 14th instant.

The President expired on Friday evening, July 12, but as the intelligence of

hisdeathwasimmediatelycommunicatedtotheChileanlegationin

Washington I did not deem it necessary to do more than advise the

Departmentofthedateofthefuneralceremonies,whichdatewas

afterwards changed to Wednesday, the 17th.

aI beg also to confirm the receipt of the Department’s telegramof the 15th

instant.

This telegram was immediately communicated to the Chilean foreign office,

together with a note, copy of which is inclosed.

Messages similar to that of the Department were received by all diplomatic

representatives here and in most cases these messages of condolence were

accompanied by instructions to send floral tributes in the name of the

executive heads of their Governments. Under the circumstances it seemed

to me proper to send some floral offering, and I therefore assumed the

responsibility of purchasing a large artificial wreath, which I sent in the

name of the President.

The death of the President was not unexpected. For the latter part of the

year he has been considered in an extremely precarious condition; fully

one-half of this time he has been incapable of attending to his executive

duties, and during the last three months he lost control completely of his

mental faculties. His death being anticipated for so long a time rendered

easy the transition of the executive power into the hands of the Vice-

President. The acting President, Señor Zanartu, will retain the executive

powers, which are in all respects equal to those of the deceased President,

until the newly elected President, Señor Riesco, shall be inaugurated,

September 18, 1901.

I have, etc.,
HENRYL.WILSON.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Wilson to Señor Rodriguez.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Santiago,July 16, 1901.

No. 172.]

Mr. MINISTER: I have the honor to inform your excellency that I received last

evening,fromtheDepartmentofStateatWashington,thefollowing

cablegram: “The President of the United States conveys through you to the

Government and the family of the late President Errázuriz his sincere

sympathy.”

The above reached my hands at 6 o’clock p. m., but as I found it impossible

to communicate with your excellency’s department last night it is only at

this moment that I am able to transmit the message.

Ibegtoassureyourexcellencythatthedeplorablelosswhichthe

Government of Chile has just suffered in the death of its Chief Executive,

His Excellency Don Fedrico Errázuriz Echaurren, has called forth the deep

sympathy of the President of the United States and of the Government and

people thereof.

My sad duty in expressing these sentiments would remain incomplete did I

not in response to the desire of the President of the United States convey

through your excellency’s department to the Señora Jertrudis Echenique,

viuda de Errázuriz his sincere condolences for the irreparable misfortune

which she has just sustained in the death of her distinguished husband, and

express the hope that in the hour of her deep tribulation she may find

Divine consolation.

I gladly avail myself of this occasion to renew, etc.,HENRYL.WILSON.
aPrinted ante.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 55]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Santiago,August 15, 1901.

No. 207.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith copy and translation of the reply of

the Chilean minister of foreign relations to my note of condolence on the

death of President Errázuriz. By an oversight my note was forwarded to the

Department before the reply was received.

I have, etc.,
HENRYL.WILSON.
Señor Rodriguez to Mr. Wilson.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]

REPUBLIC OFCHILE,
MINISTRY OFFOREIGNRELATIONS,
Santiago,July 22, 1901.

No. 703.]

Mr.M :TheChileanforeignofficehasreceivedwithgenuine

satisfaction your attentive note of the 16th instant, conveying the cablegram

addressed to your legation by the Secretary of State of the United States of

America,inwhich,inthenameofthePresident,hesendstomy

Government his sincere sympathy for the death of His Excellency Federico

Errázuriz.

It is very satisfactory to Chile that the great Republic of the North should

take such cordial participation in this most lamentable national misfortune,

andforthatreasonyouwillpermittheundersigned,throughyour

excellency, to express to His Excellency the President and the worthy

Government of the United States of America the appreciation with which

this Republic has received this delicate manifestation of condolence.

I renew, etc.,
LUISM.RODRIGUEZ.

[Document 56]
Vice-President Zanartu to the Vice-President of the United States.
[Telegram.]

SANTIAGO,CHILE,September 14, 1901.

The people of Chile and its Government are astounded by the apprehended

issue of the abominable attempt at Buffalo. May Your Excellency and the

American people be pleased to accept the most heartfelt condolences.
ANIBALZANARTU,
Vice-President of Chile.

[Document 57]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wilson.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1901.

Please convey in the name of the American people and Government earnest

appreciation of sympathy cabled by Vice-President Zanartu.
HAY.

[Document 58]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 14, 1900.

(Mr.CongerreportsthattheconsularofficersatTientsinhavebeen

informed by the Russian general that he has taken absolute possession of a

large tract facing the foreign settlement, as property of the Russian army by

conquest.

Mr. Conger regards this as a dangerous precedent, as all extensions of

foreign settlements should be international. He has directed the United

States consul to enter a protest and will himself protest to the Russian

minister.

Belgium is also claiming a large tract adjoining that claimed by Russia.

Suggests the probable desirability of further action by the Department.)
[Document 59]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Conger.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

D S,
Washington,November 16, 1900.

(Mr. Hay states that the United States Government favor securing foreign

rightsattreatyportsbyadequateforeignconcessions,eitherasan

international settlement or as separate concessions to the interested nations,

but that forcible appropriation under claim of conquest is in conflict with

the declared purpose of the powers and disturbs their harmonious action.

The United States Government think the question should be adjusted as part

of the general arrangement, in which the right of the United States to an

impartial share should be reserved.

Mr. Conger’s protest is approved.)

[Document 60]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,December 31, 1900.

No. 491.]

aSIR: Confirming my telegrams of the 14th ultimo and your replyof the 16th

ultimo, concerning the seizure and appropriation of a large tract of property

as a conquest of war by the Russian military forces at Tientsin, I have the

honortoincloseherewiththecorrespondencebetweentherespective

legations and consulates of Russia and the United States concerning it.

The Belgian consul, by direction of his minister, has also pretended to

occupy another large tract there. The French and Japanese have extended

the boundaries of their concessions, and the Austrian and Italian ministers

have served notice that they, too, will soon demand settlements.

TheBelgianministerinformsmethattheyhavenointentionofa

settlement, but only wish a site for a consulate.

I have made the protest evidenced by inclosures herewith, because I believe

the action, especially of the Russians, is in violation of their publicly

declared intentions, and because I believe all settlements at the treaty ports

should be international.

The several armies came here, as they have all declared, for a general

purpose, and not to gain any special advantage for individual governments.

This “grab game,” therefore, in which they are indulging, is neither fair nor

consistent.

Since there are so many regularly established concessions at Tientsin an

international one is hardly to be expected, but all action in relation to

securing new or extending old concessions should be deferred until order is

restored, the Chinese Government reestablished, and the rights and interests

of all can be considered.

The notice of the Japanese consul has only just arrived, but I have

instructed Mr. Ragsdale to make like protest in this case.

It would be advantageous to us in many ways to have an American

concession at Tientsin, but we have learned by experience that it takes both

money and citizens to own and operate a concession. We have not enough

there of either. The Department is familiar with our former efforts to sustain

the desirable concession which had to be abandoned in 1896. If, however,

the United States Government can in any way take upon itself part of the

burden, as the other governments do, it may be advisable for us to demand

consideration of our rights to a concession while the others are taking and

dividing up all available territory. If, upon receipt of this, the Department

desires any action taken in this direction, I will thank you to instruct me by

telegraph.

aI inclose mapshowing British, Russian, Japanese, German, and French

concessions; also land recently seized by the Russians.

I have, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 1]
C U S,
Tientsin,November 8, 1900.

S: I have the honor to inform you that on yesterday the Russian consul

here gave notice to the consuls of the different countries that the land

fronting on the Bund, or east bank of the Peiho, extending from (and

including) the railroad station to Meyers’ godown, a distance of nearly 2

miles,wouldbereservedfortheuseandbenefitoftheRussian

Government.

To-day a like notice was given by the Belgian consul that his Government

would reserve the land on the east bank of the river for a distance of about 1

mile below that already claimed by the Russians. The distance back from

the river is not given by either claimant. I have asked for a map showing the

exact area claimed. If given, I will forward you a copy.

I am, etc.,
JAMESW.RAGSDALE,Consul.
[Subinclosure.]
RUSSIAN CIRCULAR ANNOUNCING OCCUPATION OF LEFT BANK OF THE PEIHO, OPPOSITE FOREIGN CONCESSIONS AT TIENTSIN.
[Translation.]

TIENTSIN,November 6, 1900.

My DEARCOLLEAGUE: His Excellency Lieutenant-General Linevitch, commander

in chief of the Russian expeditionary force in Chihli, has directed me to

inform you that since the 17th of June last the Imperial Chinese troops have

joined the rioters (Boxers) who attacked the foreign concessions and the

railway station occupied by the Russian troops, and that on the 23d of June

the Russian reenforcements, which came to raise the blockade, swept the

left bank of the Peiho from below the railway station up to the petroleum

godown of Messrs. Meyers & Co., and have established themselves there

by right of conquest in having taken possession by force of arms and at the

price of Russian blood spilled, in order to prevent the Chinese from

returning to resume the firing. His excellency considers all this tract of land

included in that from above the railway station to the petroleum go-down as

having become the property of the Russian troops on the 23d of June by act

of war.

The Russian flags have been planted, and notice posted upon boards in

many places within this territory, which has been occupied and protected by

the Russian military authorities. Therefore his excellency can not and will

not recognize, except by his special authorization, any cession whatever of

this territory of which he has taken entire and complete possession.

It is understood that the rights of those landowners (other than Chinese)

whose titles have been duly registered in foreign names before June 17 will

be safeguarded.

I avail myself, etc.,
N.POPPÉ,Consul-General of Russia.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Ragsdale.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 13, 1900.

SIR: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch of the 8th instant, with

reference to the taking over of certain lands at Tientsin by the Russian and

Belgian consuls for the use of their respective Governments. I will be much

pleased to have a map showing exact locations and area of same, as well as

any other information you may have obtained on the subject. In the

meantime you are instructed to make a vigorous protest against this action

of the consuls, and demand that no American interests or rights be in

anyway infringed upon. I shall at the same time bring the matter to the

attention of the Russian and Belgian ministers here.

I am, etc.,
EHC
[Inclosure 3.]
C U S,
Tientsin,November 24, 1900.

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith printed circular, or express, issued

thought it was best to send you this copy before investigating the fact that it

may be important to American ownership. Up to this time no official

communication has been sent to the consuls of the various nationalities, but

I shall at once investigate the extent to which American interests are

involved and report to you later.

I am, etc.,
JAMESW.RAGSDALE,Consul.
[Subinclosure.]
FRENCH CIRCULAR ANNOUNCING THE OCCUPATION OF CERTAIN TERRITORY AT TIENTSIN IN ADDITION TO ITS FORMER CONCESSION.
TIENTSIN,November 20, 1900.

The consul-general of France, president of the municipal council, wishing

to warn foreign residents against the consequences they would expose

themselves to by buying ground in the quarter presently annexed to the

French concession, has the honor to inform them that the municipal council

will not recognize as valid any contract subsequent to June 17, the date on

which hostilities began.

All land holders, bearers of regular titles issued before the 17th of June, are

requested to exhibit them at the French consulate, where they shall be duly

verified and registered.

The extension of the concession includes all the grounds as follows:

First. Between the Rue de Paris, the Taku road, the Quai de

France, extended as far as the old building of the London Mission

in the Chinese city.

Second. The zone situated west of the French concession and

limited by the Taku road, the extra British concession, the mud

wall, and a line running from the said wall and abutting on the

river in front of the London Mission building.
G. DUCHAYLARD,
Consul-General of France.
[Inclosure 4.]
Mr. Ragsdale to Mr. Conger.
CONSULATE OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tientsin,November 26, 1900.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of the circular letter sent to

the members of the consular body in re claim of territory by the Belgian

consul. So far as I have been able to find out, the rights of American

citizens are not involved.

In this connection I have also to report that the territory claimed by the

Russians does not include property belonging to American citizens. In this

event, is it desirable that I file a protest against their action in acquiring

territory?

I am, etc.,
JAMESW.RAGSDALE,Consul.
[Subinclosure.]
T ,November 7, 1900.

MDC : I have the honor to inform you that in accordance with

instructions from His Belgian Majesty’s legation at Pekin, I have this day

occupied the territory situated opposite the foot of the German concession

and extending along the river to a point about 50 meters below the

petroleum godown of Messrs. H. Meyer & Co., thence to another point

straight lines, is limited on the inside by the railway, beginning from the

railway crossing, about If kilometers from the mud wall up to another point

distant about 1¾ kilometers, equally distant from the point of intersection of

the road and the above railroad.

The Belgian flag has been planted upon the territory and its limits marked.

I have, therefore, the honor to inform you that every sale, cession, or

transfer of property within these limits can not and will not be recognized as

legal. It is understood that titles in the names of Europeans (other than

Chinese) which have been duly registered prior to taking over of this

territory will be safeguarded.

I avail myself, etc.,
CHEVALIER DEMELOTE.
[Inclosure 5.]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Ragsdale.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 30, 1900.

SIR: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch of November 26 with

inclosure, with reference to land recently taken over by the Belgian consul.

I note that you have not yet protested against similar action on the part of

the Russians for the reason that no property belonging to Americans is

included. It is to be regretted that you did not at once protest against the

action of the Russian consul, as instructed in dispatch of the 13th instant. It

is rather late now, but the protest should still be made (sending copy to the

legation), not only on behalf of any private or particular American interests,

but against the rights of any power to forcibly seize and hold to its sole use

property in an open treaty port which may be needed for the use of all the

powers.

If Russia, or any other power, desires a new concession, or an extension of

an old one, consent of the Chinese Government should first be obtained,

and all the public or international rights of the other powers should be

respected.

In this same dispatch you were requested to furnish a map showing the

exact location and area of these lands, which I will be pleased to have as,

soon as possible.

I am, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 6.]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Ragsdale.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 30, 1900.

SIR: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch of November 24 inclosing

circular published by the French consul-general with reference to extension

of French settlement, a copy of which reached me from another source

some days ago, and to say that I hope soon to hear from you the result of

your investigations as to what American interests, if any, are involved.

I can not understand by what right the French forcibly seize and annex

property to their settlement in an open treaty port, when all nationalities

have rights which must be respected, without obtaining either the consent of

the Chinese or other Governments interested. I am not yet advised what

individual American rights are affected, but whatever they may be, you will

not overlook them.

We can not agree that either the French consul or municipality can pass

upon the validity of any American title to property outside of the legally

legitimately accomplished.

You are authorized to make due protest against this action, in behalf of all

American interests, whether private, public, or international, sending me a

copy of your protest.

I am, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 7.]
Mr. Ragsdale to Mr. Conger.
CONSULATE OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tientsin,December 4, 1900.

SIR:Ihavethehonortoacknowledgereceiptofyourdispatchesof

November 30, and to report that I have complied with the instructions

therein required. I also inclose copies of the protest sent by me to the

consul-general of France and the consul of Russia.

In this connection I desire to say that I have not yet been able to procure an

intelligent map of the concessions proposed, although they were promised

to me. I will make another effort.

I am, etc.,
JWR ,Consul.
[Subinclosure 1.]
C U S,
Tientsin,December 4, 1900.

S: Having reference to the circular letter sent to the members of the

consular body by you some days ago announcing the annexation by your

Government of the east bank of the Peiho, opposite the present foreign

concessions, I have the honor to file my earnest protest. I hold that no

power has the right to forcibly seize and hold to its sole use any property in

an open treaty port which may be needed for the use of all the powers. I

maintain, further, that if any power desires a new concession, the consent of

the Chinese or other governments should first be obtained, and that all

public or international rights of the other powers should be respected.

I am, etc.,
JAMESW.RAGSDALE,Consul.
[Subinclosure 2.]
Mr. Ragsdale to the French Consul-General at Tientsin.
CONSULATE OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tientsin,December 4, 1900.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your printed circular, dated

November22,1900,withreferencetotheextensionoftheFrench

concession. Inasmuch as the proceeding is so irregular and at variance with

the usual and legitimate method of acquiring concession rights, I am

compelled to file an earnest protest against any such arbitrary action, and I

now do so on behalf of all American interests, whether private, public, or

international. I can not understand by what right you forcibly seize and

annex property to your settlement in this port (where all nationalities have

rights which must be protected) without first obtaining the consent of either

the Chinese or other governments interested. I can not agree that either

yourself or the French municipality has the right to pass upon the validity of

any American title to property outside of the legally constituted French

settlement. If you desire to extend your concession, I hold that you should

wait until order is restored, and then proceed legitimately, keeping in mind

the rights acquired by other nationalities.

I am, etc.,
JWR ,Consul.

[Inclosure 8.]
Mr. Ragsdale to Mr. Conger.
CONSULATE OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tientsin,December 6, 1900.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a letter just received from

the acting consul for Russia in reply to my letter protesting against the

annexation of territory at Tientsin. Shall I take any further action?

I am, etc.,
JAMESW.RAGSDALE,Consul.
[Subinclosure.]
The Russian Acting Consul at Tientsin to Mr. Ragsdale.
RUSSIANIMPERIALCONSULATE,
Tientsin,December 5, 1900.

SIR ANDDEARCOLLEAGUE: In reply to your note of yesterday, with reference to my

circular letter announcing the occupation by the Russian military authorities

of the eastern bank of the Peiho opposite the present foreign concessions, I

have the honor to inform you that all questions concerning this matter are to

be addressed to the said military authorities.

I am, etc.,
NP
[Inclosure 9.]
L U S,
Pekin,November 14, 1900.

SIR: The United States consul at Tientsin has just informed me that on the

7th instant the Russian consul gave him notice that the land fronting on the

“Bund” or east bank of the Peiho River, extending from and including the

railroad station, to Meyer’s godown, a distance of nearly 2 miles, had been

taken by the Russian military forces and would be reserved for the use and

benefit of the Russian Government.

In view of the frank declarations of the Russian Government that it had no

designs of territorial acquisition in China, I can not believe that such action

has been seriously taken, or that it will receive the approval of the Russian

Government.

Tientsin is an open port, and the property under consideration is needed by,

and should be reserved for the use of, all the powers. Even in ordinary

peaceful times, if foreign occupation of it were necessary, it should be

occupied as an international settlement, such as was recently insisted upon

and secured in the extension of the Shanghai settlement. But now, under the

present movement of the allied forces in China, there are still stronger

reasons why this large tract of land, including, as it does, an important

public railway station and other property necessary for international use,

should not be appropriated by a single power.

I therefore take this opportunity to protest against such appropriation of this

property and beg your excellency to have the matter investigated; and if the

reported action is found true, to request instructions from the imperial

Russian Government which will prevent any such appropriation of territory.

I improve this occasion, etc.,
EHC
[Inclosure 10.]
P,November 16, 1900.

MYDEARCOLLEAGUE: In response to your excellency’s letter of the 14th instant in

reference to a communication sent by the gerant of the Russian consulate at

Tientsin to the United States consul there, I beg to inform you that there is

no question whatever of acquiring territory by conquest on the part of

Russia nor of the taking possession of the railway station at Tientsin by the

Russian Government, and if the communication of Mr. Poppé, above

referred to, contains any expressions which could be so construed they have

certainly been erroneously used by him.

I beg to add that in this matter the object of the Russian military authorities

has been to prevent the seizure of and speculation in land by certain parties

within the radius occupied by the Russian troops for military purposes since

last June.

I avail myself, etc.,
M. DEGIERS.
[Inclosure 11.]
Mr. Conger to the Russian Minister at Pekin.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 22, 1900.

MYDEARCOLLEAGUE:Ihavethehonortoacknowledgereceiptofyour

excellency’s note of the 16th instant, replying to mine of the 14th instant, in

which, referring to the occupancy by the Russian military of the railway

station and other property at Tientsin, you say:

“That it can be in no way a question of territorial conquest of any sort

whatever on the part of Russia, nor of the taking possession of the Tientsin

railwaystationbytheRussianGovernment,andiftheaforesaid

communication from Mr. Poppé contains any expressions which could give

rise to any such interpretation, they certainly have been employed by him

only as the result of an error.”

aI inclose herewith a copy of Mr. Poppé’s communication,from which you

will see that it is unequivocally declared that the Russian troops have seized

this property and established themselves therein by right of conquest, and

claimthatithasbecometheirpropertybyactofwar,andthatin

consequence the commander in chief of the Russian expeditionary force has

taken full and entire possession thereof.

I am very glad to receive this disclaimer from your excellency, and I beg

that you will instruct the Russian consul at Tientsin to correct the evident

error he has made in his notice to the consuls.

I also hope that the Russian military will receive instructions to carry out

the declared policy of the Imperial Russian Government in this regard.

May I ask you to kindly return the copy of Mr. Poppé’s communication.

I improve this occasion, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 12.]
Mr. Conger to the Belgian Minister at Pekin.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 14, 1900.

MDC : The United States consul at Tientsin has just informed me

that on the 8th instant the Belgian consul formally notified him that the

Belgian Government proposed to appropriate to its sole use and benefit a

considerable tract of land on the east bank of the Peiho River in Tientsin.

Under the present disturbed conditions, and while this part of the Empire is

under military occupation, it is difficult to understand how the Belgian

Government can rightfully appropriate this property; and believing that

international settlements will better serve general commerce and trade, and

more adequately assure the rights and interests of all foreigners than

separate settlements, I am constrained to protest against the appropriation

and occupancy reported, and beg your excellency to have the Belgian

consul instructed to desist from the proposed seizure or occupancy of said

property until order is restored and the rightful possession of the land be

acquired, or its necessity for international use be determined.

I improve the occasion, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 13.]
The Belgian Minister at Pekin to Mr. Conger.
BELGIANLEGATION,
Pekin,November 18, 1900.

MYDEARCOLLEAGUE: I have the honor to acknowledge your excellency’s letter of

the 14th instant. In reply I hasten to inform your excellency that, in marking

off the limits of a piece of ground at Tientsin, and in raising the Belgian flag

over it, it was my intention to take a purely conservative measure destined

to reserve such portion of said ground as might be required for the future

building of a Belgian consulate and the required dependencies.

I avail myself, etc.,
JOOSTENS.
[Inclosure 14.]
TI RL A H ,
Pekin,November 28, 1900.

The imperial and royal ministry of foreign affairs has been informed that

several powers have recently occupied tracts of land at Tientsin upon which

to establish settlements or to increase those which they already possess, and

hasdirectedmetocommunicatethefollowingdeclarationtothe

effectually protect our interests in commerce and navigation, the Imperial

and Royal Government considers it necessary, after the restoration of order

in China, to establish a consulate at Tientsin, and it will require for this

purpose a settlement like the others already have.

For this purpose the Imperial and Royal Government has decided to exact

from the Chinese Government, in the course of the next negotiations, a

suitable tract.

In view of the recent occupations of Tientsin, the Imperial and Royal

Government desires now to advise in advance the foreign representatives at

Pekin of this intention, in order to preserve an equity of rights with the other

powersandtosecureitselfagainstanyprejudiceinthequestionof

settlements or concessions of land.
M.CZIKANN.
[Inclosure 15.]
The Italian Minister at Pekin to Mr. Conger.
PEKIN,December 1, 1900.

Having been informed that several of the powers have recently occupied at

Tientsin territory for either establishing settlements or extending those

already established, and in accordance with orders of the minister for

foreign affairs, I beg to bring to the notice of the foreign representatives at

Pekin the following: In order to effectually protect our commercial and

shipping interests, the Royal Government may consider it necessary to

establish a consulate at Tientsin, and consequently a settlement, such as the

other powers already have.

In order to do so, the Royal Government may consider it necessary to

demand of the Chinese Government, in the course of future negotiations, a

suitable location.

With reference to the recent occupations at Tientsin, I beg to inform the

foreign representatives of this contingency, in order to reserve to the Royal

Government equal rights, without prejudice, with the other powers, in the

matter of settlements or concessions.
SALVAGORAGGI.
[Inclosure 16.]
Mr. Ragsdale to Mr. Conger.
CONSULATE OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tientsin,December 28, 1900.

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith an express just circulated by the

Japanese consul. It speaks for itself.

I am, etc.,
JAMESW.RAGSDALE,Consul.
[Subinclosure.]
NOTICE PROMULGATED BY THE JAPANESE CONSUL AT TIENTSIN.
HISIMPERIALJAPANESEMAJESTY’SCONSULATE,
Tientsin,December 28, 1900.

His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s consul, being desirous to prevent the

possible confounding of the right of ownership of land and premises within

the limit of the Japanese settlement, has the honor to notify that he will not

recognize the validity of any transfer of right of ownership of land or

premises within the following limits, made after the 17th of June, the day of

opening of hostilities, or those transfers which, although made before the

above date, have not been duly verified by the Chinese authorities at the

time of such transfers:
North: From a point 600 feet westward of the Nanmen (the south gate) to

Chiakao, along the ditch outside the Tientsin city wall.

Northeast: From Chiakao to the northeastern boundary of the French

settlement along the Peiho.

East: The boundary line between the French and Japanese concessions.

South: The mud wall.

West: The straight line drawn from the point 600 feet westward of the

Nanmen (the south gate) to the point 450 feet westward of the Haikwanmen

(mud-wall gate near the Haikwansu).
NAGAMASATEI,
His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Consul.
[Inclosure 17.]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Ragsdale.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,December 31, 1900.

SIR: I have to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch of the 28th instant,

inclosing notice published by the Japanese consul in the matter of extending

their concession.

You will make a respectful protest against this action, urging that in the

present disturbed condition of affairs, with the absence of the Chinese

Government, and during the actual military occupation by foreign troops,

such appropriation of territory by a single power can not be made with a

due consideration for the rights of all others interested. All extensions of

existing settlements or locations of new ones should be delayed until the

restoration of order and upon a conference of all concerned, in order that

the interests of all the powers may be respected and conserved.

I am, etc.,

[Document 61]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,February 26, 1901.

(Mr. Conger reports that notwithstanding his protests all territory at Tientsin

available for concessions, except a small tract formerly the United States

concession, has been seized by other powers, and that he has instructed the

United States consul to serve notice that that tract must be left for part of an

internationalsettlementoraUnitedStatesconcession,whichwillbe

demanded when order is restored, and that the United States will not

recognize seizure or adverse occupation.)
[Document 62]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Conger.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 27, 1901.

(Mr. Hay approves action respecting Tientsin settlement reported in Mr.

Conger’s preceding telegram.)
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
L U S,
Pekin, China,February 27, 1901.

No. 551.]

aSIR: I have the honor to confirm on the overleaf my telegramof the 26th

ainstant and Department’s replyof to-day with reference to former United

States concession at Tientsin.

I inclose copy of my correspondence with Consul Ragsdale and General

Chaffee which fully explains the necessity for the action I deemed proper to

take in the matter.

I have, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 1.]
General Chaffee to Mr. Conger.
HEADQUARTERSCHINARELIEFEXPEDITION,
Pekin, China,February 21, 1901.

SIR:Ihavethehonortohandyouherewithpaperswhichareself-

explanatory.

Owing to recent events in this section of China and with a view to the future

expansion of trade by the United States at Tientsin and adjacent country, I

think it not improbable our Government would be willing to recover, if it

can be done without friction, its old concession at Tientsin. Further, it might

wish or consent to do so for a few years at least, as a military necessity, in

order to afford undisputed footing for its troops and stores in case of

renewalofdisturbancependingafewyearsoftrialoftheChinese

Government to restore and maintain public order.

The papers do not disclose cost of maintenance, police, etc., which I

recognize is always an important element when questions of this sort are up

for consideration at Washington. I am not posted as to the methods adopted

by other nations for exploiting their holdings into self-supporting condition,

but I presume you are informed.

It is my opinion that our Government should recover this concession if it

can do so at once and without serious difficulty. I leave the subject with

you, however, to represent to Washington. As the matter is now in such

condition that delay may bring about the threatened absorption before

reportcouldbemadeandreceivedbymail,thedispositionofthe

Government might be obtained by using the cable.
ADNAR.CHAFFEE,
Major-General, U. S. A., Commanding United States Troops in China.
[Subinclosure 1.]
Major Foote to Adjutant-General, China Relief Expedition.
HEADQUARTERSLISCOMBARRACKS,
Tientsin, China,February 17, 1901.

SIR: Referring to the matter of retaking the old United States concession, I

would state that all the land on both banks of the river is now taken for a

distance extending, on the right bank, from the lower or south limit of the

German concession, north, to a point within a few hundred yards of the

south wall of the Chinese City, or less than a mile from the junction of the

Grand Canal and the river, the Japanese having extended their concession,

north of the French, to the point mentioned.

The Italians, Austrians, and Belgians have taken territory on the left bank,

extending north of the Russian concession to the Shui-Shih-Yeng, or Black

Fort. This leaves only a space on the right bank of about 1,300 feet in the

old United States concession available for our use.

We are now simply occupying a portion of that temporarily. It seems to me

important, if not necessary, that we at least definitely establish the north and

south line of the old concession and declare our intention to hold and

occupy it as long as we have troops in this province. I am informed that no

opposition will be made to this action on our part, and such action will give

us a fixed right to a part of the river front that is most convenient for us and

will probably be very necessary when the river is open for navigation.

The pontoon bridge on the river connecting our depot quartermaster’s office

with the corral is about the center of the concession. This bridge was

transferred by the Russians to the provisional government of Tientsin, and I

have obtained it for our use with the understanding that we will guard and

maintain it, the provisional government to furnish boats and material that

may be necessary for repairs.

I inclose map showing in red dotted lines the limits of the old United States

concession, also some data furnished me by the United States consul here in

regard to the original status of the concession.

Mr. Denby informs me that the Chinese wish the United States to retake the

concession, and that he has reason to believe that it can be maintained in

connection with that of the British, as the Anglo-American concession is at

Shanghai, thus reducing expenses for police, etc.; also, if we do not take it,

the British will.

Steps are now being taken to continue the river improvements that were in

progress here when the troubles commenced. The completion of that work

will increase the value of the land on the river front.
MORRISC.FOOTE,
Major, Ninth Infantry, Commanding.
[Subinclosure 2.]
C S U S A ,
Tientsin, China,February 15, 1901.

S: With reference to the old American concession in Tientsin, and in

compliance with your request, I have the honor to submit that in the year

1869 there was laid out at Tientsin three tracts of land for English, French,

and American residents, and that for some years our Government exercised

in a way jurisdiction over the same.

On October 12, 1880, the concession was relegated to its former status

“with the understanding that if at some future time it shall become desirable

to establish suitable municipal regulations therein it shall be competent for

the consular authorities to do so.”

Under date of October 14, 1880, the Taotai Cheng acknowledged receipt of

the dispatch sent to him by the consul two days before, and stated that if

any American consul in future should “desire to have the settlement revert

to the present system of administration he must first arrange with the

customs taotai as to the mode of administration, and if there be nothing

objectionable in same there should be nothing to prevent the settlement

from reverting to the original government.”

Sometime in the year 1896 a movement was on foot to cede this territory to

the Germans, against which action a protest was filed and correspondence

in relation thereto with the State Department followed, and finally on April

2, 1896, the minister advised that all jurisdiction over the property be

abandoned, and on June 25 instructed the United States consul at Tientsin to

advise the taotai to that effect.

It has never been the policy of our Government to acquire territory abroad,

and that policy may be a wise one in most instances, but at Tientsin I think

it would be wise for our Government to have some place over which they

could exercise some control. The trouble in North China is not over, and

final settlement day is a long ways off. I am glad, therefore, to learn that

steps in the right direction are contemplated.

I inclose you a quotation from a letter from the State Department to

Minister Denby in relation to the concession.

I am, etc.
JWR ,Consul.
[Subinclosure 3.]

[Extract.]

As there is no record showing that any concession was ever actually made

to the United States, and in view of the further fact that we, many years ago,

relinquished whatever control we may have been allowed to exercise over

the land, it would seem that we are not in a position to maintain that we are

entitled to resume jurisdiction over the tract, even if it is considered

desirable to do so.

The preceding remarks are simply intended to give you the Department’s

understanding of this case, and it is not necessary that you should do

anything in the matter, at least while awaiting the reply of the Chinese

Government to your protest and until you ascertain what the attitude of that

Government will be in the matter.

[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Ragsdale.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,February 24, 1901.

SIR: As you are already fully aware, it is against the declared policy of our

Government to in any way make the present military movement in China a

pretext for seizing or obtaining territory; and it is for this reason that I have

instructed you to make the protests which you have made against the

seizures by other powers.

But in order that we may prevent every possible place being occupied by

others, so that if the Government desires to apply for a concession after

order is restored, we may be able to reoccupy at least the small tract that

was formerly the United States concession, or, preferably, have it included

in an international settlement, and still be consistent with the position we

have already taken, you may send the inclosed, in the form of a note from

yourself, to each of your colleagues.

If there is likely to be any doubt about the limits of the tract, you might, if

necessary, set out the boundaries in addition to saying it is “known as the

United States concession.”

Yours, very truly,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 3.]
COPY OF NOTICE TO BE SERVED ON FOREIGN CONSULS BY UNITED STATES CONSUL AT TIENTSIN RELATIVE TO PRESERVATION OF THE TRACT OF

LAND KNOWN AS THE UNITED STATES CONCESSION IN TIENTSIN.
For the purpose of preserving the tract of land known as the United States

concessioninTientsin,tobewithothertractsorganizedintoan

international settlement if possible, but, if not, then at the proper time

whenever it may legally be done, to be reoccupied as a United States

concession, the undersigned, by direction of the United States legation at

Pekin, hereby serves this formal notice of such intention on the part of his

Government, and requests that it be in every way respected. No adverse

seizure or occupancy of any part of this tract can be recognized or allowed.
JAMESW.RAGSDALE,
United States Consul.
[Inclosure 4.]
L U S,
Pekin,February 25, 1901.

S: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your communication of the

21st instant, recommending that some measure be taken to recover for the

use of the United States the former United States concession in Tientsin and

setting forth its necessity in a military point of view.

I agree with you that as long as United States troops are to be kept in this

you now occupy or may find necessary in the future, and I see no reason

why upon these grounds you should not take and retain temporarily all or

such portion of this old concession as is necessary, and so notify your

military colleagues.

The emphatically declared policy of the United States is that it would not

make the present military movement in China a pretext for securing

possession of Chinese territory, and most of the other Governments made

the same sort of declaration, but, notwithstanding this, nearly all of them

havetakenadvantageofthesituationtoseizelargetractsormake

considerable additions to their present concessions at Tientsin.

I have in accordance with my instructions directed the consul at Tientsin to

protest strongly against all these seizures, insisting that under their declared

policies they could not take territory as military conquest, and that during

thedisorderresultingfrommilitaryoccupation,absenceofChinese

Government, etc., regular concessions could not be legally obtained, and

that efforts in that direction should be deferred until order was restored and

lawful proceedings could be had with a due consideration of the rights of all

the powers. Our Government also favors international settlements where

possible.

I have, therefore, in order to prevent the seizure of this only tract left on the

river and to preserve it, to be with others organized into an international

settlement or to be reoccupied as a United States concession, directed our

consul at Tientsin to serve on his colleagues the formal notice, a copy of

which I inclose.

I have, etc.,
EHC
Printed ante.
Printed ante.

[Document 64]
Mr. Squiers to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,April 22, 1901.

No. 614.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose a copy of a proclamation, dated April 18,

issued by the German consul-general of Tientsin, by which notification is

given that the German concession there has been, by the consent of the

aChinese authorities, extended as indicated on the mapinclosed herewith.

I have not instructed Mr. Ragsdale to enter a protest against this action, as it

does not appear that the interests of any of our nationals are involved or in

any way prejudiced.

The inclosed map also shows the extensions of old concessions, as well as

new concessions up to date.

I have, etc.,
H.G.SQUIERS.
[Inclosure.]
G C G ,
Tientsin,April 18, 1901.

MDC : By order of the Imperial German legation at Pekin, I have

the honor to inform you that, with the consent of the Chinese authorities,

the German concession at Tientsin has been enlarged on the west to the

Taku road, on the south to the boundary within the limits which are marked

in green on the plan herewith.

I beg to add that it is well understood that foreigners who hold prior regular

titles are safeguarded.

I assure you, etc.,
ZIMMERMAN,Consul-General.
aNot printed.

[Document 65]
Mr. Squiers to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,July 25, 1901.

No. 677.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose to you copy of correspondence regarding

provisional transfer of old United States concession at Tientsin to the

municipality of the British extra concession.

As reported in Mr. Conger’s dispatch No. 491, of December 31, 1900, and

No. 551, February 27, 1901, this concession was temporarily occupied by

us with the hope that by doing so the powers might be induced to joining in

an international settlement, but there now appears to be no possibility of

such action, at least for the present.

Mr. Ragsdale’s representations that this property is an “eyesore” to Tientsin,

as there is no sanitary or police control, are supported by reports from other

sources.

As the object in taking over control of the concession will be in no way

prejudiced, I recommend the acceptance of the British proposals, with the

exception of paragraph 2, which should provide for mooring of all United

States vessels.

I beg to request a telegraphic repty.

I have, etc.,
HGS
[Inclosure 1.]

Mr. Ragsdale to Mr. Squiers.
UNITEDSTATESCONSULATE,
Tientsin, China,July 13, 1901.

No. 182.]

SIR: I have the honor to submit that the territory in what is known as the old

United States concession, Tientsin, and to which we have given notice of

probable reoccupation, is now really “no man’s land” in so far as sanitary or

police control is concerned, and is rapidly filling up with bad characters,

making some control absolutely necessary. The municipality of the British

extra concession is willing to assume such control and have asked, through

the British consul-general, what conditions would be exacted in this event.

With the approval of the legation I shall reply offering the said municipality

control on the following conditions:

1. The right of occupancy by our military forces at any time shall

not be interfered with.

2. The right to use the bund for mooring purposes will be

reserved.

3. The right of representation on the municipal council by at least

one American citizen.

4.Alltransfersofpropertywithintheconcessionshallbe

registered at the United States consulate.

5. No regulations shall be made exclusively applying to the

concession without the approval of the United States consul.

6. If for any reason control is desired by the United States the

same shall be turned over after twelve months’ notice.

I am, etc.,
JWR ,Consul.

[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Satow to Mr. Squiers.
BRITISHLEGATION,July 24, 1901.

MYDEARCOLLEAGUE: In reply to your inquiry of the 16th instant relating to the

provisional transfer of the old United States concession to the municipality

of the British extra concession, I beg herewith to inclose copy of the terms

on which I understand the above-mentioned municipality are willing to

agree. You will see that there is little or no difference between these and the

conditions forwarded to you by Mr. Ragsdale, and I trust that an agreement

may be come to which will prove beneficial to both parties.

Believe me, etc.,
ERNESTSATOW.
[Subinclosure.]
CONDITIONS OF HANDING OVER THE UNITED STATES CONCESSION AT TIENTSIN.
1. The United States Government to reserve the right to exercise

exclusivemilitarycontrolovertheconcessionincaseof

necessity.

2. The United States Government reserve the right to moor a

gunboat or gunboats at the bund of the United States concession

in case of necessity.

3. At least one American citizen to be on the extra concession

council. In the event of there being no American citizen on the

extra concession council in the ordinary way, the United States

consul should have the right to nominate one by virtue of this

arrangement.

4. All transfers of land in the United States concession to be

registered at the United States consulate.

5.NospecialregulationswhichapplytotheUnitedStates

concession and not to other parts of the British extra concession

to be made without the approval of the United States consul.

6. The United States Government to reserve the right to terminate

the arrangement with the British extra concession on giving one

year’s notice and assuming any financial liabilities which may

have been incurred for the development of the concession with

the consent of the United States consul.

[Document 66]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,September 9, 1901.

(Mr. Conger asks if the return of the former United States concession at

Tientsin shall be demanded from the Chinese Government. He states that its

only value is in the remote contingency of a point to land troops being

required; that it is very small; that no Americans are residing or are likely to

reside there, and that a general international settlement is impossible.

Refers to dispatches Nos. 491, 551, and 677.)

[Document 67]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Conger.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 12, 1901.

(Mr. Hay states that provisional extension of British municipality to cover

former American concession at Tientsin, with complete reservation of

American residence and commerce therein and eventual right of reentry,

might be arranged; that it is very desirable to keep open the right of

eventual recovery of American interest in the concession.

Refers to Mr. Ragsdale’s letter inclosed in dispatch No. 677 from Mr.

Squiers.)
[Document 68]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,October 11, 1901.

No. 769.]

S: Confirming my telegramof the 9th ultimo and Department’s replyof

the 12th ultimo, I have the honor to report that on the 14th ultimo I made

formal application for the re-cession to the United States of the old United

States concession at Tientsin, having previously received verbal assurance

of a willingness on the part of Prince Ching and Li Hung-chang to grant it.

The matter was referred to Li Hung-chang, the viceroy of this province, by

the foreign office, but becaues of his illness, or for some other reason, he

did not reply. However, in the meantime his secretary had informed me that

he was giving it his attention. On the 7th instant I wrote him again and

received reply that he had instructed the taotai at Tientsin to consult the

English and German consuls and report. I immediately wrote him that as

this was a matter which concerned only China and the United States it was

whollyunnecessarytoconsultanyothergovernments,andthatsuch

consultation on his part was, in fact, only an invitation for them to interfere,

and that the United States Government could not allow such interference. I

also called and had a personal conference the 9th instant, in which he said

that after the concession was surrendered by the United States it was then

divided between Germany and England. I knew this could not have been

possible and so told him, but added that if it were so that was the end of it,

as we were not asking a concession from England or Germany, but only

from China. My Government, however, would not be satisfied except upon

conclusive proof that such was the case. He said, of course their records

were all destroyed, and he only had an indistinct recollection of the matter,

as it was done during the viceroyalty of Wang Wen-shao; but the German

and English consuls must have a record of it, and that was why he wished to

consult them.

To-day he sent his secretary and the customs taotai of Tientsin to tell me

that he was mistaken; that the matter had been talked about, but was not in

fact given to the Germans and English, because of the opposition of the

China Merchants’ Steam Navigation Company and the Chinese Engineering

and Mining Company, who were the owners of practically all the land in the

tract. I told them, as I had also told Li Hung Chang before, that if it was not

given to the United States the Germans or English would take it, and

therefore it was not a question whether or not these companies should be

under foreign jurisdiction, but under what foreign jurisdiction. They replied

that the English and Germans, soon after our giving it back, had agreed in

writing that they would not ask for it, but would leave it in control of these

two companies. I said that the affairs of last year had changed all this, and

that had it not been for the notice which I served in February last the tract

would have been seized before this as they have seized other property. But

they still urge the opposition of these two companies as an excuse, and add,

further, that the Chinese Engineering and Mining Company has been sold

out to Belgian, Russian, and French interests, and they can not understand

what we can want of a concession where the land is all occupied, leaving no

placeforAmericanmerchantsorbusiness,andtheysaythatthese

companies will strongly suspect a design to dispossess them. I insisted that

all rights of property in Chinese or others would always be respected under

the jurisdiction of the United States. They then said the taxes would

necessarily be very high, and as these two companies owned practically all

the land, they would have all the taxes to pay. I replied that even now the

roads had to be kept up, policed, and lighted and it would probably cost

them no more then than now. They answered that now the Chinese board of

works improved the streets and that they paid no taxes, etc.

Instead of this tract they offer and beg us to accept a much larger and

unoccupied tract a long way down the river, outside of all the other

concessions. I replied that this would not satisfy us, but that this tract, even

with its present occupants, exactly suited our purpose and was the only tract

we desired.

They then asked if we would be willing to agree that a representative of one

of these companies should always have a place on the council of municipal

government. I replied that we desired the concession on the same terms as

to jurisdiction and control as concessions had been given to other powers,

and could take it with no other restrictions.

They finally said that the viceroy was very anxious to please the United

States, and would consent to giving the concession if I insisted upon it, but

he had sent them to explain to me all the difficulties in the way and the

troubles and complications which would probably arise out of it. I replied

that I understood it all, and if the concession was properly granted to the

United States we would have to meet the difficulties as they arose, and at

any rate they should not invite difficulties and opposition by consulting

these companies or anybody else.

The fact is, these companies represent some of the foremost and wealthiest

Chinese in the Empire, and they do not wish to be turned over, together

with their property, to foreign jurisdiction, and the viceroy does not like to

brook their opposition. It is possible that before the affair is concluded we

shall hear of some strenuous German opposition. In fact, I am not certain

that they will not resurrect some documentary evidence giving Germany

title, because in the correspondence transmitted to the Department with

Colonel Denby’s dispatch No. 2559, of July 10, 1896, there is a letter from

the taotai, saying that he would take the concession back and would then

I inclose the correspondence had thus far concerning the matter, and have,

etc.,E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Conger to the Board of Foreign Affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,September 14, 1901.

F. O. No. 280.]

YOURHIGHNESS ANDYOUREXCELLENCIES: During the occupancy of Tientsin by the allied

forces many of the foreign powers have taken advantage of the situation to

possess themselves of large tracts of territory in that vicinity for separate

national settlements or for other purposes. The United States has taken no

part in such appropriations of property, preferring to organize international

settlements where possible. But since this seems impossible at Tientsin at

thepresenttime,andsincenormalrelationshavebeenreestablished

between the powers and China, so that it may properly be done, my

Government has instructed me to request the recession to the United States

of the very small tract in Tientsin well known as the United States

concession. This tract comprises all the land lying between the British and

German concessions and extending from the Peiho River back to the Taku

road. The boundaries are well known and established, but at a later date

they can be more accurately surveyed and marked.

This concession was set apart for and granted to the United States in 1860

at the same time that the English and French concessions were granted to

them. For many years jurisdiction was exercised over it by the United States

consul, but on June 27, 1896, it was, for what then seemed sufficient

reasons, surrendered back to the Chinese Government; but now conditions

have so changed as to make it necessary and desirable for the United States

to again take it under its jurisdiction. It will also be an advantage to China

to have the United States exercising jurisdiction along with the other

governments at Tientsin.

I beg to add that during a recent conversation with his excellency, the

Chinese plenipotentiary, Li Hung-chang, before the signing of the protocol,

he assured me that the act of recession should have his approval and

cooperation.

Trusting that this request will meet with the hearty approval of your

highness and that the proper local officials will be immediately given the

necessary instructions to carry it out, I improve this first occasion to

congratulate you upon the reorganization of the foreign office, and to assure

your highness, etc.
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 2.]
Prince Ch’ing to Mr. Conger.
F. O. No. 261.]

Ch’ing, prince of the first order, president of the board of foreign affairs,

etc., sends this reply: A few days since I received your excellency’s dispatch

concerning the former American concession at Tientsin, which was restored

to China, requesting that it might be retroceded to the United States, etc.

The contents of the dispatch have been carefully noted and I have issued

instructions to the superintendent of trade for the north to take the matter

into consideration and report.

As in duty bound I send this reply for your excellency’s information.

Kuanghsu XXVII year, eighth moon, 7th day (September 19).

[Inclosure 3.]
L U S,
Pekin,October 7, 1901.

F. O. No. 292.]

YOUREXCELLENCY: On the 14th ultimo I had the honor to send to his highness,

Prince Ch’ing, president of the foreign office, a request on behalf of my

Government for the recession of the former United States concession in

Tientsin. His highness, acknowledging receipt, informed me that the matter

had been referred to your excellency to be arranged. This was done in

pursuance of previous personal conference, in which both his highness and

your excellency had expressed a willingness to make the recession.

It would seem, therefore, that it was only necessary to formally confirm

your verbal assurance and issue the proper instructions to the local officials,

so that I might instruct the consul of the United States to again assume

jurisdiction of the concession. For nearly a month I have been waiting for

this, and I regret that I am constrained to again call the attention of your

excellency to the matter and request its early determination.

I improve the opportunity, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 4.]
Earl Li to Mr. Conger.
F. O. No. 272.]

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt just now of your excellency’s

note concerning the desire of your Government to have the concession at

Tientsin which was surrendered restored to them and to have the local

officials instructed to make the transfer, etc.

With regard to this case, we some time since received the instructions of the

board of foreign affairs, and already on the 17th and 20th (September 29

and October 2) wrote to the taotai appointed to inquire into concession

affairs at Tientsin, Mr. Chien Jung, directing him to investigate, deliberate,

and decide upon the matter and to send a reply. We also clearly stated to

him that the concession in question is situated between the English and

German concessions, covering the whole plot of ground situated there and

extending from the Peiho to the Taku road, and that since your Government

was anxious to have the transfer made quickly, he ought to consult with the

English and German consuls, and then, according to the old boundaries,

turn the territory over to the control of your honorable country, all of which

would be perfectly just, which is a matter of record.

Up to the present there has been no reply from Ch’ien, taot’ai, as to his

compliance with these orders, and I have sent further instructions, urging

him to make haste in dealing with the matter and send reply. Aside from

this, as in duty bound, I send your excellency this reply, and have the honor

to wish your excellency all prosperity.

Card inclosed.

Eighth moon, 26th day (October 8, 1901).

[Inclosure 5.]
Mr. Conger to Earl Li.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,October 9, 1901.

F. O. No. 294.]

Y E :Ihavethehonortoacknowledgethereceiptofyour

excellency’s note of yesterday, concerning the recession to the United States

of its former concession in Tientsin, in which your excellency says you

have instructed the taot’ai, Mr. Ch’ien, to consult with the English and

German consuls before acting in the matter.

I am greatly surprised at this, for it is entirely a matter between China and

the United States, in which other governments have no concern, and should

be settled without reference to them. Your excellency has not deemed it

necessary to consult the United States in regard to concessions granted to

other powers in Tientsin, and I fail to see why an exception should be made

in this case, by inviting interference, which is wholly unnecessary, can not

be allowed by the United States, and may lead to annoying complications.

I avail, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 6.]
Earl Li to Mr. Conger.
I have just seen the customs taot’ai, Huang Chien-hang who tells me that

the old American concession at Tientsin was really not divided and given to

the British and Germans, but in fact was bought by the China Merchants’

Steam Navigation Company and the Chinese Engineering and Mining

Company for the use of their respective companies. I have directed the

taot’ai, Huang, to have personal interview and come to some satisfactory

arrangement.

In sending this I have the honor to wish your excellency all prosperity.

Card inclosed.

Eighth moon, 28th day (October 10, 1901).
aPrinted ante.
Printed ante.

[Document 69]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Conger.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 27, 1901.

No. 417.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch, No. 769, of the 11th

ultimo, confirming telegrams from and to you on the subject of the

recession to the United States of the former American concession at

Tientsin, and reporting your negotiations with the Chinese Government in

the matter.

Inviewoftheunfitnessofthealternativelyofferedtractforeither

commercial or military use by the United States, and recognizing the

difficulties in the way of the restoration to us of the former concession, by

reason of the tenancies which have been established therein since its

abandonment by us, it seems undesirable to press the matter further at

present. The Government of the United States will, however, expect to have

equal favors and facilities with other powers for military purposes at

Tientsin, should it at any future time become necessary to carry out the

purposes of the protocol with respect to keeping open communication

between Pekin and the sea; and if effective assurance in this regard be given

we may leave the question of a commercial concession in abeyance until

the development of commerce in that quarter shall make it necessary to

claim privileges and facilities on the same footing as other powers. We

would feel it a duty to reserve our right in such a case.

It is to be remembered that circumstances have materially changed since the

United States relinquished its holding at Tientsin, and that we have entered

into conventional arrangements, and engaged in contingent obligations

which may make it not only expedient, but necessary to secure a position of

equality at Tientsin in matters of commerce and international policy, if our

purposes in the direction of enlarged intercourse and the maintenance of

close relations of good will with China as well as with the powers are to be

effectively carried out, and, consequently, that we can not neglect any step

conducive to those beneficial ends.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 70]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,November 30, 1900.

No. 199.]

SIR: It is again my unpleasant duty to bring to your attention what seems to

me to be another effort on the part of the subordinate authorities of the

Treasury Department of the United States to distort the language and defeat

the plain intent of the solemn treaty stipulations entered into between the

United States and China. The present case is of such a character that I feel

sure you will agree with me that it demands the attention of the President of

the United States, and the exercise of his supreme authority to bring about a

proper observation of these international stipulations.

The present case is one which involves the construction of Article II of the

treaty of 1880, which became Article III of the treaty of 1894, and of

section 6 of the act of Congress of July 5, 1884, passed, to give effect to the

treaty. The treaty guarantees to Chinese subjects, being students, the right of

coming to the United States and residing therein. To establish the right of

the Chinese student to enter the United States, section 6 of the act of

Congress requires that he should produce the certificate described therein,

giving in detail his history and status, issued by the Chinese Government,

and viséd or indorsed by the United States consul at the port of departure of

the student; and the act makes it the duty of the United States consul,

“before indorsing such certificate, to examine into the truth of the statement

set forth in such certificate, and if he shall find upon examination that said

or any of the statements therein contained are untrue, it shall be his duty to

refuse to indorse the same.”

In accordance with the treaty and act of Congress, Yip Wah, a Chinese

subject, arrived at San Francisco, and produced the student certificate above

described. No allegation is made that the certificate was not in due form

according to the act of Congress. But the student was refused admission

into the United States by the collector of the port of San Francisco, and,

upon appeal had to the Commissioner of Immigration, the decision of the

collectorwassustained,andunlessthePresidentshallinterposehis

authority Yip Wah will be compelled to return to China.

The grounds of the decision refusing the admission of this student are set

forth in the letter of the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury to the collector

of San Francisco, a copy of which has by the courtesy of the honorable

Commissioner of Immigration been furnished me, and which I inclose for

the information of the President and yourself. It appears from this decision

that a Chinese subject can not establish his character as a student by

showing, as an applicant for admission into the United States, that he “was

simply an attendant upon the native schools of China,” and that he “intends

to continue his studies here.” I have to confess, Mr. Secretary, that such a

decision sounds strange to me, in view of the treaty and the law. I can not

conceive of any other way in which a Chinese young man can establish his

right of admission into the United States. But the decision makes clear what

is the position of the Treasury Department on this point. It appears that the

only evidence, other than the certificate, upon which the collector based his

action was the statement of the applicant himself to the effect that he had

been an attendant on the native schools of China and that he came to the

United States to continue his studies, avowedly to acquire a profession, “for

which he has thus far not even established a foundation, being entirely

ignorant of the English language.” The construction thus given to the treaty

and the law is that a Chinese subject in order to gain admission to the

United States as a student must first acquire a knowledge of the English

language. The further declaration of the applicant “that upon his return to

China he does not intend to practice as a physician, but to work with his

father,” who is engaged in business in Canton, can not property be held to

affecthisrightofadmission.Thisstatementwasmadebyayouth

undergoing an inquisition by an official of whom he stood in awe, and even

if taken in its fullest future application can not militate against his treaty

right of entrance. No suspicion is thrown upon the sincerity of his intention

to pursue his studies. Neither the treaty nor the law has to do with his

pursuit after he leaves the United States and returns to China. The object of

the law was to restrict the immigration of laborers, and plainly the facts

show that the applicant does not belong to the laboring, but to an exempt,

class.

I beg you, sir, to consider what effect this decision will have, if the

President allows it to remain as the proper construction of the treaty and the

law. It is in effect a requirement that all Chinese subjects, coming to the

United States to pursue their studies or prepare for a profession must show

that they possess a knowledge of the English language. You are well aware

of the fact that for many centuries the Chinese Government has maintained

an extensive system of general instruction and made it the basis and test of

admission to the public service, so that the youth have great facilities for

acquiring an education. But up to the present there are few schools in which

the English language is taught. To acquire this knowledge most of the

young Chinese would have to resort to some school established by the

missionaries, which would be repugnant to the ideas of the great mass of

the inhabitants, and, even if this prejudice could be overcome, the places

where such schools are to be found are very few compared to the vast

population of China. One of the leading objects of Chinese students in

taking advantage of the treaty right to come to the United States is to

acquire a knowledge of the language. In the past many hundreds of Chinese

youngmenhavebeensenttothiscountry,someofthembythe

Government, and it was understood with the cordial approval of the

Government of the United States, and placed in school at private or

Government expense, the great majority of whom had no knowledge of the

English language. The law of the United States was the same then as now.

We read in the history of the human race that once a powerful sovereign

made himself infamous by requiring a foreign people to make bricks

without straw; that is, he ordered them to accomplish a certain task without

affording them the proper facilities to execute his decree. The United States,

it is understood, is now concerting with other great powers certain measures

whereby the people of China may be induced to adopt such principles and

methods of government society, as will make them more in harmony with

the Western nations. And yet, if the decision which has given occasion for

the present note is to be confirmed by the President, it effectually closes the

doors of the institutions of learning in America to the great mass of Chinese

students who desire to come to this country to learn its language and

thereby study its governmental and social system, in order that on their

return to their own country they may profit by this education.

I inclose with the letter of the Assistant Secretary a copy of a letter from the

attorney in San Francisco of Yip Wah, containing an argument on his part to

sustain the appeal, and to which also I ask your attention. With the

foregoing statement I submit the case to you, feeling confident that the

President, with the spirit of justice which has so distinguished his public

life, will not allow this illiberal and unreasonable decision to stand.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.
[Inclosure 1.]
The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury to the Collector of Customs at San Francisco.
TREASURYDEPARTMENT,
OFFICE OFCOMMISSIONER-GENERAL OFIMMIGRATION,
Washington,November 21, 1900.

SIR: Under cover of your letter of 16th instant the Department is in receipt of

the papers on appeal in the case of Yip Wah, a Chinese person who sought

admission at your port with a section 6 certificate as a “student,” and whom

you denied on November 12, 1900.

You will note by reference thereto that the act approved July 5, 1884,

section 6, provides among other things that the certificate therein mentioned

“shall be the sole evidence permissible on the part of the person so

producing the same to establish a right of entry into the United States; but

said certificate may be controverted and the facts therein stated disproved

by the United States authorities.”

It is noted in this case, and in others of a similar character, that evidence is

sought to be produced to verify the claims made in such certificate in behalf

of the appellant, a practice which is reprehensible as being in direct

contravention of the above-quoted language. The certificate itself is but

prima facie evidence of the right of the alien to land, and it is the duty of

Government officers to scan the statements contained therein with a view to

determining whether in fact the claim of the applicant is true. The only part

of the examination conducted in this case by the Chinese inspectors which

seemed to have this end in view, rather than a purpose of confirming the

statements in the certificate, was the examination by Inspector Lynch of the

applicant himself. In the opinion of the Department this examination shows

that applicant was simply an attendant upon the native schools of China, as

any other young person of that country might naturally be, but fails to show

that he was a student in the sense of the law. If the act is to be construed as

meaning that all young persons who have attended schools in China are

students, and therefore, upon their declaration only to that effect, are to be

admitted to this country upon the ground that they intend to continue their

studies here, it would appear that the possession of such a certificate as that

presented by the applicant in this case would not be prima facie but

conclusive evidence of his right to admission.

This view of the case the Department is not prepared to entertain. The

applicant upon his own showing has followed the ordinary course of study

of young persons, and comes here professedly to acquire a profession for

which he has thus far not even established a foundation, being entirely

ignorant of the English language, and asserting, moreover, that upon his

return to China he does not intend to practice as a physician, but to work

with his father, whom he states to be the proprietor of a grocery business in

Canton. The statement of counsel in applicant’s behalf to the effect that his

client is “coming here to commence and finish his education” agrees with

the view of the Department that applicant’s status as a student in his native

country is not established.

In view of the foregoing consideration the Department is of opinion that

your action, based upon the belief that the bona fides of the applicant as a

student is not established, was well taken, and the appeal is therefore

dismissed.

Respectfully,

H.A.TAYLOR,Assistant Secretary.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Pippy to Mr. Wu.
SANFRANCISCO,November 14, 1900.

SIR: Inclosed please find a copy of a brief I have this day sent to the Treasury

Department in a section 6 student case.

It appears from the action of the collector here that he does not desire to

land any students at all, there being a number of cases held pending a

decision in this matter. It seems to me that this is a direct contravention of

the rights of the Chinese granted under the treaty.

This matter is of vital importance to quite a number of your countrymen,

and I would respectfully submit that some influence be brought to bear

upon the Department in Washington, in order that the collector at this port

may be taught his duty and be prevented from overriding the treaty between

the United States and China.

I am, etc.,
GEO.H.PIPPY.
[Subinclosure.]
SF ,November 13, 1900.

S: I most respectfully submit that the application of Yip Wah, ticket No. 87

“exGaelic,” October 28, 1900, for permission to land as a student, should

be granted.

In support of my position I contend that every requirement of section 6 of

the treaty between the United States and China, as amended July 5, 1884,

has been complied with. The certificate of the applicant is made out in due

form and contains everything required, not only under the treaty, but also

under the regulations of the Treasury Department.

The applicant’s statement is uncontradicted and bears out all the statements

set forth in the certificate.

I most respectfully refer to a letter of the honorable Mr. Spaulding to the

collector at this port under date of December 12, 1899, in the case Wong

Hay, a Chinese student 14 years of age, in which the following language is

used: “In view of the youth of the applicant, which would undoubtedly

disqualify him for laboring work, it is deemed advisable to authorize his

admission, notwithstanding the discrepancies referred to, and the appeal is

therefore sustained. As has heretofore been stated to you, the admission of

adult Chinese as students is not favorably regarded by the Department, but

the admission of Chinese youths upon section 6 certificates describing them

as students is more readily justifiable.”

I beg leave to quote from an opinion of Mr. M. D. O’Connell, Solicitor of

the Treasury, to the Secretary of the Treasury, dated July 10, 1900, in the

case of Li Ip, a student, in which the following language is used: “The

object itself challenges a general spirit on the part of all who are interested

in the encouragement of young men who are aspiring to a higher education,

especially to a knowledge of our language, and so far as the ambition of the

student is honest and bona fide he should be freely granted all the rights that

the statute affords to him.”

The act of September 13, 1888 (25 Stat., p. 476), section 2, certainly

establishes the right beyond question of the applicant herein to a landing, he

having complied with the requirements of the Treasury Department as set

forth in pages 17 and 18 of the laws issued by your Department July 10,

1899.

There is no question but what under the existing treaty between the United

States and China, and under all the acts of Congress, as well as the

regulations of the Treasury Department, the applicant herein having proven

beyond a doubt that he is a bona fide student, taking not only the primary

but the higher courses, is certainly entitled to be landed, and I challenge the

production of any good reason to the contrary.

Respectfully submitted.
GEO.H.PIPPY,
Attorney for Yip Wah.

[Document 71]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
December 5, 1900.

No. 163.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note, No. 199, of

the 30th ultimo, calling attention to the case of Yip Wah, a Chinese subject,

claiming to be a student, whose right to remain in the United States is

denied by the collector of customs at San Francisco.

The case having been appealed to the Treasury Department, the action of

the collector has been sustained by that Department.

You state that the case seems to you to be another effort on the part of the

subordinate officials of the Treasury Department of the United States to

distort the language and defeat the plain intent of the solemn treaty

stipulations entered into between the United States and China, and you

suggest that the present case is of such a character as to demand the

attention of the President of the United States and the exercise of his

supreme authority to bring about a proper observance of these international

stipulations.

In reply I beg to say that in the Department’s view the immigration acts do

not confer upon the President any power to interpose in the matter. The act

of August 18, 1894, provides that “in every case where an alien is excluded

from admission into the United States under any law or treaty now existing

or hereafter made, the decision of the appropriate immigration or customs

officers, if adverse to the admission of such alien, shall be final, unless

reversed on appeal to the Secretary of the Treasury.”

The substance of your note has been communicated to the Secretary of the

Treasury for his consideration.

[Document 72]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,December 26, 1900.

No. 200.]

SIR: Since my note of the 30th ultimo, in which I called your attention to the

case of the student Yip Wah, I have received from the imperial consul-

general and from reputable Chinese merchants in San Francisco such urgent

complaints that I feel it my regrettable duty to again address you on the

subject of the manner in which the immigration laws of Congress are being

enforced against Chinese subjects.

They represent, what I set forth in my note of the 30th ultimo, that under the

rulings of the authorities of the port of San Francisco Chinese students

holding certificates in conformity to the treaty and law of Congress are

virtually debarred from entering the United States, it being held by the said

authorities that such students must come here with a knowledge of the

English language and with an education that will permit them to forthwith

enter a college or take up an advanced professional course of study.

TheyfurtherrepresentthatundertheactofNovember3,1893,the

Government of the United States issued certificates of residence to a large

number of Chinese persons, not laborers—merchants and others—and that

the rights acquired under these certificates are being entirely ignored.

Holders of such certificates desiring to make a temporary visit to China are

deniedtheprivilege,andpersonswhohavedepartedholdingsuch

certificates are denied the privilege of reentering the United States.

They state that merchants returning to San Francisco after a temporary visit

to China are often imprisoned in the detention dock for weeks and months

pending their landing. Their Caucasian witnesses are put to all sorts of

inconveniences and annoyances and treated with suspicion and discourtesy.

When present to sigh identification papers they are compelled to await the

pleasure of the Chinese bureau for examination, and are plied with all sorts

of immaterial questions from an inspector, who assumes the character of an

inquisitor. The result of this is that it is now very difficult for Chinese

desiring to visit their native land to obtain the necessary signatures for their

identificationpapers,thuscausingthemuntoldmentalandfinancial

suffering.

They report that it has been heretofore the custom in San Francisco for

years to allow the attorney for the persons desiring to enter the United

States to be present at the Chinese bureau pending the taking of evidence on

their behalf, thus affording a protection to the Chinese applicants and

operating as a restraint upon overzealous subordinate officials. It has just

been ordered by the port authorities that henceforth no attorneys shall be

allowed to be present at the taking of such testimony, or of any testimony

on behalf of Chinese desiring to enter that port. They assert that this action

makes the immigration inspector, whose avowed policy is to cause the

return to China of every Chinese he possibly can, the master of the situation

and throws all Chinese applicants at his feet.

Your note of the 8th instant contains the reasons of the Treasury Department

for its actions. But it does not seem to me to be just that these Chinese

subjects, who are ignorant of the law, of the language, and the customs of

this country, should be deprived of the benefit of counsel and placed

entirely at the mercy of inquisitors, who, I regret to say, are generally

unfriendly if not positively hostile to them.

I beg to say that I was aware of the law which is quoted in your note of the

5th instant, when I suggested the interposition of the President of the United

States, but I am advised that it can hardly be interpreted as a prohibition

against the exercise by that supreme official of the nation of his influence

with one of his own Secretaries, if he was convinced, upon examination of

the facts, that a solemn treaty guaranty was being violated and a great

wrong being done to subjects of a friendly Government. I am further

advised that it was not the intent of Congress, by the act cited, to take from

the President the duty, which I have understood was imposed on him by

executed,” and by the same instrument the treaties with foreign nations are

declared to be “the supreme law of the land.” I feel persuaded that if you

will lay the questions presented in the present note and that of the 30th

ultimo before the President he will be inspired by his high sense of justice

to induce the honorable Secretary of the Treasury to revise the decisions

which have been made by the official of his Department, or that he will at

least submit the questions to the Attorney-General for a construction of the

treaty and the laws depending thereon.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.

[Document 73]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 14, 1901.

No. 168.]

SIR: Referring to your note, No. 199, of November 30 last, calling attention

to the case of Yip Wah, a Chinese subject, claiming to be a student, whose

right to remain in the United States is denied by the collector of customs at

San Francisco, and referring also to that part of the Department’s note in

reply, No. 163, of the 5th ultimo, in which you were informed that the

substance of your note had been communicated to the Secretary of the

Treasury for his consideration, I have the honor to inform you that the

Department is in receipt of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury dated

the 10th ultimo, in which, after expressing his regret, in which regret this

Department shares, that the action of the Treasury Department in the case

does not meet with your views, he says that that Department does not feel

that it could with propriety or in accordance with law modify or reverse the

decisions complained of.

Accept, etc.,
JH

[Document 74]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 2, 1901.

No. 169.]

SIR: Referring to your note, No. 200, of December 26 last, complaining of

the manner in which the Chinese-exclusion laws are enforced at San

Francisco, I have the honor to inform you that the Department is in receipt

of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, dated the 12th ultimo,

inclosing for the Department’s information a copy of a report received from

the collector of customs at San Francisco on the subject, together with a

copy of a report from the Chinese inspector in charge at that place.

The collector says:

I do not understand that there is now any basis for the contention

that unreasonable delay is occasioned in the hearing of these

cases. Heretofore, where the evidence was presented through

attorneys, in many instances the continuances have been granted

at the request of such attorneys. Now, however, the Government

proceeds upon its own initiative, and through the Chinese bureau,

to inquire into the status of each particular case as it presents

itself. All reasonable efforts are made to expedite these hearings,

and I believe that you will find that at the present time (February

1, 1901), and in the future, there has been and will be no

unreasonable postponement in deciding any of these cases.

As to the complaint of discourtesy, etc., the Chinese inspector in charge

asks that you be requested to prefer the charge in form so specific that a

thorough investigation will be required, and that his office may be relieved

of any officer found guilty upon such charges, a request which I now have

the honor to make.

[Document 75]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,April 11, 1901.

No. 203.]

SIR: In your note of the 2d ultimo, in which you did me the honor to reply to

my notes respecting the conduct of the customs inspectors and other

officials of your Government at San Francisco in the enforcement of the

Chinese immigration treaty and laws, you ask for more specific information

on the subject, in order that their conduct may be investigated.

The charge in my note of December 26 last was that the inspectors were

generallyunfriendly,ifnotpositivelyhostile,toallChinesesubjects

applying for admission to the United States. In my note of November 30

last I alleged that the subordinate Treasury officials distort the language and

defeat the plain intent of the treaty. I respectfully submit that the facts

communicated in the notes cited, as well as others of previous dates, fully

sustain the charges made, and afford sufficient data to enable the Treasury

Department to correct the conduct of the officials mentioned. However, in

order to comply with the request contained in your note of the 2d ultimo, I

asked of the imperial consul-general in San Francisco further details, and I

copy herewith from his report:

Tang Shi Tak, who arrived here on the steamerAmerica Maru
December 22, 1900, ticket No. 34, applied for landing at this port

as a teacher, presenting a section 6 certificate issued by the

Government at Hongkong. He was denied landing. It appears that

he stated that he came here for the purpose of engaging in his

profession as a teacher; that a certain firm in this city, giving its

name, had secured for him a number of pupils. The Chinese

inspector interviewed the firm referred to and they stated that they

had secured for this applicant a number of pupils, giving their

names and the names of their parents. The inspector interviewed

the various persons named and found the statement to be true,

excepting that the name of one person could not be found at the

address given, and the inspector so reported. He did not, however,

report that as regards the other names mentioned the statements

were correct. For that reason the case was denied.

Yee Sang, a returning Salinas merchant, arriving here on the

steamerDoric, February 1, ticket No. 81, applied for admission at

this port after an absence of about one year. He was denied

landing. It appeared from his statement that he had been engaged

in mercantile business for a number of years and that his business

hadbeenclosedout;thathethereupontookanofficeand

conducted the business of the defunct firm, collecting their debts

and settling up their liabilities for a period of about a year. He

then reengaged in business and continued in the second business

for about nine months prior to his leaving for China. Proof was

introduced by white witnesses that the man had been a merchant

for a great many years prior to his departure for China, and the

testimony of the white witnesses complied in all respects with the

requirements of the Department.

In the case of Cheong In, No. 5, steamerNippon Maru, November

12, 1900, the applicants presented two section 6 certificates,

which certificates were issued by the Government in Hongkong,

in due form of law and properly viséed. They presented these

certificates at this port and demanded to be landed by reason

thereof. The cases were investigated by the customs officials and

no statements contained in the certificates were in any way

controverted. It appears that the inspector reported that neither of

these parties had any money about their person, and for that

reason they were denied landing at this port. It did, however,

appear from the investigation of the case and the report of the

customs officials that certain responsible firms in this city were

indebted to the firms of which these applicants were members in

China, and that upon the landing of these applicants they would

collect this money and would use it, among other purposes, for

engaging in business in this city. The amount was considerable,

and the stores, upon being interrogated by the Chinese inspectors,

corroborated the statements in every particular. The law does not

require that a Chinese person seeking admission at this port

should be supplied with any particular amount of money, and

while it might be argued that a person arriving here without

means of any kind could not well be called a merchant, that does

not appear in this case, as these applicants had a credit here, or, in

other words, responsible firms in this city were indebted to them

in various amounts of money.

In the case of Woo Chung, No. 10, steamerCoptic, December 14,

1900, this applicant also presented a section 6 certificate duly

issued by the Government at Hongkong and claimed to be a

merchant and a member of the exempt class. No fact in his

certificate was controverted by the Government officials. In his

statement he claimed that what money he needed in this country

for the purpose of going into business would be furnished him by

acertainfirminthiscity.Thatfirmwasinterrogatedand

corroborated the statement of the applicant, and at the request of

the then acting collector of this port the amount of money which

the applicant claimed he needed was by the firm placed in the

form of a certificate of deposit and exhibited to the collector, who

expressed himself as fully satisfied with the case and that the

applicant was what he claimed to be. This was a day or two

before the expiration of the term of office of the then acting

collector, and when the matter was brought up again before the

present collector upon a recommendation of Mr. Dunn in this case

it was denied, following the recommendations of Mr. Dunn in all

cases, good, bad, and indifferent.

Cases similar to these could be repeated as long as one had

patience to listen to them; but these seem to me fair examples of

returning merchants and section 6 cases merchants who have been

unlawfully denied admission at this port.

I trust that the foregoing additional facts may be brought to the attention of

the honorable Secretary of the Treasury, in the hope that he will issue such

instructions as will bring about a more rational and exact compliance with

the letter and spirit of the treaty stipulations entered into between the two

Governments.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.

[Document 76]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 15, 1901.

No. 172.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 203, of the

11thinstant,infurtherrelationtoyourcomplaintconcerningthe

enforcement of the Chinese exclusion laws at San Francisco and giving

details of cases of discourtesy, etc., on the part of the office of the Chinese

inspector at that place.

In reply I have the honor to inform you that a copy of your note has been

sent to the Secretary of the Treasury for his information.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 77]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 23, 1901.

No. 173.]

SIR: Referring to your note No. 203, of the 11th instant, in which you quote

from a communication of the Chinese consul-general at San Francisco

reports of certain cases in which it is charged that the United States officials

at that place, upon whom devolves the duty of enforcing the Chinese

exclusion laws, have been guilty of improperly refusing admission to

Chinese immigrants, I have the honor to inform you that the Department is

in receipt of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, dated the 17th

instant, in which he says:

The Department finds, upon reference to its files, that each and all

of the cases cited by the Imperial consul-general to sustain the

charges referred to were appealed to this Department, and, after a

careful review of the evidence transmitted therewith, the action of

the said officers was sustained, except in one instance, that of

Tang Shai Tak, whose claim to be a teacher, and therefore within

the exceptions provided for by the convention of December 8,

1894, was duly allowed, and he was therefore permitted to land.

The Department is of course not aware of what information the

Imperial consul-general may have in his possession bearing upon

the charge of impropriety on the part of the officials at San

Francisco, but inasmuch as his letter, extracts from which are

contained in the note of the Chinese minister, shows simply that

in his judgment they had acted in disregard of the preponderance

of evidence, and charges nothing against them other than that,

their action in that respect does not appear to require further

investigation, since it was ratified as above stated. Mistake or

prejudice on the part of the said officials, if such is shown, may

always be corrected by appeal, when each case will be reviewed

and decided upon its merits.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 78]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,November 28, 1901.

No. 214.]

SIR: I am informed by the Chinese consul at Honolulu that the collector of

customs at that port has refused permission to a Chinese student to land for

the purpose of pursuing an education. The person so refused is reported to

me to be a boy aged 15 years, Tong Tseng, who arrived at Honolulu by the

steamerGaelicon October 21, bearing with him a proper certificate, issued

to him by the British Government of Hongkong and viséed by the United

States consul-general at that port. His application for permission to land

was rejected by the collector of Honolulu, as I am informed, not because his

certificate was not properly made out or that he was not a student, but

because when questioned the boy answered that his purpose in coming to

Honolulu was to pursue his studies at the Chinese-American school. His

friends and the American principal of the school interested themselves on

his behalf and offered to give a guaranty or bond for the good faith of the

boy, but their offer was refused by the collector, who stated that his

instructions from the Treasury Department were that only those Chinese

who intend to pursue some of the higher branches of study or for some

particular profession could be admitted.

I am advised that an appeal has been taken to the Secretary of the Treasury,

and that the boy is detailed at the quarantine station awaiting the Secretary’s

decision. In view of this action it becomes my duty to ask your kind

intervention with your honorable colleague, the Secretary of the Treasury,

to the end that the treaty between the two Governments may not be violated

in this case.

In examining the opinion of the Solicitor of the Treasury upon which the

ruling of the collector is based I find that he defines a student to be “a

person who (1) intends to pursue some of the higher branches of study, or

one who (2) seeks to be fitted for some particular profession or occupation

for which facilities of study are not afforded in his own country; one (3) for

whose support and maintenance in this country, as a student, provision has

been made, and who (4), upon completion of his studies, expects to return

to China.” (Regulations relating to exclusion of Chinese, 1900, p. 35.) May

I venture the assertion that this definition with its various conditions reads

very strangely in contrast with the simple phrase of the treaty? Suppose

such a clause as that just quoted had been proposed for insertion in the

treaty, can you, Mr. Secretary, for a moment believe that the Chinese

negotiator would have accepted? I think you will agree with me that the

officials of one of the parties to a treaty can not attach conditions to its

stipulations which that party would not have proposed in the negotiations

and which the other party would not have entertained.

If the construction given by the Treasury officials is to be maintained by

your Government, you must admit that it is a virtual nullification of the

treaty. Under this ruling a Chinese student can only be admitted to the

United States to pursue a course of study for a profession or occupation “for

which facilities of study are not afforded in his own country.” Any one at all

familiar with China must know that there were in existence in that Empire

when the treaty was made institutions of learning where instruction is given

in English and Chinese in almost every branch of education—in medicine,

in divinity, in international law and the science of government, in civil and

mining engineering, in the science of navigation, in the military art, and in

the other various branches of sciences and belles-lettres.

It is not a sufficient reason to give to the application of a Chinese student

who comes to the United States to make himself more perfect in English to

say that there are facilities in the place of his home, in China, or Hongkong,

where he can learn this language. There are throughout the United States, in

every city and town, teachers of the French and German languages, but I

understand that it is a common practice among the well-to-do American

families to send their children to France or Germany, at great expense, to

acquire a more perfect knowledge of the tongue there spoken.

It would be just as proper and well founded a reason upon which to base the

rejection of a Chinese student to enter the United States for the study of

medicine or theology to say that there are institutions in China for such

study.

The Solicitor of the Treasury must know that many centuries before the

nations of northern Europe began to give attention to education the Chinese

Empire was the seat of learning, with a literature and art which is even to-

day the admiration of the western countries. And it is because of the thirst

of the Chinese youth for knowledge that, with the modern facilities for

travel and exchange of ideas, they seek admittance to the schools of this

enlightened nation. It is the same spirit which has taken so many American

youths to Paris, Berlin, and other seats of learning. No such line is drawn

upon the young men of this country when they land in France or Germany.

Anyone at all conversant with the social conditions of China must know

that there is a broad and well-marked distinction between the student and

the laboring classes. The authorities who give the certificate and the consul

who visés it can readily discriminate between them. But in the present case

there is no question as to the genuineness of the certificate or the status of

the applicant. The boy is to be rejected and sent back on his long journey

because he could find the same facilities for education at his home that he

seeks in Honolulu. Certainly, Mr. Secretary, you and your enlightened

colleague, the Secretary of the Treasury, must admit that the reason for this

decision is unjustifiable and in violation of the treaty. I hope, therefore, that,

actuated by the spirit of fairness which has so distinguished your official

conduct, you will lay the present case before your colleague and urge him to

give to the appeal his personal attention, in the full assurance on my part

that he will overrule the unreasonable decision of the collector at Honolulu.

Accept, etc.,
WT

[Document 79]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 3, 1901.

No. 187.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 214, of the

28th ultimo, requesting that permission be granted to the Chinese student,

Tong Tseng, whose case is described in your note, to land at Honolulu, to

which place he goes for the purpose of pursuing an educational course.

In reply I have the honor to inform you that I have sent a copy of your note

to the Secretary of the Treasury for his information, and have commended

the case to his consideration.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 80]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 14, 1901.

No. 192.]

SIR: Referring to your note No. 214, of the 28th ultimo, requesting that

permission be granted to the Chinese student, Tong Tseng, to land at

Honolulu, whither he has gone for the purpose of pursuing an educational

course, I have the honor to inform you that the Department is in receipt of a

letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, dated the 10th instant, in which he

says that papers on appeal have been received from the collector of customs

at Honolulu in the case of a Chinese boy named Tong Chong, who arrived

at that place by the steamshipGaelicon October 22 last; and that the

Treasury Department, in a decision given on the 10th instant, has directed

that the said Tong Chong be permitted to land.

The Secretary of the Treasury adds that it is assumed that the boy Tong

Chong is identical with the one named in your note as Tong Tseng, who,

you state, arrived by theGaelicon October 21, inasmuch as all the other

circumstances of Tong Chong’s case agree practically with those stated in

your note.

Accept, etc.,
JH

[Document 81]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,December 16, 1901.

No. 220.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 192, of the

14th instant, informing me that the Treasury Department has directed that

Tong Tseng, or Tong Chong, a Chinese student, who arrived at Honolulu by

the steamshipGaelicin last October, be permitted to land, in a decision

given on the 10th instant on his appeal. I beg to express my appreciation of

the justice of the course pursued by the Treasury Department in this case,

and to request that you will kindly convey my thanks to the Secretary of the

Treasury.

As to the slight confusion caused by the different spelling of the boy’s

name, referred to by the Secretary of the Treasury, this is due partly to the

dialectic variation in the Chinese pronunciation of the name and partly to

the imperfect representation of the Chinese sounds by English letters. The

Secretary of the Treasury is right in assuming that it is one and the same

boy, whether his name is given as Tong Tseng or Tong Chong.

Accept, etc.,
WT

[Document 82]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 30, 1901.

No. 196.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 220, of the

16th instant, expressing your appreciation of the justness of the course

pursued by the Treasury Department in the case of the Chiness student Tong

Tseng.

In reply, I have the honor to inform you that a copy of your note has been

sent to the Secretary of the Treasury for his information.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 83]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,December 9, 1901.

No. 218.]

SIR: The President having signified to me in the private audience with which

he honored me the other day his desire that I should furnish him with

certain specific cases of injustice and hardship suffered by the subjects of

China by reason of the rigid enforcement of the Chinese exclusion laws, I

have the honor to inclose a memorandum which I have prepared for this

purpose and to request that you will kindly lay it before the President for his

consideration and for such action as he may deem proper.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.
[Inclosure.]
MEMORANDUM.
Attorney-General Griggs, in an opinion addressed to the Secretary of the

Treasury,datedthe15thofJuly,1898,says:“Itmaybestated,

comprehensively, that the result of the whole body of these laws and

decisions thereon is to determine that the true theory is not that all Chinese

persons may enter this country who are not forbidden, but that only those

are entitled to enter who are expressly allowed.”

In pursuance of this opinion, the Treasury Department issued instructions to

collectors of customs in the following terms: “Collectors of customs are

directed to admit only Chinese whose occupation or station clearly indicates

that they are members of the exempt class of Chinese named in Article III

of the treaty with China, viz, ‘Chinese subjects, being officials, teachers,

cashiers, physicians, proprietors of restaurants, etc.”

To deny admission to other classes of Chinese than laborers is clearly

contrary to the letter and spirit of the laws and treaties respecting the

immigration of Chinese to the United States and to the uninterrupted

practice of the Executive Departments of the United States for a period of

sixteen years from 1882 to 1898.

Since the issuance of the instructions by the Treasury Department, in

pursuance of Attorney-General Griggs’s opinion above referred to, the

rights of even the so-called exempt classes of Chinese have been constantly

ignored and denied by officers of the United States Government charged

with the execution of the laws, as may be seen in the following cases: CASEI.

Mr. Lew Yuk Lin, acting consul-general of China at Singapore, in the

Straits Settlements, and Commander Chen En Tao, naval attaché to the

Chinese legation at London, were proceeding via Vancouver, Montreal, and

NewYorktoLondon,England,onthebusinessoftheImperial

Government. They arrived at Malone, N. Y., on the evening of December

26, 1899, and were met on the train by Mr. J. Gibbs and Mr. F. G. Shufelt,

deputy collectors at Malone. These officers informed them that they had

received telegraphic instructions from the collector at Plattsburg, N. Y., to

detainthematMaloneuntilinstructionscouldbeobtainedfromthe

Treasury Department at Washington. The two Chinese officials endeavored

to satisfy the deputy collectors of their status as officials of the Chinese

Governmentbyexhibitingtothemtheircredentialsand,inaddition,

certificates issued to them by the British authorities at Hongkong and

Shanghai, and by the United States consul-general at Hongkong, showing

conclusively their official character and their right to exemption from the

operation of the exclusion laws. To their great surprise and in spite of their

protest, the deputy collectors insisted upon detaining them, and they were

forced to get off the train and pass the night in a hotel. For over twenty-four

hours they were kept under surveillance and were not allowed to continue

their journey until remonstrance had been made by this legation and

telegraphicinstructionsreceivedfromWashington.Eventhenno

satisfaction was tendered them for the inconvenience and extra expense

they had been thus put to by reason of their detention and for the great

humiliation and indignity to which they had been subjected.

CASEII.

Fei Chi Ho and Kung Hsiang Hsi, two Chinese students, arrived at San

Francisco September 12, 1901, by the steamerDoric, in the charge of Miss

Luella Miner, a teacher in the North China College of the American Board

ofForeignMissionsatTungchow,nearPeking.Theyhadpassports

certifying to their status as students, issued by Earl Li Hung Chang, viceroy

of the province of Chihli, and viséd by Mr. Ragsdale, United States consul

at Tientsin. According to Miss Miner’s statement, Fei Chi Ho studied first

in the primary schools and then for eight years in the North China College

and Academy, where he graduated in May, 1898. From that time until the

Boxer outbreak in the summer of 1900, he taught in the Boys’ Boarding

Schools at Taiku and Fenchow, in the province of Shansi. Kung Hsiang Hsi

is a native of Taiku, in Shansi, and studied many years in the mission school

there. In 1896 he entered the North China College and Academy, and had

completed the junior year when he returned to his home in Shansi in June,

1900, expecting to return and finish his college course the following year.

Both these young men were in Shansi at the time of the general outbreak

against foreigners in that province, and were conspicuous for their devotion

and faithfulness to their American friends, whom they refused to desert,

though for weeks they were repeatedly surrounded by Boxer mobs. When

the last of the missionary bands was killed on August 14, 1900, Fei Chi Ho

escaped, and, after unspeakable hardships, made his way to Tientsin,

bringing the first authentic tidings of the fate that had befallen the Shansi

missionaries. His father, mother, and other relatives were killed by the

Boxers. The other young man, Kung Hsiang Hsi, was intrusted by the two

American ladies, Miss Bird and Miss Partridge, a few days before their

death, with letters to their friends. These he concealed for twelve months, at

the risk of his life, before it was possible for him to carry them over the

borders of the province of Shansi. He had with him also a few articles from

the personal effects of Miss Bird for her mother.

To these young men the collector of customs at San Francisco refused

admission on the ground that their passports were not in proper form. The

entreaties of Miss Miner and the intercession of the Chinese consul-general

at San Francisco in their behalf were of no avail. They were ordered to be

deported. Thecasewasappealedtothe TreasuryDepartment,which

confirmed the decision of the collector. As they were in imminent danger of

being sent back to China, it was arranged, at the last moment, through the

intercession of an influential friend, that the young men should be permitted

to land on the bond of the Chinese consul-general at San Francisco, pending

their sending to China for the proper certificates.

CASEIII.

aTong Tseng,a boy 15 years old, arrived at Honolulu, by the steamer
Gaelic, on October 21, 1901, bearing a proper certificate, issued by the

British authorities at Hongkong and viséd by the United States consul-

general at that port. His application for admission was rejected by the

collector of customs at Honolulu, not because of any defect in his certificate

or any doubt as to his character as student, but because when questioned he

answered that the purpose of his coming to Honolulu was to pursue his

studies at the Chinese-American school. His friends and the American

principal of the school exerted themselves in his behalf, and offered to give

a guaranty or bond for the good faith of the boy, but their offer was refused

bythecollector,whostatedthathisinstructionsfromtheTreasury

Department were that only those Chinese who intend to pursue some of the

higherbranchesofstudyorpreparethemselvesforsomeparticular

profession could be admitted.

CIV.

Yee Ah Lum and some thirty Chinese merchants of Canton came to the

United States in August, 1899, for the purpose of buying American goods.

Their applications for admission into the country were rejected by the

collector of customs at San Francisco on the ground that their certificates

weredefective.Theallegeddefectwassimplytheomissionofthe

particulars respecting the nature and character of their business in the

English portion of the certificates, though such particulars were plainly

stated in the Chinese portion. Thereupon Yee Ah Lum and the other Chinese

merchants appealed to the Secretary of the Treasury, but the Secretary

sustained the decision of the collector. They were accordingly deported. It

was afterwards learned that they went to Europe to make their purchases.

CASEV.

Tom Kem Poy and Wong Sun Chune were two Chinese merchants who had

been in business a number of years at Mazatlan, Mexico, as members of the

firm of Simon Ley & Co. Armed with certificates from the Mexican

Government,properlyviséedbythe Americanconsulattheportof

departure, and also with a certificate from the registrar of commerce of

Mazatlan showing that they were merchants of good standing, they came to

Los Angeles, Cal., in February, 1899. On their arrival the Chinese inspector

arrested them, and threw them in jail, because, as he testified at the

preliminary examination of these men, he had felt their hands, and therefore

knew that they were not merchants. They were in jail from February 6 to

June 1, when their attorney wrote to this legation, and in all probability had

to remain there to the day of their deportation, which was not ordered till

August. Thus they were kept in jail for seven months for no crime or fault

whatever.

CASEVI.

aLei Yok,a member of the Chinese firm of Tuck Chung Yuen, of Habana,

Cuba, left that port on the 11th of November, 1898, by the steamerWhitney
for New Orleans with the intention of proceeding to San Francisco, where

he had an interest in the firm of Tai Seng Tong, doing business at 929

Dupont street, San Francisco. Upon his arrival at New Orleans the customs

authorities refused to let him continue his journey. His passport was in due

form, issued by the Chinese consul-general at Habana, and viséed by the

British consul acting in behalf of the United States Government as well as

by the Spanish governor of the province at that time. His detention was due

to a new regulation of the Treasury Department, issued in pursuance of an

opinionoftheActingAttorney-General,withdrawingtheofficial

recognition up to that time accorded to Chinese consular certificates.

Ho Mun, a native of the Portuguese city of Macao, born of Chinese

parentage and a merchant of good standing, arrived at San Francisco by the

steamerCopticon September 17, 1899, and applied for admission to the

United States by presenting a certificate issued by the proper Portuguese

authorities at Macao and viséed by the United States consul-general at

Hongkong. His application was rejected on the ground that his certificate

failed to state the length of time for which he was engaged as a merchant in

Macao before his departure for the United States. Accordingly, he was

removed to a place of detention on the steamship company’s dock in the

custody of the customs authorities to await orders for his deportation.

Almost immediately afterwards he fell sick. Every effort was made by his

friends and relatives to give him the necessary medical care and attention,

but the customs authorities and particularly Inspector Dunn, who was in

charge of the Chinese bureau, refused all entreaties that a regular physician

should be allowed to examine and attend the sick man. For two months Ho

Mun remained in the place of detention, and his condition grew worse and

worse from day to day. As a last resort, an application was made to the

district court of the United States in and for the northern district of

California for a writ of habeas corpus, which was granted on the 16th of

November, 1899, and Ho Mun was taken from the custody of the custom

authorities, and removed to the county jail, where he died on the 21st of

November.

The foregoing are typical cases taken from a large number. They serve to

show the nature of the hardships entailed upon even the members of the

exempt classes of Chinese by the harsh enforcement of the exclusion laws.

These certainly do not seek the American shore for the purpose of wresting

the daily bread from the mouths of American wage earners, but for the

purposeofpromotingafriendlyunderstandingandimprovingthe

commercial relations between the two countries. It is true that instances of

fraudulent attempts to enter the country are not wanting. But innocent

Chinese who have every right to come to the United States should not be

treated as suspicious characters and sent back to China as lawbreakers on

the least pretext.
Complete report of this case printed, p. 68

[Document 84]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 12, 1901.

No. 191.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 218, of the

9th instant, and to inform you in reply that I have laid before the President

for his consideration and for such action as he may deem proper in the

matter, a copy of the memorandum inclosed with your note, giving specific

cases of alleged injustice and hardship suffered by subjects of China by

reason of the rigid enforcement of the Chinese-exclusion laws.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 85]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,December 10, 1901.

No. 219.]

SIR: In view of the fact that the law of the Congress of the United States

which went into force May 6, 1882, based upon the treaty of 1880 between

China and the United States, regulating Chinese immigration, and which

was reenacted May 5, 1892, for ten years, is about to expire by limitation,

Government to bring the subject of this law and the treaties to the attention

of the United States, and to urge an adjustment of the questions involved

more in harmony with the friendly relations of the two Governments and

with the interests of their respective peoples.

The treaty of 1880 (Article IV) provides that if the laws of the Congress of

the United States to carry out the treaty “are found to work hardship upon

the subjects of China, the Chinese minister at Washington may bring the

matter to the notice of the Secretary of State of the United States, who will

consider the subject with him * * * to the end that mutual and unqualified

benefitmayresult.”Thematterwhichnowpressesitselfuponour

consideration is whether the laws now in force “are found to work hardship

upon the subjects of China,” and whether they ought to be renewed or

modified by the Congress. As the subject is one of the utmost importance to

my Government and my people, I must entreat your patience while I

attempt to review it at some length and in detail. In doing so it will be

necessary to repeat some of the facts and arguments which have already

been submitted to you, in order that a full and connected presentation of the

subject may be made for the consideration of the legislative branch of your

Government,andIrespectfullyrequestthatacopyofthisnotebe

transmitted to the honorable Congress.

In seeking to discharge this duty I shall ask your attention, first, to the

diplomatic history of the treaties upon which the laws of the Congress are

based; second, to an inquiry somewhat in detail whether these laws have

worked hardships to the subjects of China; third, whether they have proved

to be for the best interests of the United States in an economic aspect and in

its commercial relations with China; and, fourth, whether, in view of their

early expiration, they should be reenacted; and, if so, to what extent of

territory they should be applied and what modifications are called for by

experience in their enforcement.
I.—DIPLOMATIC HISTORY OF THE CHINESE IMMIGRATION TREATIES.
In 1868 the governments of China and the United States celebrated a treaty

which guaranteed to the Chinese subjects visiting or residing in the United

States the same privileges, immunities, and exemptions as were enjoyed by

the citizens of the most favored nation. It was a treaty negotiated by the

great American statesman, Secretary Seward. It was announced by the

President of the United States to Congress to be a “liberal and auspicious

treaty” (Dip. Cor. U. S., 1868, p. 16), and it was welcomed by the people of

the United States as a great advance in their international relations. It also

has the double significance of having been negotiated by a Chinese special

embassy,ofwhichadistinguishedAmericandiplomat,Hon.Anson

Burlingame, was the head, and who was familiar with the wishes and

interests of the American people.

Some delay was occasioned in its ratification by the Chinese Government,

and upon the advent of a new President, General Grant, his Secretary of

State,Mr.Fish,manifestedamarkedzealandanxietytosecureits

ratification, with a full knowledge on the part of the Government that it was

to secure the free entrance of Chinese laborers into the United States, whose

coming by “thousands” he welcomed. In urging the minister of the United

States to hasten final and favorable action, he wrote: “Already they (the

Chinese immigrants) have crossed the great mountains and are beginning to

be found in the interior of the continent. By their assiduity, patience, and

fidelity, and by their intelligence, they earn the good will and confidence of

those that employ them. We have good reason to think that this thing will

continue and increase.” (Wharton’s International Digest, I, p. 457.) Under

such circumstances the Imperial Chinese Government was pleased to meet

the wishes of the Government of the United States, and it put the treaty into

full force and operation with the expectation that it would be the means of

unrestricted commercial and industrial intercourse and a bond of union and

friendship between the two great peoples for many generations to come.

But within a few years the labor unions on the Pacific coast began to object

to the coming of Chinese laborers to that region to compete with them.

Soon afterwards the Chinese Government was surprised to be informed that

the President of the United States had delegated a commission of its citizens

to go to Pekin and solicit an abrogation of the treaty clause, to which

reference has been made. Although the Imperial Government was resolutely

opposed to its abrogation, it received the American commission with all the

respect due to their Government and to their high station, and listened

patiently to their representations. The commissioners admitted that the

treatyof1868gavetheChinesetheabsoluteunrestrictedrightof

immigration to the United States in any numbers, but they represented that

the conditions had so changed since the treaty was negotiated, or that its

operation had been so unexpected in its results, that the interests of the

American people demanded that the treaty clause in question should be

annulled.

The Chinese Government was still unwilling to abrogate a treaty which had

been urged with so much zeal by the United States and which had so lately

been entered upon on both sides with such high hopes. Thereupon the

commissioners proposed that in view of the disturbances created in the

United States by the operation of the treaty, permission be given the

Government of the United States, in its discretion, “to limit, suspend, or

prohibit” the immigration of Chinese laborers. To this proposition the

Chinese Government objected as a virtual abrogation of the treaty, but it did

indicate a disposition to intrust to the Government of the United States the

power “to regulate, limit, or suspend” such immigration, if the power to

“prohibit”wasstrickenout,andifassurancecouldbegivenbythe

commissioners that the discretion to be granted to the United States would

be judiciously and reasonably exercised.

TheAmericancommissionersacceptedtheproposaloftheChinese

Government as fair and adapted to the situation of affairs, and they

proceeded to give the assurance requested by the Chinese Government in

the following terms:

It would be as difficult to say what would be the special character

of any act of Congress as it would be to say what would be the

words of an edict of the Emperor of China to execute a treaty

power. That the great nations discussing such a subject must

always assume that they will both act in good faith and with due

consideration for the interests and friendship of each other. That

the United States Government might never deem it necessary to

exercise this power. It would depend upon circumstances. If

Chinese immigration concentrated in cities where it threatened

public order, or if it confined itself to localities where it was an

injury to the interests of the American people, the Government of

the United States would undoubtedly take steps to prevent such

accumulations of Chinese. If, on the contrary, there was no large

immigration, or if there were sections of the country where such

immigration was clearly beneficial, then the legislation of the

UnitedStatesunderthispowerwouldbeadaptedtosuch

circumstances. For example, there might be a demand for Chinese

labor in the South and a surplus of such labor in California, and

Congressmightlegislateinaccordancewiththesefacts.In

general, the legislation would be in view of and depend upon the

circumstances of the situation at the moment such legislation

became necessary. * * * They further remarked that they were

satisfiedthatifanyspeciallegislationworkedunanticipated

hardships the Government of the United States would listen in the

most just and friendly spirit to the representations of the Chinese

Government through their minister in Washington. (U. S. Foreign

Relations, 1881, p. 185 .)

These assurances were accepted by the Chinese Government as satisfactory

and, at its request, they were reduced to writing. That Government was not,

however, satisfied that the word “prohibit” should be merely stricken out of

the treaty draft prepared by the American commissioners; but to the words

“regulate, limit, or suspend” it required that there should be added the

words “but not absolutely prohibit it” (Chinese immigration). The further

words were also added, “the limitation or suspension shall be reasonable.”

By such friendly explanations and language was it sought to make clear

what was the intent and scope of the new and amended treaty.

A further incident of this negotiation is proper to be noted. In the American

project of the treaty it was provided that “the words ‘Chinese laborers’ are

herein used to signify all immigrations other than that for teaching, trade,

travel, study, and curiosity.” Such a clause would have excluded from the

United States a large class of Chinese not enumerated, and it was wisely

stricken out and not included in the treaty as accepted.

In transmitting the immigration treaty of 1880, as finally adopted, to the

Secretary of State, the commissioners say:

We are satisfied that in yielding to the request of the United States

they (the Chinese negotiators) have been actuated by a sincere

friendship and an honorable confidence that the large powers as

recognized by them as belonging to the United States, and bearing

directlyupontheirownpeople,willbeexercisedbyour

Government with a wise discretion, in a spirit of reciprocal and

sincerefriendship,andwithentirejustice.(U.S.Foreign

Relations, 1881, pp. 171 –198 .)

It would seem reasonable to expect that in yielding so fully to the wishes of

the United States in this second negotiation, the Chinese Government would

not again be called upon for further concessions in the interest of and at the

demand of the labor unions on the Pacific coast, but such was not the case.

Within a period of less than ten years an urgent application was made by the

Secretary of State for a new treaty amendment so as to enable the Congress

of the United States to still further restrict the privileges of the Chinese

laborers who had come to the United States under the solemn pledge of

treaty guaranties. And when the Chinese Government hesitated to consent

to the withdrawal of rights granted by the United States to the subjects of all

other Governments the Congress of the United States passed the Scott Act

of 1888, in plain violation of the treaty. In order to save the Executive of the

United States from embarrassment, the Chinese Government, contrary to its

own sense of justice and of international comity, for a third time yielded to

the wishes of the United States, and celebrated with it the amended treaty of

1894, which gave to Congress additional power of legislation respecting

Chinese laborers.

How far Congress has complied with the letter and spirit of the treaties and

of the assurances given by the American commissioners who went to Pekin,

may be seen by an examination of the various laws which have been passed

ostensibly to carry out the stipulations of the treaties, and the rulings of the

Departments in the enforcement of these laws. They have been made the

subject of many communications of this legation to you, Mr. Secretary, and

the archives of your Department will show how futile have been the

representations of the Chinese Government.

aI beg to inclose for reference a copy of the treatyof 1868 and also one of

athe treatyof 1880. (See inclosures, Nos. 1 and 2.)II.—HAVE THE LAWS OF CONGRESS WORKED

HARDSHIPS TO THE SUBJECTS OF CHINA?
I have shown that when the Chinese plenipotentiaries were induced to agree

to the exclusion of Chinese laborers from the United States the American

commissioners held out the hope that possibly it might not be exercised at

all, or, at most, under certain limitations and as to specified localities. But

immediately after the treaty went into effect a law was passed making the

exclusion of Chinese laborers complete as to the entire territory of the

United States and without exception.

Let us now examine in some detail whether the assurance given by the

American commissioners who negotiated the treaty of 1880 that the power

to enact laws under the treaty would be “exercised with a wise discretion, in

a spirit of reciprocal and sincere friendship, and with entire justice” has

been realized.

It is an undeniable fact that the treaties of 1880 and 1894 had for their sole

objecttheexclusionofChineselaborers,butthelawsandTreasury

regulations have included in this category classes of skilled artisans and

traders. Restrictions and definitions are thrown around the term “merchant,”

“student,” and others not laborers, which, as I shall show, make it very

difficultfortheseclassestoentertheUnitedStates.TheTreasury

Department,inaccordancewithanopinionofthe Attorney-General,

excludes from the United States all persons who are not expressly described

in Article III of the treaty of 1894. This action I claim to be in direct

opposition to the treaties, to the laws of Congress, and to the whole history

of the events which gave rise to them.

The preamble to the treaty of 1880 shows that it was entered into at the

request of the United States, and the reason therefor is stated to be “because

of the constantly increasing immigration of Chinese laborers.” In the first

article authority is given to the Government of the United States whenever,

in its opinion, “the coming of Chinese laborers * * * affects or threatens to

affect the interests of that country, to regulate, limit, or suspend such

coming or residence;” but it provides that “the limitation * * * shall apply

only to Chinese who may go to the United States as laborers, other classes

being not included in the limitations.” Then follows in the next article the

enumeration, which substantially appears in the treaty of 1894, as to

“officials,teachers,students,merchants,ortravelersforcuriosityor

pleasure.” The treaty of 1894, in its preamble, recites the object of the treaty

of 1880 and gives as the reason for its amendment “the antagonism and

much deprecated and serious disorders to which the presence of Chinese

laborers has given rise.” Thereupon it amends Article I of the treaty of

1880, under which the immigration of Chinese laborers could be suspended,

but not absolutely prohibited, by authorizing their absolute prohibition for

ten years, and it amends Article II as to Chinese laborers, under which they

were “allowed to go and come of their own free will and accord,” by

restricting their return to the United States by the terms set forth in Article

II of the new treaty. A provision not found in the treaty of 1880 is added as

to registration of “Chinese laborers;” but in no other respects is the treaty of

1880 modified or affected by the treaty of 1894, except as already stated

respecting the certificate to be given to Chinese subjects residing in foreign

lands. It repeats in Article III the recital of “officials, teachers, students,

merchants, or travelers for curiosity or pleasure,” but expressly states that

their right of coming to the United States is under the status “at present

enjoyed”—that is, under the treaty of 1880. In the Chinese text of Article II

of the treaty of 1880 and of Article III of 1894 the words “officials,

teachers, students, merchants, or travelers for curiosity or pleasure” are

followed by the words “et cetera,” which clearly shows the intention of the

negotiators and confirms my argument on this point.

Not only does the treaty and all the correspondence leading up to it show

that the intention was to exclude Chinese laborers only, but the various laws

of the Congress of the United States are in absolute confirmation of this

intent. Section 6 of the acts of 1882 and 1884 refers to those who must

produce the required certificate as “every Chinese person other than a

laborer;” the penalty in section 2 of these acts imposed upon vessels only

applied to the bringing of “Chinese laborers;” under the act of May 5, 1892,

registration is only made obligatory as to “Chinese laborers;” and the act of

October 1, 1888, known as the Scott Act, the most drastic legislation ever

passed by Congress, was expressly limited to “Chinese laborers.” Under

these acts it never was held by the United States authorities that admission

of the exempt classes was confined to those only who are recited in Article

II of the treaty of 1880, and the present exclusion can not justly be based

upon the fact of the recital of Article III of the treaty of 1894, for the same

recital appears in the treaty of 1880. The force and effect of the legislation

of Congress is well stated by the Supreme Court of the United States in its

opinion in the case of Wan Shingv. United States (140 U. S., 424–428) as

follows:

The result of the legislation respecting the Chinese would seem to

be this, that no laborers of that race shall hereafter be permitted to

enter the United States, or even to return after having departed

fromthecountry,thoughtheymayhavepreviouslyresided

therein and have left with a view of returning; and that all other

persons of that race, except those connected with the diplomatic

service, must produce a certificate from the authorities of the

Chinese Government, or of such other foreign Governments as

they may at the time be subjects of, showing that they are not

laborers, and have the permission of that Government to enter the

United States, which certificate is to be viséed by a representative

of the Government of the United States.

It thus appears by the declaration of this high tribunal that the only test to be

applied to a Chinese seeking admission into the United States is whether or

not he is a laborer. If the negative shall be established in the manner

prescribed by the laws, to wit, by the production of the proper certificate,

the person must be admitted.

The construction given to the law by the Supreme Court is that which was

followed up to a recent period. The Secretary of the Treasury at that time,

the Hon. John G. Carlisle, in the regulations of 1893, published for the

enforcement of the laws of the United States respecting the Chinese, made

the following declaration for the guidance of the officers of the United

States:

No class of Chinese are prohibited from coming into the United

States or remaining there, except such as may properly and within

the meaning of said statutes be known as “laborers.” (See series 7,

No. 18, U. S. Internal Revenue, 1893, p. 9.)

It is needless for me to say to you that Mr. Carlisle is not only a statesman

intimately acquainted with the spirit and policy of his Government, but that

he is one of the first lawyers of his country. After the treaty of 1894 went

intoeffect—thatis,in1896—newregulationswereissuedfromthe

Department of the Treasury, signed by the Acting Secretary, the Hon.

Charles S. Hamlin, to whose Bureau Chinese matters specially belonged,

and in which the declaration above quoted appears with this additional

statement:

The persons referred to in the acts of Congress to which these

regulations apply, and whose immigration into the United States

is prohibited, are limited to Chinese laborers. (See regulations,

1896, p. 9.)

Thus it will be seen that from the passage of the first exclusion act in 1882

until July 15, 1898, when the opinion of the Attorney-General above

referred to was given, for a period of sixteen years the prohibition to enter

the United States was distinctly confined to Chinese laborers only, other

classes not being included in the prohibition. But under the opinion of the

Attorney-General none but those expressly enumerated in Article III of the

treaty of 1894 are allowed admission into the United States. It is most

unreasonable to suppose that such was the intent of the negotiators. Did

they contemplate the admission of students and the exclusion of scholars,

when there are such in China of the most eminent attainments, professors

and philosophers, worthy to rank with the distinguished savants of America

or Europe? Did they propose to admit merchants, however small their

business, and reject bankers, of whom there are in China many possessed of

millions, and turn away brokers or commercial agents, of whom there are

not a few in China managing the business of the largest commercial houses

and banking companies of Europeans? Was it probable that they should

provide for the admission and residence in the United States of tens of

thousands of Chinese laborers and prohibit the entrance of physicians to

care for them? Would they stipulate for the coming without limit of mere

travelers, however lowly, for curiosity, and refuse the stay of noblemen or

men of high professional standing? To state these questions is to refute

them.

Not only a large class of Chinese of education, high rank, and business

standing have thus been excluded by a simple ruling of the Treasury

Department, but such obstructions and conditions are by the Immigration

Bureau thrown around the admission of those who are recognized as

entitled to enter the United States as in many cases amount to a virtual

nullification of the treaty. That convention expressly stipulates that students,

without qualification, are to be admitted. And yet the Treasury Department

proceeds to neutralize this privilege by a ruling that defines a student to be

“a person (1) who intends to pursue some of the higher branches of study,

or who seeks to be fitted for some particular profession or occupation (2)

for which facilities of study are not afforded in his own country; (3) for

whose support and maintenance in this country, as a student, provision has

been made, and (4) who, upon completion of his studies, expects to return

to China.” (Regulations, 1900, p. 35.) It would sound strange to read in a

dictionary of the English language the only definition of student to be “one

who pursues a super graduate course and is provided in advance with a

competency.” And yet such is the interpretation of the word of the treaties

which is followed by the Immigration Bureau. It will be seen that four

conditions are attached to the admission of a Chinese student into the

United States, not one of which is warranted by the treaty. The effect is that

the doors of American universities and colleges are practically closed to the

Chinese race.

Merchants are among the enumerated classes in the treaties entitled to

admission and residence in the United States, and yet so many restrictions

are applied to their entrance and residence that in many instances they

amount to a violation of the treaty. Merchants and others of the exempt

class are required, under the law, upon reaching the United States to

produce certificates setting forth a series of facts as to their past lives,

occupation, and standing in China. But this certificate, duly viséed, is not

accepted as sufficient evidence of their right to enter. They are subjected to

a most searching examination by the customs officials. At San Francisco,

where most of them arrive, they are lodged in the loft of a wooden house

awaitingthisexamination.Itispracticallyanimprisonment,lasting

sometimes for weeks and even months. They are not allowed to see their

friends. Cases are reported where persons have become sick and no docter

was allowed to see them, and deaths have occurred.

In the examination or inquisition above noted the merchant, student, or

other of the exempt class is compelled to answer a great variety of questions

and to give an account of his past life, and if any of his answers are

inconsistent with the statements in the certificate, or for any other cause

they create suspicion as to their correctness, the applicant is refused

admissionandcompelledtoreturntoChina.Themannerofthese

examinations is reprehensible. Men and women are examined alone, neither

their friends nor a lawyer in their behalf being allowed to be present, and

the interpreter is generally a foreigner. There are so many dialects of the

Chinese language that one interpreter can not understand them all. Hence

misunderstandingsoftenariseandinjusticeisinflicted,whereasifa

competent interpreter, who understood the particular dialect spoken by the

applicant,shouldbeallowedtobepresentmisunderstandingand

consequent injustice would be avoided.

The certificates are required to be in the English language, but they also

appear in duplicate in Chinese. The customs inspectors take advantage of

every technicality to reject them, even when there is no evidence of fraud. It

is made by law the duty of the United States consul at the port of departure

in China “to examine into the truth of the statements set forth in said

certificate,” and to refuse to visé the same if not found correct. Yet if a

certificate duly viséed by the consul is presented with the omission of a

single particular in English, though it may appear in the Chinese text, it is

rejected.

To illustrate the extreme severity with which the officials carry out the law,

I cite one or two recent cases. Last year several merchants came to San

Francisco with a good supply of money and credit to make purchases. They

were provided with the legal certificates viséed by the American consul, but

it appeared that in their certificates some parts of their former career were

not filled up in English, although properly filled up in Chinese. The

objection was raised by the customs authorities that the certificates were

defective. It was contended on their behalf that the law was complied with,

as every detail was mentioned in the certificate, although some of it was

only in Chinese, and it was offered to supply the omission in the English

from the Chinese text, but the authorities would not allow it. The case was

appealed to the Treasury Department, and the decision of the San Francisco

authorities was confirmed. It was of no avail that these merchants had come

10,000 miles, that their certificates were quite sufficient as far as the

Chinese text was concerned, and that the American consul who viséed the

document was at fault in not seeing that all the parts were filled up in the

English text. It was suggested that the merchants be released under bonds

and that their certificates be sent back to China for correction. There was no

suspicion of fraud, yet the suggestion was not heeded, and these merchants

were compelled to return to China. It was afterwards stated that they went

to Europe to purchase their goods.

One more case will be sufficient to illustrate the manner in which the law is

applied. During the present year a boy of 16 years of age, sent by his father,

a merchant of good standing in Shanghai, to this country for the obvious

purpose of finishing his education, and armed with a proper certificate,

applied to the collector of custom, at Malone, N. Y., for admission into the

United States. His application was rejected and he was obliged to return to

China, notwithstanding the assurance given by the Chinese consul at New

York of the bona fide student character and purpose of the boy. The ground

upon which he was denied admission was not because there was any doubt

as to the genuine student character of the boy, but simply because of the

statement found in his certificate, which had been duly viséed by the United

States consul-general at Shanghai, that the boy’s intention of coming to the

United States was “to study the English language.”

Theexaminationabovestatedisnottheonlyinconvenienceofthat

character to which merchants and others are subjected. They are kept in

confinement pending inquiries set on foot by the customs inspectors. These

inquiries are often made in a surreptitious manner; the applicants for

admission are not afforded an opportunity to confront those who give

damaging information against them or to rebut their statements. The report

of the inspector is decisive as to their admission or deportation to China,

and their only remedy is an appeal to the Secretary of the Treasury in

Washington, which is virtually to the Commissioner of Immigration. The

report of the inspector is ex parte, and the applicant can only support his

appeal by ex parte affidavits, as no judicial hearing or orderly examination

by counsel is allowed. The Treasury officials on appeal, however fair-

minded they are, have no opportunity of hearing witnesses or taking fresh

evidence, and usually disregard the affidavits and accept the report of the

inspector. Would it be inappropriate for me to say that such a proceeding

seems like a travesty of justice?

To send a Chinese back upon his arrival in this country is a great hardship,

especially when it is based upon technicalities often without merit. It means

to him loss of business, of money, and of time, as well as blighted hopes.

The result is sometimes fatal.

There are other hardships suffered by Chinese subjects seeking admission to

the United States, which are not so much the result of injustice on the part

of officials as the laws and regulations adopted ostensibly to enforce the

treaties. As already mentioned, the law of Congress requires of merchants

and others coming to the United States a certificate authenticated by the

United States consul at the port or place of departure. At many places in

China whence they depart there is no American consul. Most of the Chinese

go to Hongkong to ship for this country. It is impossible to obtain there the

required certificate, it being a British port, and they not being residents of

that place. It has been held by the Treasury Department that Chinese

coming from a foreign port must procure the certificate of the authorities of

that port, and that the certificate of the Chinese consul there is not

sufficient. In most instances it is not possible for the authorities of the

foreign port to make out the certificate giving the facts required by the law.

The only -person who could do so is the Chinese consul, and under the

construction given to the law by the Treasury Department this officer is not

permitted to give the certificate, and the Chinese seeking to come to the

United States from such foreign ports suffer great inconvenience.

I have thus far referred to the hardships suffered by the Chinese merchants

and others in securing the admission to the United States which they are

guaranteed by the treaties. But after they have overcome these obstructions

thrown in their way by the customs officials, they are constantly liable to

annoyances and hardships while resident in the United States at the hands

of these officials. To some of these I beg to call your attention. Chinese

residing in the United States are often annoyed and harassed by overzealous

inspectors and United States marshals, who, without a word of warning,

surround a community of Chinese, herd them together, and demand the

immediate production of their registration certificates or other proofs of

their right to remain in the country; and if no such evidence is found on

their persons they are placed in confinement until a tedious process of

investigation is gone through and their right to remain in the United States

is proved to the entire satisfaction of the inspector or other officer of the

law, as the case may be. Even merchants well known locally in the city or

town they reside in are not exempt from this mode of inquisition, to the

detriment of their business and annoyance personally.

One of the glaring incidents of the kind was that of Hong Sling, a merchant

of Chicago, who, while visiting Decatur, Ill., last year, was pounced upon

by a United States officer and challenged to show proof of his right to be in

the country. He gave his name, place and character of his business, and

other evidence of his character as a merchant, including a letter signed by

the Hon. Mr. Gage, Secretary of the Treasury, certifying to his standing as a

merchant personally known to him. But the officer was not satisfied, and

threatenedimmediatearrestunlessalegalcertificatewasproduced,

although the law required the registration of laborers only and made

registration of merchants voluntary on their part. After thorough search of

his own baggage, Hong Sling finally succeeded in finding his certificate,

which he happened to have taken along with him. Then kicking him and

abusing him, the officer permitted him to go on his way, greatly humiliated

in the presence of a large crowd that had gathered around him.

Chinese lawfully residing in this country can not pass over the boundary

without getting proper papers by filing an application one month prior to

their departure. Some Chinese, not knowing this regulation, have been

caused hardships. Inconvenience is caused when a Chinese is suddenly

calledawayfromtheUnitedStates.Instanceshaveoccurredwhere

Americans taking Chinese servants with them out of the United States, and

not having time to file application as required, have not been permitted to

bring their servants back on their return.

Merchants doing a large business for many years in this country and

desirous of sending for members of their families in China can not do so

unless they themselves return to China to get the necessary certificate.

Neither the Chinese minister nor a Chinese consul is permitted to issue the

certificates. This also works great hardships to many Chinese in this

country.

Registered Chinese laborers when they go back to China on a visit are

obliged, unless the time is extended, to return within a year. In case they

want the time extended, they have to send their papers back to this country

to be certified by the Chinese consul at the port of departure. The papers are

often lost on the way, and there does not seem to be any way of replacing

them. In any case, it is a tedious proceeding and liable to vexatious delays.

Chinese merchants, who have a settled business in this country, are often

denied landing upon their return from a visit to China or elsewhere on the

least pretext. Consequently their business has to suffer, in addition to the

heavy expense they are put to in appealing their cases.

The foregoing somewhat tedious statement of the hardships suffered by the

Chinese who seek admission to and residence in the United States, because

of the laws of Congress and the regulations of the Treasury Department,

might be enlarged did it seem necessary. But I think the cases cited are

sufficient to demonstrate that the spirit and intent of the treaties are being

defeated. It further shows, I am sorry to say, that the officials of the

Government of the United States, to whom is intrusted the enforcement of

the laws, treat the Chinese, not as subjects of a friendly power lawfully

seeking the benefit of treaty privileges, but as suspected criminals, and that

merchants, students, and others clearly entitled to residence in the country

do not receive the courtesy and consideration due them, but are looked upon

as offenders and suspects, and treated as such. It is not becoming in me to

laud the merits of my own people or to claim for them undue consideration.

I may, however, without impropriety, recall the language of the President of

the United States, who properly interpreted the spirit and desires of my

Government, when Congress at an earlier period sought to legislate in an

unfriendly manner. He said:

This ancient Government, ruling a polite and sensitive people,

distinguished by a high sense of national pride, may properly

desire an adjustment of their relations with us which would in all

things confirm, and in no degree endanger, the permanent peace

and amity and the growing commerce and prosperity which it has

been the object and the effect of our existing treaties to cherish

and perpetuate. (Message of President Hayes, March 1, 1879.)
.

Havingdiscussedthediplomatichistoryofthetreatiesandlawsof

Congress, and examined how far and in what manner these laws work

hardships to the Chinese, I come now to consider the question whether they

have proved to be for the best interest of the United States in an economic

aspect.

If the present laws have worked for the best interest of the United States,

this fact would furnish a very strong reason for their permanent retention

upon the statute books. If they have not worked for the interest of the

United States, then it must be admitted that a change is not only desirable

but absolutely necessary. It is not the desire of the Chinese Government in

making this communication to enter into any argument concerning this

matter, but the sole purpose is to furnish in as succinct a form as possible

some of the facts upon which the Chinese Government bases its belief that

the laws in question have worked injury to both countries.

A brief history of the events which led up to the troubles culminating in the

exclusion of Chinese laborers from the United States may be of value in

understanding this question.

In 1844 five ports in the Chinese Empire were opened to American

commerce under a treaty negotiated by Caleb Gushing. The commerce of

the United States with the ports of China grew rapidly. As already stated, in

1868 the Burlingame treaty was entered into and ratified by both countries,

under the terms of which the right of Chinese to immigrate to the United

States was admitted, and the promise was made that the subjects of China

should enjoy the same privileges, exemptions, and immunities respecting

travel and residence as the subjects of the most favored nation. At that time

the Pacific railroads were being built across the western part of the United

States, and other large enterprises were projected on the Pacific coast.

Labor on the Pacific coast was very scarce, and in frequent instances day

laborers received higher wages than were paid to skilled artisans in the

eastern part of the United States. There was then no alien contract-labor law

on the statute books of the United States, and the railroad companies sent

their agents to Canton and contracted for many thousands of Chinese.

This influx of Chinese labor naturally attracted a great deal of attention in

certain quarters. The labor agitators feared that the scarcity of labor from

which the far West had suffered would be at an end, and that wages would

be reduced. The attention of Congress was called to the Chinese question,

and instead of passing an alien contract-labor law, as was done later, that

body attempted the restriction of Chinese immigration. A bill was passed

restricting the immigration of Chinese and was vetoed by President Hayes;

the veto being accompanied by a message so convincing that I take the

aliberty of attaching a copyof it and request your honorable Government to

give it the consideration which is its due. (See inclosure No. 3.) The

excitement in the West had been taken advantage of by what were known as

“sand-lot” politicians, led by Dennis Kearney. These men, it will be

remembered, precipitated riots in which a number of Chinese were killed. A

careful examination of the records in the State Department will not disclose

a single instance in which the Chinese were the aggressors. The Pacific

coast States, I am informed, were very evenly divided politically at that

time, and both of the great political parties were forced to declare against

the Chinese. For no party without taking such a stand could have won the

support of those who then held the balance of power in California and

Oregon.Itisnottobewonderedat,therefore,thatCongressagain

attempted to settle this question by the exclusion of Chinese laborers. They

passed such a bill. It was vetoed by President Arthur by the special message

of April 4, 1882, which reviews the history of Chinese immigration and the

arestrictions sought to be placed upon it. A copyof this message is attached

hereto, to which attention is directed. (See inclosure No. 4.) This Congress

shortly afterwards passed a bill restricting Chinese immigration, which

became a law. It was not so stringent as subsequent legislation, but it was an

opening wedge for the Scott law of 1888, followed by the Geary law of

1892. In 1894 the last treaty concerning this subject was entered into, and

was considered by the Chinese Government as a somewhat favorable

amodification of the Geary law. A copyof this treaty is likewise attached

hereto. (See inclosure No. 5.) The arguments against the admission of

Chinese to the United States are well known and can be very briefly stated;

it is claimed that the Chinese will work for less wages than the American

workman;itisclaimedthatthepopulationofChinaconsistingof

400,000,000 people would, if immigration were unrestricted, overrun the

United States and destroy its institutions; it is claimed that the Chinese do

not come with the intention of becoming citizens, but return to China as

soon as they acquire sufficient means to establish themselves in the country

of their nativity; and it is claimed that their standard of living is so low that

they consume practically nothing and add but little to the purchasing

element of the community.

There has now been a period of nineteen years of partial and total exclusion

of Chinese laborers. Of this there have been thirteen years of total exclusion

and six years of partial exclusion, preceded by a period of unlimited

admission of the subjects of the Chinese Empire. It is an easy matter to

trace the comparative effect of unlimited immigration, partial exclusion,

and total exclusion.

I will first take the question of labor. The rates of wages for the different

periods are taken from the Fifteenth Annual Report of the Commissioner of

LaboroftheUnitedStates. Theaveragerateofwagesforlaborin

California in 1870, with unrestricted Chinese immigration, was $2 per day.

It remained stationary at this rate until 1884 when, under partial restriction

of Chinese immigration, it was raised to $2.31 per day. Immediately upon

the passage of the act of 1884 the average wages dropped to $1.70. In 1893,

the first year after the passage of the Geary law, the average wages in

California for laborers was $1.73 per day. After the passage of the Geary

law wages for labor in California steadily declined until in 1898 the average

was only $1.59 per day. These figures are official and prove conclusively

that the exclusion of Chinese has not had the effect of raising wages where

Chinese labor is employed.

The fact is that Chinese labor does not compete and never has competed

with American labor, but supplements American labor and is of advantage

to it. It is not difficult to explain why this is so. The Chinese are not skilled

in the lines of industry in which wages are highest in the United States.

They are skilled in those lines of labor in which the United States is

deficient. They are agriculturists and thoroughly familar with agricultural

productswhichtheDepartmentofAgriculturehasbysuccessful

experiments demonstrated are easily grown within the United States. The

successful tea garden in South Carolina would be only one garden out of

thousands instead of an isolated curiosity, if the Chinese immigration law

should be expunged from the statute books. The successful silk farms in

Louisiana and California would no longer be unique, and the United States

would become an exporter of raw silk. The present development of the rice

industry in the States of Louisiana and Texas would be but a start toward

thereclamationoftheswamplandsoftheUnitedStates,andthe

possibilities in this direction could scarcely be estimated beforehand. The

reports of the Land Commissioner of the United States show that less than

one-half of the area of the United States is now under cultivation. In the line

of agriculture alone more Chinese could be used in the United States than

would emigrate to this country in a century. The rate of wages paid to

Chinese laborers would be paid according to the value of the productions as

is now paid to American labor, and as the Chinese people are not skilled in

the industrial lines prominent in the United States and are not adapted to

those employments they would enter into competition with no American

labor but would organize for themselves new lines of labor and new

occupations according to their training in the country of their nativity. They

came to the United States when the laundry business was not only in its

infancy but practically unknown. They made it a great industry, not only for

themselvesbutforAmericans.Thecut-ratelaundriesareAmerican

laundries. In no city are the cheapest rates to be found in the Chinese

laundries. The same may be said of domestic service.

It is claimed that the population of China consists of 400,000,000 people. It

is very doubtful whether this is a correct estimate, as no accurate census has

ever been taken of the population of China. A reference to the reports of the

consulsoftheUnitedStatesholdingofficialpostsinChinaandof

immigration statistics will show that all the immigration into the United

States from China has come from the single province of Kwangtung

(Canton), which has a population of about 25,000,000; of this population

only about 5,000,000 live in those districts which solely supply Chinese

immigrants. The reason for this is to be found in the character of the

Chinese. The Chinese is averse to travel and not inclined to emigrate from

China. This is shown by the fact that while every country in Europe has

thrown its doors open to Chinese immigration, it is very rare that a Chinese

is found in any of the European countries. The wages in those countries are

very much higher than the wages in China, and there is no barrier whatever

to prevent the Chinese from going to Europe, but they do not go. The reason

they come to the United States is that they have friends and relatives in this

country, and are therefore sure of assistance in making a start in the New

World. Even the desire to come is not so extensive as might be expected, as

is shown by the census periods. In 1860 there were 34,933 Chinese in the

United States; in 1870 there were 63,249; in 1880 there were 105,465; in

1890 there were 107,488; and in 1900, 89,863. It will be seen that at the

timeoftheprohibitionoftheimmigrationofChinesetheChinese

population had not increased as rapidly as the American population. Instead

of having more Chinese in proportion there were not as many. In the entire

ten years from 1880 to 1890 the Chinese population of the United States

increased by only 2,023. In the last ten years, ending with 1900, the Chinese

population had decreased by 17,625. These facts and figures should at once

put a stop to the fallacious though popular argument that this country would

be in imminent danger of being overrun with millions upon millions of

Chinese should the bars of exclusion be let down.

The next objection, that the Chinese do not acquire citizenship, is a peculiar

one. They are not allowed by the laws privileges accorded to the people of

other countries of becoming naturalized. If they were accorded the same

privileges as other people, many of them would become citizens; but if they

should not it would not be against the interests of the United States. It is a

matter of notoriety that the Swedes and Norwegians have settled in certain

communities and there obtained control of local politics. The same is true of

the people of other countries. It is certainly not very desirable that a foreign

element should have control of American politics, and that is the main

effect of naturalization. The fact that the Chinese do not seek to interfere

with the internal affairs of the country of their residence ought to count in

their favor.

In 1890, which was the year in which a census was taken nearest the year

when the Chinese were excluded, the census reports show that out of

82,329 prisoners in the United States only 407 were Chinese. And out of

73,045 paupers in almshouses in the United States only 13 were Chinese.

An analysis of the offenses for which the Chinese were convicted shows

that they were practically all of a petty nature. The Chinese by the census of

1890showthesmallestpercentageofcriminalsandpaupersofany

nationality within the United States.

The objection that the standard of living of the Chinese is lower than that of

the Americans can not now be sustained. The Chinese, owing to the

overcrowded condition of their country, have in times past lived very

cheaply. But should a commission examine into the facts it could be proved

thatcontactwithothermoreextravagantcountrieshasverygreatly

modified the habits of the Chinese in this particular and has led them to

acquire many new wants. This largely accounts for the great increase in the

Chinese trade. If the Chinese did not want anything more than he did a

hundred years ago he would not buy any more, but the statistics show that

his purchases are increasing more rapidly than those of the inhabitants of

any other country. An inquiry directed to the leading houses of cities in

which Chinese reside will develop the fact that the Chinese use as many and

as expensive articles of food and clothing in proportion to their means as

the people of any other nation. It is true that a Chinese who makes little will

spend but little, in order to prevent the necessity of having to apply to

charitable organizations for subsistence. But, after all, a Chinese is not

unlike other people in the matter of spending money. It is safe to say that

the more he makes the more he spends. I am sorry to say that there are

thousands of Chinese in California who have worked hard for years in this

country and yet have not been able to save money.

The Chinese Government does not believe that there would be any great

immigration from China to the United States should all restrictions be

removed. The principal objection to the exclusion law is that it seriously

affects the commercial relations between the two countries. The American

people took a prominent part in opening up to the world the immense

foreign trade of China. The first American vessel that appeared in Chinese

ports was in 1874, and the trade with the United States far outstripped that

with any other nation except England until those troubles on the Pacific

slope brought about a reaction in China. The Chinese people felt that they

had been wronged by having restrictions placed upon them which were not

enforced against any other people. I beg to append a tablefurnished by the

Bureau of Statistics showing the exports from San Francisco to China

during the past thirty years, which bears out my statement. (See inclosure

No. 6.) The history of this commerce as shown by this table is practically a

history of the agitation against the Chinese upon the Pacific coast. In 1872,

before the agitation, the exports amounted to upward of $7,000,000. The

agitation commenced, and in 1876 the exports fell to $126,000. As soon as

President Hayes vetoed the first anti-Chinese bill the exports increased to

over $9,000,000. Another bill was introduced, and the exports fell to

$185,000. The year after the Geary law was passed the exports were

$123,000. Owing to the just attitude lately assumed by the United States

Government in China, and the rumor that the exclusion law which is about

to expire would not be reenacted, a better feeling has prevailed, and the

exports have again increased to over $2,000,000. Had the exports averaged

as they did in 1879, they would have been $200,000,000 more than they

have been from the single port of San Francisco.

TheBureauofStatisticsinitsreportforDecember,1899,usesthe

following language:

The more rapid development of the privileges of foreigners in

China and the introduction of modern commercial methods dates

from the treaty of Shimonoseki, made between China and Japan

in 1895, at the close of the war between those nations, and

followed by a commercial treaty in 1896. The important features

of these treaties were that they opened the waters of the principal

rivers and canals to citizens of other nations, giving foreigners the

right to purchase goods or produce in the interior of China, to rent

warehouses without the payment of special taxes or exactions,

and to engage freely in all kinds of manufacturing industries in

the treaty ports; also to import all kinds of machinery, paying only

thestipulatedimportdutiesthereon,anduponproducts

manufactured by them in China paying only such inland transit

dues as are leviable on imported merchandise (the latter provision

having been somewhat modified, however, by the commercial

treaty). While the China-Japan treaty specially conferred these

privilegesonlyonJapanesesubjects,theyatoncebecame

applicable to the subjects of other nations having full treaty

relations with China under the “most favored nation” principle.

The prompt result of this was a movement from all parts of the

business world in the direction of China and the establishment of

business and manufacturing industries not only in the old treaty

ports, but in the new ones which were opened by the Japanese

treaty and by subsequent action of the Chinese Government. This

was followed by other evidences of a disposition to adopt modern

methods.TherailroadfromPekintoTientsinwasquickly

completed by the Chinese Government and agreements made

looking to the construction by foreign capital of other lines

thousands of miles in length; telegraphs were extended; electric

roads, electric lights, and telephones introduced in the principal

cities; mining and manufacturing concessions freely granted; the

WestRiver,whichpenetratessouthernChinafromCanton

westward, was opened to commerce, and, finally, small steamers

under foreign control were given permission to penetrate to the

interior limits of navigation on all the rivers of the provinces

containing treaty ports. The effect of this is already seen in the

establishment of factories and business houses, the construction

of railroads, the extension and multiplication of steam navigation

lines, and the opening of mines in the great sections where the

coal and iron deposits are said to be the largest in the known

world.

This is a true description of the progress now in China, and it will be seen

that with the statistics showing that the United States was not overrun with

Chinese labor before this period of progress, this country could not now be

overrun when the demand for labor in China itself has so vastly increased.

On account of the exclusion act, the American people are not securing the

share they would otherwise have in the profits of this period of Chinese

progress. It is natural that China should buy of the country to which it sells.

Instead of that, it sells the most to the United States, and although it favors

American goods above those of any other country, it largely buys from

England. The imports of merchandise from England into China increased

from 14,952,000 taels in 1878 to 33,960,000 in 1895. Those of the United

States increased from 2,253,000 to 5,093,000. The imports from the United

States show a falling off from 9,263,000 taels to 5,093,000 the year that the

Geary law was put in operation. The exports to the United Kingdom had

fallen off from 38,689,000 taels in 1872 to 12,945,000 in 1897, while the

exportstotheUnitedStatesincreasedfrom11,943,000in1872to

17,828,000 in 1897. China continued to sell her goods to the United States,

but greatly decreased the proportion of the goods bought from the United

States. The reports of the United States consuls officially residing in China

areuniformthat Americangoodsarepreferred,butgoodsarebeing

purchased from England. The percentage of the exports to China secured by

the United States has greatly decreased during this period of activity in

Chinese trade. The total trade of the United States has increased somewhat,

but it does not bear as large a proportion as it formerly did. This is a

condition which must give concern to both countries, and one which would

seem to create the necessity for a commission to examine thoroughly into

the entire question of Chinese commerce with the United States and the

immigration of the Chinese people.

The diplomatic relations between the two countries are, greatly to the

satisfaction of the Chinese Empire, most cordial, and afford an unusual

opportunity for the Government of the United States to correct the false

apprehensions of its people and allay their prejudices, and the Chinese

Government to put an end to whatever prejudice may exist upon the part of

the Chinese people against the United States. It is the wish of both

Governments that these commercial questions should be settled in a manner

which will promote the prosperity of both nations and bring about a friendly

questions are intimately connected with the treatment of the Chinese who

seek to enter the United States under the guaranty of treaty, and that the

former can not be satisfactorily developed and maintained without a fair

and honorable adjustment of the subject of immigration.
IV.—SHOULD THE EXCLUSION LAWS BE REENACTED, AND IF SO, TO WHAT EXTENT OF TERRITORY SHOULD THEY BE APPLIED, AND WHAT

MODIFICATIONS ARE CALLED FOR BY EXPERIENCE IN THEIR ENFORCEMENT.
The review of the diplomatic history which I have made makes it clear, I

think, that the Chinese negotiators of the treaty of 1880 did not contemplate

a permanent exclusion of Chinese laborers from the United States, and the

Americancommissionersheldoutthehopethatitwouldonlybea

temporary measure and not general in its application. Certain it is that if it

had been proposed or intimated that the exclusion would continue for

twenty years, the Cainese Government never would have agreed to the

treaty. It is also quite certain that if the present laws shall be reenacted, the

two Governments can not have the cordial and harmonious intercourse

which should be maintained, neither can the commercial relations be as

extensive, as intimate, and as profitable as the economic conditions of the

two countries demand and justify. Can the Government of the United States

afford to pay the high price which it will cost to maintain laws which, I

think, I have shown are contrary to the spirit and intent of the treaties, to the

recognized principles of jurisprudence, and to the spirit of amity and fair

dealing which should control the conduct of nations? I feel confident that if

thehonorableCongressoftheUnitedStateswillcauseathorough

investigation of this important subject to be made, uncontrolled by the

unthinking clamor of selfish interests, it will find a better way to conserve

the interests of this great country than by the reenactment of the Chinese

exclusion laws as they now exist and are enforced.
THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS.

When the American commissioners were in Pekin negotiating the treaty of

1880 and asking that power might be conferred upon the Congress of the

United States to limit or suspend the immigration of Chinese, they were

asked by the Chinese negotiators if they could “give them any idea of the

laws which would be passed to carry such power into execution.” The

American commissioners, among other written assurances, said: “If there

were sections of the country where such immigration was clearly beneficial,

then the legislation of the United States under this power would be adapted

to such circumstances. For example, there might be a demand for Chinese

labor in the South and a surplus of such labor in California, and Congress

might legislate in accordance with these facts. In general the legislation

would be in view of and depend upon the circumstances at the moment such

legislation became necessary.”

Since that carefully worded assurance was given the Hawaiian Islands have

been annexed to the United States. It has been the policy of the controlling

interests and the practice of the past governments of those islands to admit

Chinese subjects into those islands under reasonable conditions. At the time

of the annexation there were residing there approximately 20,000 Chinese.

The official statistics show that a large number of the Chinese population

had been born in the islands, and that a considerable number of them have

become lawfully naturalized citizens of Hawaii. They also show that many

of them have become holders of real estate; that they outnumber all other

nationalities, native or foreign, as merchants and traders, and that in three of

the leading branches of trade, as shown by the official licenses issued, they

exceed all other nationalities. In social life, also, their position is worthy of

consideration, as it will be seen that of the Chinese population over 6 years

of age 48.47 per cent are able to read and write English or Hawaiian. Of

Chinese children over 6 years 92 per cent attend school, and many of them

have been educated in the government colleges and higher institutions of

instruction. They are prominent in Christian churches and in aiding in the

support of hospitals and other charitable institutions. They freely intermarry

with the native population. They are recognized as industrious, temperate,

and law-abiding and as important factors in various social movements.

The reason which brought about the immigration treaty of 1880 between

China and the United States, the treaty of 1894, and the legislation based on

those treaties which exclude Chinese laborers from the United States does

not apply to the Hawaiian Islands. In the States it is alleged that Chinese

labor comes in competition with white labor to the detriment of the latter,

and that it is contrary to their interests to admit the Chinese; but exactly the

reverse is the case in the Hawaiian Islands, as they come into competition

with neither white nor native labor, and have been and are regarded there as

a desirable element of the population.

That such is the case we have the authority of the present government of

these islands. The territorial governor in his annual report to the Secretary

of the Interior, just made, in speaking of the employment of large numbers

of Chinese upon the plantations, says:

It may safely be said that such action never has, does not now,

and never will interfere with either American skilled or unskilled

labor. * * * It has been demonstrated beyond a doubt that the

unskilled labor upon the plantations must be furnished by other

than Americans. This would be true even if the large estates were

divided into small holdings. It is simply a physical impossibility

for the Anglo-Saxon satisfactorily to perform the severe labor

required in the sugar fields. This being true, Hawaii is entitled to

legislation favorable to its greatest prosperity,

which he shows can best be secured by the admission of Chinese under

reasonable restrictions. (See Report, August 28, 1901, p. 63.) Do not the

Hawaiian Islands present the exact conditions foreshadowed by the

American commissioners at Pekin in 1880, and is not the Congress thereby

pledged to permit the admission of Chinese laborers into those islands

under the reasonable regulations indicated by the governor of the Territory?
THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS.
By the fortunes of war these islands came into the possession of the United

States. Previous to that event and for centuries very intimate and important

relations had existed between them and China owing to their contiguity and

the favorable trade and industrial conditions. The commercial intercourse

between the cities of southern China and these islands has been and is now

very extensive, and the Chinese population resident there is very large,

engaged in every walk of life. There are innumerable artisans, farmers,

traders, merchants, bankers, and persons of large wealth—in fact, business

men of every legitimate character. Many of these are native born, of which

a considerable portion are the offspring of marriage with the Philippine

races, and the manners, customs, and characteristics of the people of the

islands are so much in harmony with those of the Chinese that the latter for

ages have met with a hearty welcome and have fraternized readily with

them. During this long period and up to a recent date there have existed free

immigration and unrestricted commerce.

NotwithstandingthefactthatthePresidentoftheUnitedStateshad

repeatedly stated that it was not his intention to change the existing

conditions in the territory acquired from Spain, further than was necessary

to restore and preserve order, and that the whole subject of their future

relations would be left to Congress for determination, within a few months

afterpeacewasdeclaredthemilitarycommanderofthePhilippines,

General Otis, issued an order extending to these islands the Chinese

exclusion laws of the United States. By the decree of this officer, without

previous authorization of the President or the Secretary of War, and without

antecedent notice, this extreme and harsh measure was enforced against the

Chinese subjects. And the same still remains in force, notwithstanding the

earnest protests and remonstrances of the Chinese Government.

It is respectfully submitted that this measure was, in its inception and now

law. When the treaties of 1880 and 1894 were negotiated the Philippine

Islands were a part of the dominions of Spain. Those treaties were framed

with a view to the peculiar condition of the labor question in the United

States, and the Chinese Government reluctantly yielded to the earnest

representations of the commissioners of the United States that they were

necessary to allay the apprehensions of the white laborers in this country.

Only as a matter of comity, and to gratify your Government on that point,

did the Chinese Government consent to the treaties. They can not be applied

to other territory in another and widely separated part of the globe, where

an altogether different condition of labor exists, without the consent of the

Chinese Government. To do so would seem to be a breach of good faith as

wellasofinternationallaw,andIfeelpersuadedthat,uponafull

consideration of the subject, neither the President nor the Congress will

continue that military order in force by its reenactment in legislation.

It is hardly necessary to assert that under no state of circumstances could

the Chinese Government have been persuaded to sign a convention which

could be interpreted to authorize the exclusion of Chinese subjects from the

Philippine Islands, where they had found a welcome and a home, and with

which islands as their nearest neighbors its people for centuries had carried

on an extensive and profitable commerce. And it is worthy of consideration

by the President, who is so justly distinguished for his high standard of

right, and by the Congress of a great and enlightened nation, to inquire

whether the Chinese, who have lived in and traded with those islands for

centuries before the United States had an existence even as colonies of

Great Britain, have not acquired vested rights of which they ought not to be

deprived even by the legislation of Congress, much less by the mere order

of a military commander. Attention is called to the fact that for nearly forty

yearsunrestrictedcommercewiththePhilippineIslandshasbeen

guaranteed to the Chinese under the stipulation of article 47 of the treaty of

commercebetweenSpainandtheChineseGovernment.Underthe

protection of this treaty a large commerce had been established, and it can

hardly be regarded as an act of comity toward China to destroy the

commercebuiltupunderthesolemnguaranteesoftheSpanish

Government. The order of the military commander, or kindred legislation if

enacted, means the destruction or impairment of a large and lucrative trade

to and from the seaports of China. It means the cutting off of many

thousands and tens of thousands of Chinese and mestizos from their

kinsmeninChina.Itmeansaradicalchangeintheindustriesand

occupations of these people, and great hardships and impoverishment in

many cases. Certainly before an intelligent and right-minded body of

legislators shall take such a course they will carefully examine the situation

of affairs.

What has been the influence of the Chinese in the past centuries and what is

it to-day in the Philippines? I must not weary you, as I might, with long

citations from recognized authorities in the past and present. I cite only

three from many travelers and officials who testify that the Chinese have

largely contributed to the prosperity of these islands. Dr. Antonio Morga, in

his work on the Philippines, written in the sixteenth century, says of Manila:

It is true the town can not exist without the Chinese, as they are

workers in all trades and business, and are very industrious.

Juan de la Concepcion, a writer and traveler in the seventeenth century,

sums up the situation as follows:

Without the trade and commerce of the Chinese these dominions

could not have subsisted.

The testimony of writers of the present day might be reproduced in great

number, but it will probably suffice to cite the official report of the nearest

commercial representative of the United States, Consul-General Wildman,

of Hongkong, who was on duty throughout the Spanish war and the

subsequent insurrection, and, no doubt, was well informed on the subject of

which he wrote. In his report to the Secretary of State of November 22,

1898, a short time after the promulgation of the Otis order, he wrote:

Broadlyspeaking,thereisnotanindustryintheislands

(Philippines) that will not be ruined if Chinese labor is not

permitted.

And in a report the following year, speaking of the possibility of competing

at Manila with the extensive manufactories at Hongkong, he says it “would

only be possible if Chinese labor were admitted freely.” (Consular Reports,

November, 1899, p. 421.) The unwisdom of the Otis order is demonstrated

by the situation of affairs in the possessions of other nations in the same

quarter of the world. The British are reputed to be the most successful in

governing colonies, and are usually controlled in their conduct by the best

interests of the people over whom they exercise government. In the nearby

colony of Hongkong, in the Straits Settlements, and in the Malay Peninsula

the British Government welcomes and encourages the immigration of

Chinese and admits them to all the rights of citizenship. The result is that

Hongkong, Singapore, Penang, and Malakka are in a nourishing condition

and peace and contentment prevail. If Congress should, before taking

action, send a commission to the Philippines and to the British, French, and

other colonies in the Far East, I have no doubt such a report would be made

aswouldleadtothereestablishmentofChineseimmigrationinthe

Philippines.

Why should the Chinese be excluded from the Philippines, when free

entrance is granted to all the other races of the East? While the immigration

of the Japanese, the Siamese, the Malay, the Singalese, and the Hindoo

coolies is properly permitted, is it a just and fair discrimination to exclude

the Chinese?

Since the acquisition of the Philippines by the United States it has been

correctly stated in this country that their possession would constitute a

convenient base of operations for the extension and maintenance of a large

commerce between China and the United States. When, by the fortunes of

war, these islands were brought into the American union, my Government

saw in this proximity an additional reason why the friendly relations which

had so long existed between the two nations should become more intimate

and harmonious. And it welcomes your efforts with the other great powers

to maintain an open door to the commerce of the Chinese Empire. But how

can these expectations be realized if the Congress of your country shall

ratify the action of the authorities in the Philippines in cutting off access of

the Chinese to the islands with which for ages they have maintained

intercourse, and in destroying the commerce of important cities with them?

From what I have above stated, it will be seen that the treaties of 1880 and

1894, which relate to the immigration of Chinese solely to the then existing

territory of the United States, do not include the Hawaiian Islands or the

Philippine Archipelago within their purview. I am aware that the honorable

Congress of the United States has full power to legislate for these newly

acquired possessions. Before the enactment of the present exclusion laws,

the United States Government deemed it necessary to send a special

commission to China to negotiate a convention for the modification of the

existingtreatiesbetweenthetwocountries,whichwasconcludedin

November, 1880. This clearly shows the desirability of consulting the

wishes of both Governments in a matter that affects their mutual relations.

In view of the vast interests involved and the commercial and friendly

relations between China and the United States, I earnestly hope that no

hasty step will be taken looking to the reenactment of the exclusion laws, in

deference to clamor from any quarter, until every effort has been made to

obtain a broad and comprehensive view of the question.

It will be seen also from what has been said that the Imperial Government

of China does not consider the reenactment of the exclusion laws by the

American Congress necessary. But if the honorable Congress should, after

proper investigation, still hold to the opinion that the demands of national

policy require the retention of some such measure on the statute books, I

beg to point out a course which is not open to so many serious objections

and which leads to the same results. Why can not the general immigration

laws of the United States be so modified and broadened in their scope as to

include the immigration of Chinese in their provisions? Why can not the

test be made such as to exclude the undesirable elements of all countries

from the American shores irrespective of race or nationality? If such a

course should be followed it would serve the purpose as effectively as the

most drastic law could do. In that case there would be no invidious

discrimination so long as the law were made applicable, without distinction,

to Europeans, Asiatics, and Africans alike. The most objectionable feature

of the present exclusion laws is that they single out the Chinese people

alone for unjust exclusion.

I regret that the importance of the question and the urgency of the situation

have made it necessary that I should ask so much of your valuable time, and

that I should dwell at so great a length upon the topic in hand. From what I

have said you will have noticed that, appealing to the provisions of Article

IV of the treaty of 1880, already cited, I think it proper and incumbent upon

Congress, before acting upon the question of new legislation, to examine

with care into the hardships suffered by the Chinese subjects, and that this

examination can best be made by a commission, who will visit the localities

in the United States where the Chinese most largely congregate, and the

Hawaiian and Philippine Islands, and by a personal investigation ascertain

how the present laws and regulations affect the Chinese and how their

exclusion affects the localities in question. I think such an investigation is

due from Congress, in view of the treaty stipulations, of the desire of the

Imperial Chinese Government, and of the great interests involved. I trust,

therefore, that the President of the United States may see proper to send this

propositionforacommissiontoCongresswithhisfavorable

recommendation.

If such a commission is appointed, I should hope that their report would

satisfy Congress that further exclusion of Chinese from the United States is

unnecessary; but if that should not occur, it ought to make plain to Congress

that the present laws are in violation of justice and humanity, inflict on the

Chinese unnecessary hardships and indignities, that they are not in harmony

with the treaties, that they work injury to the interests of both countries, and

should be materially modified.

I entertain the further hope that the investigation will lead to the conclusion

that the Hawaiian Islands and the Philippine Archipelago stand on an

entirely different footing and should be open to the ingress and egress of

Chinese in common with other Asiatics who may resort there for purposes

of labor, trade, travel, or residence.

I beg to add that I have by no means exhausted the subject. But this paper is

already too long, and I feel that I ought not to exhaust your patience. In

case, however, the commission should be appointed, as I have suggested, to

inquire into the wording of the Chinese exclusion laws I shall be pleased to

furnish to the commission further information bearing upon the subject.

In conclusion, I venture to express the belief that the honorable Congress of

the United States will deal with the important question at hand in a spirit of

fairness and equity and accord to Chinese subjects who wish to come to the

United States for all legitimate purposes the same treatment as is accorded

tothepeopleofothercountriesanddemandedandsecuredbythis

Government for American citizens in China—an open door and a fair field.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.

[Document 86]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 18, 1901.

No. 194.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 10th

instant, with inclosures, reviewing the treaties and laws regulating Chinese

immigration in this country, and requesting that before opening the question

of new legislation, Congress will provide for a commission to visit the

localities in the United States and in the Philippine and Hawaiian islands,

where the Chinese most largely congregate, and by a personal investigation

ascertain how the present laws and regulations affect the Chinese, and how

the exclusion of Chinese affects the localities in question.

Ihavecommunicatedcopiesofyournoteanditsinclosurestothe

Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and to the Committee on

Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 87]
Mr. Squiers to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,May 28, 1901.

No. 640.]

SIR:Ihavethehonortohandyouherewithacopyofaninclosure

transmitted here in a dispatch from the United States consul at Chefoo (No.

416, May 20, 1901).

It shows claims presented by Messrs. Crawford & Hudson, which it appears

the governor of Shantung, in the desire to appease the missionaries, has

agreed to pay. It seems to me unfortunate that the missionary, owing to his

peculiar status, can present and recover damages that an ordinary resident

of the country will be precluded from doing under the rules recently

aadopted by the foreign representatives. (See Mr. Rockhill’s dispatchNo.

42, March 14, 1901). I have reference to traveling expenses to and from the

United States, and extra living expenses while there.

Their settlement of the claims of native Christians has caused no end of

criticism and ill-feeling, especially in this province, and among foreigners

as well as Chinese. They have themselves gone into the country and

assessed damages on the various villages where Christians had been killed

or their property destroyed. As they have generally been accompanied by

soldiers, such settlements were in fact forcibly made, the presence of the

soldiers making them such whether they accompanied the missionaries

simply as a guard or not.

In Shansi, the governor has set aside 200,000 taels to be fairly divided

between the Protestants and Catholics, thus preventing the certain quarrels

and strife that will surely follow direct settlements made by the missionaries

themselves. So far as I know, this course has been followed in the province

of Shansi only.

While it might be at times a source of great annoyance and trouble to our

consuls and the legation, I think in the end it would prove to the best

interests of the missionaries and their work if they were precluded from any

official intercourse whatever with the local officials on matters pertaining to

their native Christians. A reference to the records of the legation will show

that the Chinese Government finds such interference with their people most

repugnant, while in some cases unjust treatment or actual persecution of

native Christians on the part of petty officials may have been prevented; as

a rule, I believe most foreigners who have lived in China for a number of

years will agree that it brought down on the Christian all the hatred and

animosity this people now seem to be capable of.

I have, etc.,
H.G.SQUIERS.
[Inclosure.]

TAIAN FU,SHANTUNG,April 22, 1901.

(Kuang Hsu, 27th year, 3d Moon, 14th day.) I, Mao Shu-yun, agree to pay

to Messrs. Bostick and Verity, Dr. Barrow, and Miss Sture the sum of taels

two thousand nine hundred and cents eighty-one (taels 2,900.81), Taian

K’uping, compensation in full for all losses sustained on their respective

mission places in Taian City by theft and robbery during 1900. I agree to

pay taels five hundred eighty-six and cents sixteen (taels 586.16) to-day and

the balance not later than the 8th Moon of this year (Kuang Hsu, 27th year).

For extra expenses in living and moving incurred by the Boxer troubles, we

withourcolaborerslookeithertothegovernorortotheGeneral

Government of China.
Claim made by Dr. T. B. Crawford.

Traveling expenses Chefoo to stopping place in America and
$2,002.55

return to Taian (Mexican)

Rent, Greenvills, S. C., eight months, at $6 48.00

2,050.55

T. J. Hudson’s claim.
Traveling expenses from Taianfu to Demossville, Ky $900.00
C.P.BOSTICK.
Trianfu, May 4, 1901.
aSee appendix to this volume, page 104.

[Document 88]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Squiers.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 17, 1901.

No. 355.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch, No. 640, of May 28

last, reporting that the governor of Shantung, in his desire to appease the

missionaries, has agreed to pay a claim presented by Messrs. Crawford &

Hudson.

You say: “It seems to me unfortunate that the missionary, owing to his

peculiar status, can present and recover damages that an ordinary resident

of the country will be precluded from doing, under the rules recently

adopted by the foreign representatives. (See Mr. Rockhill’s dispatch, No.

42, March 14, 1901.) I have reference to traveling expenses to and from the

United States, and extra living expenses while there;” and you add that the

settlement by missionaries of the claims of native Christians has caused no

end of criticism and ill-feeling, especially in the province of Chihli, and

among foreigners as well as Chinese; and that while it might be at times a

source of great annoyance and trouble to our consuls and the legation, you

think that in the end it would prove to the best interests of the missionaries

andtheirworkiftheywereprecludedfromanyofficialintercourse

whatever with the local officials on matters pertaining to their native

Christians.

In reply I have to say that, while unable to apply coercion to American

citizens in the provinces to prevent their compromising their claims with the

local authorities, this Department has, in its instructions to the consuls,

uniformlydiscouragedindependentnegotiationsbetweenindividual

sufferers and the district officers for the adjustment of alleged losses, and

has enjoined upon the consuls nonintervention to bring about any such

piecemeal settlement of difficulties which, so far as this Government is

concerned, are being settled in the course of the general negotiations at

Pekin.

On the 20th of December last an instruction in that sense was sent to the

consul at Amoy, which I quote for your information, as follows:

I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 49, of November 7,

1900, reporting that you have adjusted all the claims for damages

to American mission property and have received in settlement

thereof the sum of $3,000, Mexican.

The good disposition of the local authorities is appreciated, and if

the settlement effected by you is acceptable to the sufferers, the

Departmentdoesnotopposeit.Suchpartialandscattered

settlements can not, however, affect this Government in dealing

punishment and afford guaranties for future safety of our citizens.

The position maintained by this Government is that international

indemnities, especially for Americans murdered, are adjustable by

the Pekin treaty, and that the negotiations can not be divided by

separate local demands. If the local authorities offer to repair

local losses by direct arrangement with sufferers, officers of this

Government are neither to support nor object to them.

You will act accordingly in the future.

On the 21st of the same month an instruction of similar tenor was sent to

the consul at Fuchau.

While regarding these separate compositions of claims as unsanctioned and

as not involving any responsibility on the part of this Government to effect

their execution, the Department must necessarily take equitable cognizance

of them as matters of fact, if for no other reason than to bar any duplicate

claim upon the international indemnity by reason of the same losses. Hence

they should, whenever possible, be reported to the Department, for its

information, by the legation or the consuls.

You may instruct the consuls in the sense of this instruction.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 89]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hill.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,July 6, 1901.

No. 207.]

SIR: It becomes my duty to lay before you the claim for damages of several

hundred Chinese subjects resident in the city of Butte, Silverbow County,

State of Montana, between the year 1886 and the present time.

These Chinese subjects were peaceable and law-abiding, having complied

with all the laws respecting their registry, and were engaged in the lawful

businessofmerchants,keepersofrestaurants,farmersandgardeners,

laundry men, cooks, servants, and laborers. On or about the year 1886 there

was instituted a conspiracy or combination of several thousands of the

citizens of the United States, resident in the said Silverbow County, Mont.,

confederated together in various labor associations, with the object of

destroying the business of the Chinese subjects above described, depriving

them of their occupations or employment, paralyzing their industry, and by

threats and violence compelling them to abandon their homes and business

and depart from said city and county.

It appears that this conspiracy or combination was at first confined to more

or less peaceful methods of what is known as the “boycott,” whereby it was

soughttoprejudicetheinhabitantsofthecityofButteagainstthe

employment of Chinese subjects and to secure the discharge of those who

were already in their employ. But as time passed and the wicked and

unlawful object of the conspiracy was proving only partially successful, the

conspirators became more bold and lawless in their demonstrations; by

false and slanderous stories it was sought to inflame the public mind against

the Chinese subjects; it became more difficult for the latter to maintain their

lawful pursuits, and the secret murder of a number of Chinese occurred, the

perpetration of which must be ascribed to the spirit of lawlessness and

hatred created by this conspiracy.

The conduct of the conspirators became so violent that the Chinese subjects

appealed to the police department of said city and county to protect them

from the acts of lawlessness, and to secure to them the protection of their

business and to extend to them such rights as by treaty and law were

granted to subjects of other nations in said city. But the police did not and

would not protect or endeavor to protect them; and so far from securing the

protection guaranteed by treaty, the city council, under whose authority the

police are appointed and act, in the year 1892, upon the request of the labor

associations, indorsed and approved of the conspiracy, and thereby gave its

official influence to the unlawful and violent proceedings.

This action of the city council increased the opposition to and damages

suffered by the Chinese, and in 1893 they appealed through counsel to the

governor of the State of Montana to interpose his higher authority and

influence to secure to them the protection which had been guaranteed to

them by treaty and by public law. The appeal was referred to the attorney-

general of the State, who decided that the action of the city council was not

unlawful, and in his opinion used such language of hatred and prejudice as I

am forced to believe must be unusual in legal documents of the United

States. No relief or interposition was obtained from the governor of the

State, and the conspirators, assured of the sympathy of the local authorities,

redoubled their lawless proceedings greatly to the damage of the business

and pursuits of the Chinese subjects.

Finally, all other relief being closed to them by the inaction and lack of

sympathy on the part of the authorities, these Chinese subjects, to the

number of more than 200, through their counsel, applied in 1897 to the

judge of the circuit court of the United States, petitioning that certain of the

conspiratorsnamedshouldbebroughtintocourttoanswerfortheir

conduct, which was set forth in detail, and that the judge would take such

action as he should find necessary and possible for the relief of the

petitioners. Thereupon, the judge caused a full investigation to be made, and

as a result thereof he directed a decree to be issued commanding and

enjoiningtheconspiratorsnamedandalltheirconfederatesand

coconspirators from further continuing or conspiring to injure or destroy the

business of the Chinese subjects and to cease from all acts tending to

maintain the conspiracy and boycott.

In this connection I desire to direct your attention to the following facts

which were judicially determined by the United States court in said suit:

That the Chinese subjects who were parties to the suit in court, to the

number of over 200, were then (1897) and had been for eight years previous

peacefullydomiciledinSilverbowCountyconductingordesiringto

conduct lawful business, and that they were entitled to the protection of the

United States; that the defendants in the suit and certain other persons,

residents of said county, to the number of more than 3,000, representing

more than twenty unions or associations, banded together to organize and

carry into execution “a willful and malicious conspiracy and combination”

to deprive the Chinese residents “of the means of earning a livelihood, and

thereby compel them to leave the said county;” that in execution of this

conspiracy and combination an executive committee was appointed for the

vigorous prosecution of the same, with power to raise money and employ

men “to be a working force to commit the acts” of violence to be hereafter

stated; that large sums of money were raised by forced subscriptions among

business men and from the unions, and that a considerable force of men was

sohired;thatnoticeswerepublishedinthenewspapersandposted

throughout the city, and especially on the places of business of the Chinese

subjects and on the houses of all persons employing Chinese, announcing

that a boycott of the Chinese had been declared, and appealing to all

citizens to cooperate in carrying it out; that they employed and caused a

wagon to be driven through the city carrying a large transparency on which

was painted repulsive caricatures of Chinese subjects, with a display notice

of the boycott, and a gong sounding to attract attention; that the members of

the conspiracy did willfully and maliciously go in numbers to the places of

business of the Chinese merchants, stand upon and forcibly occupy the

highway and sidewalks, and warn people about to become customers that

these places were boycotted—that persons ought not to and must not

patronize such places; that these conspirators did sometimes use force and

compel the customers to leave such places of business, and that the result of

such violent acts was to materially reduce the business of such merchants

and make the same unprofitable; that in further execution of said conspiracy

and combination the hotels and boarding houses of the city in which were

employed Chinese cooks or servants were visited and notified that the

Chinese servants must be discharged; persons were hired to willfully and

maliciously go to such houses, stand upon and forcibly occupy the highway

and sidewalk, and warn and threaten such persons as were about to enter

that they must not patronize such houses; that a number of such boarding

houses were kept by females; that when they declined to obey the orders of

the conspirators, a wagon, with a transparency containing the name of the

boarding house and the proprietress boycotted, was driven about the city

with a gong sounding; that in almost all cases the women were forced to

yield to the demand and discharge their Chinese servants, but in addition

they were compelled to pay to the conspirators the money expended for the

wagon and advertising, amounting in the case of one female to $45; that

persons were employed by the conspirators to ascertain all the private and

business houses in which Chinese were employed, and they were treated in

a similar manner; that a boycott was placed upon the Silver Bow National

Bank because its cashier employed a Chinese servant and its place of

business was in a block in which a Chinese acted as janitor; the bank began

to suffer by the withdrawal of depositors, and the boycott was only removed

after a secret conference between its president and a committee of the

conspirators; and that the effect of the acts of the conspirators, a part of

which are above described, was to deprive many of the Chinese residents of

work and the means of earning a livelihood, to materially reduce the

business of the merchants and make the same unprofitable, and to break up

the homes and drive away from Silverbow County 350 of such Chinese

residents, being one-half of the number of those residing in said county, and

that all of the Chinese residents would have been driven away but for the

restraining influence of the injunction of the United States circuit court.

It is to be borne in mind that all these acts, growing out of what the court

finds to be a “willful and malicious conspiracy,” were committed openly,

with the full knowledge of the police, the city and the State authorities, and

without a single effort on their part to restrain the lawlessness, as will be

seen by reference to the finding No. 27 of the record of said court.

The petitioners whose claim for indemnity I herewith submit estimate the

damages suffered to amount to $500,000. They recognize the good effect of

the injunction of the United States court, but represent that the conspirators,

while ceasing from open acts of violence, are still seeking to execute their

conspiracy by clandestine means. It further appears that the persons who

have inflicted the damages are insolvent, even if it were possible to

successfully accuse them before the courts, which in the present state of

local public sentiment would be impossible. Neither can any remedy be

found by proceedings against the city or county authorities who have

willfully allowed these damages to be inflicted.

The only remedy to be found for my injured countrymen is to resort to the

Government of the United States to make good its treaty stipulations. I

therefore appeal to you, and through you to the honored and upright

President, to take such steps as will fully indemnify the Chinese subjects of

Silver Bow County, Mont., for the pecuniary losses and injuries they have

sustained, and such as will hereafter secure to them the full enjoyment of

their rights as peaceful and law-abiding residents.

I transmit herewith the petition of the Chinese subjects setting forth their

grievances and losses, and to this are attached the complaint before the

United States circuit court, the action of the city council of Butte City and

the governor of the State of Montana, the findings of facts, and the

injunction of the United States court.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.
[Inclosure.]

BUTTE,MONT.,February 20, 1901.

To His Excellency WT ,
Chinese Minister, Washington, D. C.

S: I have to-day mailed you a certified copy of the record, including the

testimony in the case of Hum Fay et al.v. Frank Baldwin et al., being a case

involving a boycott of the Chinese residents of the city of Butte and county

of Silver Bow, State of Montana. This record includes a copy of the decree

rendered by the United States circuit court for the district of Montana,

restrainingandenjoiningthedefendantsfromfurtherboycottingsaid

Chinese residents of said Butte City and Silver Bow County. Among the

findings is one to the effect that the duly constituted authorities of said city

of Butte and county of Silver Bow, and also of the State of Montana,

neglected and refused to enforce the laws and ordinances in force at the

time in behalf of said Chinese residents, to the great injury and damage of

said Chinese residents.

The undersigned most respectfully request that you will present a claim to

the United States Government, as in the memorial heretofore sent to you,

praying that they be awarded an adequate amount of compensation for the

damages they have received. Our counsel, Col. W. F. Saunders, will call

upon you shortly with reference to this matter, and give you such further

information in the premises as may be necessary.

Thanking you in advance for an early reply, we beg to remain, etc.,
To His Excellency WT ,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary from the Empire and

Government of China to the United States of America.
S: The undersigned are a committee representing the Chinese denizens

from 1886 to 1897 in Silver Bow County and Butte City, Mont., and some

of whom, to the number of 226, with plaintiffs, joined in a certain action

hereinafter referred to, and they in behalf of their fellow-countrymen,

wronged and damaged by the action hereafter described, humbly and

respectfully petition your excellency to take such action and institute such

proceedingsaswillresultinsecuringtoyourpetitionerspecuniary

compensation for the wrongs and injuries hereinafter recited.

And your petitioners represent that they are persons of Chinese descent and

natives and subjects of the Empire of China, who during the period above

mentioned were domiciled in said Silver Bow County, State of Montana,

and in all respects were complying with the laws of the United States,

authorizing and permitting them to remain as denizens of the said United

States and entitling them to all the rights and privileges of citizens of the

most-favorednations;andtheywereconductingdiversandsundry

industries in said county and State to the great advantage of said community

and profit to themselves.

And your petitioners say that while they were engaged in the peaceable and

orderly conduct of their divers and several industries as aforesaid certain

citizens of the United States, resident in said Butte City, did wickedly and

maliciously conspire against your petitioners and their fellow-countrymen,

denizens as aforesaid, with the intent and for the purpose of destroying all

their industries and preventing them from securing any reward for the

labors in which they were engaged, and to compel them to leave the said

city, county, and State.

That such conspirators, numbering several thousand citizens of the United

States, having been organized into unions or associations, successfully and

secretly did institute against all the Chinese subjects in said Silver Bow

County, including your petitioners, a boycott, by means whereof they

designed and intended to prevent your petitioners and their countrymen, in

said Silver Bow County, from conducting any business whatever, whereby

they would be deprived of a livelihood and would be compelled to emigrate

to some other country; and your petitioners say that many of them were

withoutmeansandweredependentupontheirdailylaborforthe

necessaries of life.

That when said unions or associations had been formed as aforesaid and

peopleofotherracesthanoursagainstyourpetitionersandtheir

countrymen and to excite animosity against them by libels, slanders, abuse,

and all the processes of mischief which they could set in motion; that to this

end they assumed to forbid any citizen of the United States or person other

thanofChinesedescentfrompatronizingyourpetitionersortheir

countrymen or any of them therein or from employing them in any industry

whatever, and to this end did threaten our customers with a like boycott in

case they should disregard the commands of said conspirators. To the end

that they might be protected against such unlawful actions, your petitioners

and other Chinese subjects resident thereat applied to the police department

of said city and county, which is charged by law with the protection of

individual rights and the maintenance of public order, to prevent the said

boycott so far as it assumed the form of lawlessness and to secure to your

petitioners such rights as by treaty and law were granted to subjects of other

nations in said county and State.

But the police did not and would not so protect or endeavor to protect your

petitioners, and so it was that the said unions and associations, being the

conspirators aforesaid, by a resolution adopted by them, requested the

council of the said city of Butte, in which your petitioners did most dwell,

to assist them in their unlawful practices so as aforesaid contemplated and

set in motion, and said city council, which is the legislative department of

the said city of Butte, did indorse and approve said movement, and by its

actions consented to assist and did assist the conspirators aforesaid in their

design and purpose so as above manifested, and failing therein, after long-

continued endeavor, your petitioners applied to the officers of the said

county, charged by law with the maintenance of public order, and asked

them to assist your petitioners in protecting their said rights, but so it was

that the said officers did neglect and refuse so to do.

That thereupon your petitioners, or some of them, called the attention of the

authorities of the State of Montana, to wit, the governor thereof, to the

conspiracy and boycott aforesaid, with the statement that the same was in

derogation of the treaty rights of your petitioners, and requesting protection

therefrom, but so it was that the said governor, referring the said statement

and request to the attorney-general of the State as to his opinion thereon,

said attorney-general did maintain that the said conspiracy and boycott, and

consequently pecuniary damage, were not in derogation of the rights of

your petitioners, and thereupon, being so advised as to his duty, the chief

executive of the State, charged by her constitution to see that the laws were

faithfully executed, neglected to protect your petitioners against the actions

of the conspirators aforesaid.

And your petitioners do further represent that said conspiracy and boycott

existed long prior to 1886, and does since exist, to the great damage of your

petitioners and those they represent, and their countrymen, natives, and

subjects of the Chinese Empire, and chat it does yet continue, to the great

and continuing damage of all Chinese whose domicile is in said Silver Bow

County.

And the passions and prejudices of the more ignorant citizens of the said

community are and have been so excited as that the Chinese have been

deprived of the means of making a living and in a number of instances

native Chinese subjects have been killed by the citizens of the United States

in consequence of the conspiracy aforesaid.

And your petitioners do further say that they have been damaged by reason

of unlawful acts so as aforesaid committed in being, deprived of their labor

and business as aforesaid in the sum of $500,000 and more, and that large

numbers of their countrymen, subjects and natives of the Empire of China,

whose domicile was in said Butte at the time of the commencement of said

boycott, were by reason thereof driven from said city and county and

compelled to seek a living elsewhere, to their great pecuniary injury, loss,

and damage.

And your petitioners say that, having been subjected to the injury and

contumely aforesaid and the loss and damage consequent thereon, they

commenced a certain action in the circuit court of the United States to

enjoin and prevent the said unlawful acts of the said conspirators, and that

with expense and labor they did finally procure an injunction whereby the

unlawfulandcoarserformsofsaidconspiratorswereenjoinedand

restrained, but the same still clandestinely continues to the great injury of

your petitioners.

Yourpetitionersattachheretoandmarkas“Exhibit A”theirbillof

complaint in the action aforesaid, which in form and substance they affirm

is true. They also attach the order whereby certain other Chinese subjects,

residents in Silver Bow County, were admitted as complainants in said

action.

They also attach hereto and mark as Exhibit B the correspondence between

the governor and the attorney-general of the State of Montana, touching the

said boycott and the executive duty of repressing the same.

They also attach hereto and mark as Exhibit C the findings of the examiner

in chancery, appointed for that purpose by said court, of the facts found by

him touching the said boycott.

They also attach hereto and mark as Exhibit D the findings of the court,

confirming with immaterial modifications the said findings.

They also attach hereto and mark as Exhibit E the order of the court for a

“permanent injunction in said case.

They also attach hereto and mark as Exhibit F the injunction issued in said

action.

They also accompany these papers with the testimony in said action taken

before said examiner.

And your petitioners say that during the continuance of said boycott they

suffered great damage in their estate and persons and that the defendants in

said action as well as the other persons joining in said conspiracy against

whom proof could be obtained were then citizens of the United States,

owing to it allegiance, obedience, and fidelity, and are and were practically

insolvent, and that for the loss and damage by your petitioners suffered

there is no remedy at law or otherwise than through diplomatic channels.

Your petitioners do further say that they are ready at all times and before

any tribunal thereto authorized to maintain by competent proof the facts

stated in this petition.

Wherefore your petitioners pray that for all the wrongs aforesaid done to

the Empire of China by said citizens of the United States to their persons

and estate, including the homicides aforesaid, your excellency may be

instructedtodemandoftheGovernmentofthiscountryadequate

remuneration, and it may be recommended that His Imperial Majesty may

direct that the same be paid to us, that we may be reimbursed for the

damages we have suffered in the premises for these violations of the treaty

obligations of the United States of America. And as in duty bound your

petitioners will ever pray.

We are, etc.,
Hum Fay, Quong Loy, Hure Pock, Kim Chong Tai, Wah

Shung Lung, Wang Hong Gow, Quon Long Chung, Don S.

Len, Bow Shang Tong, Tung Tuck, Wong Fun, Wah Chong

Tai, Kong Sing Fong, Chun Chew, Chum Choy, Chin Him

Tong, Quong Tuck Wing, Wong Tai Shang, Tuck Kim, Tung

Yee Chan, Shang Hai, Yee Wo, Deer Yick.

W.F.SANDERS,

J.U.SANDERS,

L.P.SANDERS,
Solicitors for Petitioners.
In the circuit court of the United States, ninth circuit, district of Montana.

HUMFAY,DEERYICK,HUMTONG, ANDHUREPOCK, complainants,
v.
FRANKBALDWIN,GRIFFITHE.TAYLOR,GEORGEMORE-hart, George E. B. Walters, P. H.

Burns, Ed. Marchand, H. G. Morgan, M. J. Geiger, Louis Schaffer, Harry

La Galla, Charles Slayton, J. W. Huffman, George W. Morgan, Frank P.

Weldon, Fred Whatley, Albin A. Sandahl, Robert E. Taylor, J. H. Free,

W. R. Martin, W. H. Eddy, and John Doe and Richard Doe, whose real

names are unknown, defendants.
Bill of complaint.
Now come your orators Hum Fay, Deer Yick, Hum Tong, and Hure Pock,

who sue for themselves and all other subjects and natives of the Empire of

China, and who are of Chinese descent, and who are conducting or desire to

conduct and but for the unlawful acts of the defendants hereinafter alleged

and set forth would conduct business in the county of Silverbow, State of

Montana, and who desire to join herein, and who are all alien inhabitants of

the said State of Montana, and complaining of the defendants Frank

Baldwin, Griffith W. Taylor, George Morehart, George B. Walters, P. H.

Burns, Pat Kane, Ed. Marchand, H. C. Morgan, M. J. Geiger, Louis

Schaffer, Harry La Galla, Charles Slayton, J. W. Huffman, George W.

Morgan, Frank E. Weldon, Fred Whatley, Albin A. Sandahl, Robert E.

Taylor, J. H. Free, W. R. Martin, W. H. Eddy, and John Doe and Richard

Roe, whose real names are unknown to the plaintiffs, and all others who

combined and confederated together and are perpetrating and assisting in

the perpetration and threaten to continue the perpetration of the wrongs

hereinafter described, and say that they, the said defendants, are citizens and

residents of Montana, and your orators and each of them are of Chinese

descent, and are natives and subjects of the Empire of China, domiciled in

Silverbow County, Mont., and that there are of such Chinese subjects

domiciled in said county engaged in conducting lawful business in said

county of Silverbow, or desiring so to conduct such business, and but for

the unlawful acts of the defendants hereinafter alleged would conduct such

business therein, and who desire to join in this prosecution three hundred or

more alien Chinese, who each have a common and general interest in

redressing the wrongs herein complained of and in preventing and enjoining

the same, but whom it is impracticable to bring before this court as orators

in this case, and for whom your orators sue as well as for themselves, and

your orators say that they and the said parties for whom they sue, are and

have been residents of Butte, in said county of Silverbow, for more than one

year last past, and they say that the said Hum Fay, Deer Yick, and Hum

Tong are, and since the 1st of April, 1896, have been doing business in said

SilverbowCounty,Mont.,inthebuyingandsellingofChineseand

Japanese fancy goods, and in the maintenance and carrying on the business

of conducting a restaurant in the city of Butte, in said county of Silverbow

and State of Montana; and they are entitled by the laws of the United States

and the treaties between the said Empire of China and the United States to

reside in said county of Silverbow, and to conduct and carry on for a profit

their business aforesaid at Butte and elsewhere, and they and each of them

have complied with the provisions of the law of the United States entitled

“An act to execute certain treaty stipulations relating to Chinese,” approved

May 6, 1892, and have obtained from the proper officer the certificate in

said act provided.

And your orators complain and say that they have been domiciled within

the territory of the United States for the twenty years last past, and now

reside in the district of Montana.

And your orators do further say that they are by law and treaties entitled to

all the rights, privileges, immunities, and exemptions which are accorded to

the citizens and subjects of the most-favored nations, and to conduct their

said business without let or hindrance from the said defendants, their aiders,

abettors, confederates, or coconspirators, or either or any of them, and are

entitled to the equal protection of the laws of the United States, and that the

public faith of the United States is pledged to protect your orators and all

others in like condition, nativity, and descent from the ill treatment and

wrongs hereinafter alleged to have been perpetrated by the said defendants,

theiraiders,abettors,andconfederates,andareentitledtotheequal

protection of the laws of the United States and of the State of Montana.

And your orators say that, so being subjects of the Chinese Empire

domiciled as aliens of the United States and residing in said Silverbow

County, on or about the 1st day of April, 1896, the said Hum Fay, Deer

Yick, and Hum Tong, as they well might, pursuant to the privileges so

secured to them by treaty and law, at Butte, in said Silverbow County, did

proceed to carry on the business of buying and selling for a profit Chinese

and Japanese goods and of keeping a restaurant for customers for profit at

No. 37 West Park street, in the city of Butte aforesaid, in the county of

Silverbow, which said business they were able to conduct for a period of

time without let or hindrance from the said defendants or any of them, and

at great profits to your said orators aforesaid. But so it was, as your said

orators are informed and verily believe, that the said defendants, with the

intent and for the purpose of preventing the said Hum Fay, Deer Yick, and

HumTongfromconductingthesaidbusinesssuccessfullyandfrom

securing any custom or customers therefor, and from making any profit

thereat, and with the intent and for the purpose of intimidating the patrons

of the said owners of said restaurant in their said business, and thereby

preventingthemfrompatronizingsaidbusinessandtobreakupthe

business of the owners of said store and restaurant, and compel them to

leave the said county of Silverbow, did, on or about the 1st day of October,

1896,willfullyandmaliciouslycombine,confederate,andconspire

together, and with other persons in large numbers to your orators unknown,

and to the number of three or four hundred, all actuated by a like purpose,

designed to deprive all Chinese aliens residents at said county of Silverbow

of the privilege of doing business therein and of the equal protection of the

laws and of equal privileges and immunities under the laws, and to deny

them the rights and privileges secured to them by the laws and treaties of

the United States.

And your orators do further say that the said Hure Pock, on the 1st day of

April, 1896, and from that time forward until now, has conducted in the said

city of Butte a store for the sale of Chinese and Japanese goods at great

profit to himself, and has proceeded to carry on, and does yet carry on, said

business; and your orators do further say that a large number of the alien

Chinese above mentioned are engaged in the conduct of divers and sundry

kinds of business in said Butte, to wit, the keeping of restaurants and

providing food for individuals who should desire to eat thereat for a

compensation to be paid by such customers, and divers and sundry of them

carrying on the business of raising garden vegetables in said Silverbow

County, and sundry and divers of such Chinese aliens as mentioned herein

are engaged in the laundry business for profit, and were making large

profits in and about the conduct of the various kinds of business so by them

carried on as aforesaid in the said county of Silverbow.

And your orators do further say that there is a large number of Chinese alien

residents of said Silverbow County who could and but for the wrongs

hereinafter set forth and described would conduct and carry on divers and

sundry enterprises and business in said county of Silverbow at a great profit

to themselves; but so it is that the said defendants, their aiders, abettors,

confederates,andconspirators,wickedlydesigningandintendingto

disregard the laws and treaties of the United States and the laws of the State

of Montana, and to deny these Chinese aliens, residents aforesaid, the equal

protection of the laws and equal privileges and immunities thereunder, and

to break up the business in which they are engaged, and to deny to them the

privileges of profitably conducting the same, and to prevent others of said

alien Chinese residents from entering into that or any other business in said

county of Silverbow for that purpose and with that intent, on or about the

1st day of October, 1896, did combine, conspire, and confederate together,

and with divers and sundry other persons to your orators unknown, willfully

and maliciously to deprive your orators and other Chinese alien residents of

said Silverbow County of their rights so to conduct said business profitably,

and, having so wickedly combined, conspired, and confederated together

for that purpose, did, on the 1st day of October, 1896, at said Butte,

maliciously and with force and arms go into the place of business of the

said Hum Fay, Deer Yick, and Hum Tong, and did stand upon and occupy

the highway in front thereof and the sidewalk thereat, and did there remain

upon said walk and public way warning all persons who had patronized and

were customers of the said Hum Fay, Deer Yick, and Hum Tong, or who

were about to become their customers in and about their business aforesaid

and for whom they were made, and but for the unlawful and malicious

conspiracy and acts aforesaid would have made large sums of money, and

did, in behalf of the various voluntary organizations herein described and

named, advise, direct, and state to said persons that the said business and

place of business aforesaid of the said owners was placed under a boycott,

andthatpersonsandcustomersaforesaidcontemplatingbecoming

customers and all persons ought not and should not and must not patronize

the said business of the owners of said store and restaurant as aforesaid.

And your orators do further say that the said defendants, their aiders,

abettors, and confederates as aforesaid, did then combine and conspire

together, and did follow other customers of your orators with the malicious

intent to deprive your orators of the right to the profitable business in said

Silver Bow County, and warned and directed them not to patronize alien

Chinese in any manner whatever, and did threaten customers of your orators

and other alien Chinese, as aforesaid, that if they should continue to

patronize such alien Chinese the said combination, confederation, and

conspiracy will place such patrons under a boycott and thereby deprive

them of the rights and privileges which they are entitled to enjoy under the

laws; and thereby many of the customers of your orators and the other

Chinese alien residents engaged in business in the said county of Silver

Bow are terrified and prevented from patronizing your orators. And to the

end that the said defendants, their aiders and abettors, may more efficiently

and effectually destroy the business of your orators and the alien Chinese

aforesaid, they have heretofore organized and are now maintaining divers

andsundrycombinations,confederations,andassociations,knownas

assemblies, unions, brotherhoods, or some other names to your orators

confederated together to continue and to perpetrate the wrongs aforesaid to

your orators and other Chinese alien residents of Silver Bow County, and to

destroy their business and to prevent them from engaging in legitimate

business in said county, and from the privileges of earning a living and

coconspirators organized and conducted there are the Workingman’s Union,

the Carpenters’ Union, the Plumbers and Gas Fitters’ Union, the Tailors’

Union, the Bricklayers and Stone Masons’ Union, the Brewers’ Union, the

Bakers’ Union, the Painters and Decorators’ Union, the Tin, Sheet Iron, and

Cornice Workers’ Union, the Butchers’ Union, the Musicians’ Protective

Union, the Molders’ Union, the Millwright and Pattern Makers’ Union, the

Barbers’ Union, the W. R. Morley Assembly, the Meaderville Assembly, the

Clerks’ Assembly, the Cooks’ Assembly, the Brotherhood of Switchmen,

and the Amalgamated Association of Engineers, which organizations and

assemblies organized to promote the welfare and interest of the various

members thereof by lawful means aforesaid, by their members perverted

into the combination and conspiracy aforesaid, whereby the business of

your orators has been impaired, and if such combination shall succeed, this

will be entirely destroyed.

And your orators do further say that the said defendants, their aiders and

abettors as aforesaid, have from time to time since said 1st day of October,

1896, manufactured and do yet continue to manufacture, own, procure, and

keep divers and sundry certain libelous banners, notices, transparencies,

floats, pictures, paintings, mottoes, and signs conspicuously printed upon

muslin or other material advertising that the Chinese of said county be

boycottedandrecommendingthatnobodyshallpatronizethem,and

warning all persons not to become customers of them, and which contain,

among other things, pictures and cartoons of Chinese of a character and

quality calculated and designed to hold all Chinese alien residents up to

contempt and to excite the prejudice of the community against them, which

said pictures being impressed upon cloth are put into conspicuous frames;

and in fulfillment of the combination and conspiracy aforesaid, and with the

intent and for the purpose of destroying the business of your orators and

other alien Chinese residents, and of preventing others of like descent and

nativity and nationality from entering upon said business, procure the same

to be carried or drawn in wagons through the streets of the said city of

Butte, to the end that the prejudice of the individuals composing that

community may be excited, and that the ignorant or the wicked, if any such

there shall be, shall by force and arms and otherwise destroy the business of

your orators and the aliens of Chinese descent and nationality, and your

orators be denied the privilege of conducting successful business therein.

And your orators do further say that for the purpose of ascertaining who the

patrons of your orators and other Chinese persons are the said defendants,

theircoconspirators,confederates,aiders,andabettors,followsuch

Chinamen as they go to the homes of their customers upon errands of

business with the view and intent to ascertain who said customers are, to the

end that such custom may be destroyed, and to warn such customers not to

patronize your orators or their countrymen engaged in business thereat.

And your orators do further say that the said defendants about the 1st day of

January, 1897, undertook and agreed among themselves and with divers and

sundry other persons to your orators unknown and with the various persons

of the organizations aforesaid, that for the said purpose of keeping up and

maintainingthesaidboycotttheywouldcontribute,andtheydid

maliciously and unlawfully contribute money to spies and pay informers so

as aforesaid engaged in perverting persons from patronizing your orators in

and about their business and in carrying the said libelous banners, floats,

notices, transparencies, pictures, paintings, mottoes, and signs printed as

aforesaid, which are malicious defamations of your orators and all who are

Chinese alien residents engaged in business in said county of Silver Bow,

the real intention and design being to bring before the public the nativity of

your orators and their countrymen and to expose your orators to public

hatred and contempt; and by the procurement of the said defendants, their

said aiders and abettors, said libelous and defamatory banners are drawn

upon wagons or carried by individuals through the streets and in the sight of

the said persons of Butte, and are yet being so carried and read by many

thousands of people, many of whom are thereby prejudiced against your

orators and others of like nativity and country.

And your orators do further say that from time to time the said defendants,

their coconspirators, aiders, and abettors, do and did print, publish, and

cause to be distributed in said Butte and elsewhere, dodgers, cards, and

pamphlets advising the citizens and denizens of said county to boycott your

orators and others and not to patronize them in and about the business in

which they are engaged, and did also print the names of patrons of your

orators and distributed them through said county, with the intent and for the

purpose on the part of the said defendants, their aiders and abettors, of

exposing such persons to hatred, ridicule, and persecution, and thereby

terrify them into abandoning the patronage of your orators.

And your orators do further say that all the foregoing acts were done and

performed by the said defendants, their aiders and abettors, wickedly,

maliciously, and unlawfully, and are in contravention of the rights of your

orators to pursue their lawful industry without let or hindrance from the said

defendantsoranyotherperson,andwithoutbeingsubjecttothe

conspiracies aforesaid, and wholly unrestrained, except by equal, just, and

impartial laws. And your orators do say that by reason of the acts aforesaid

they have suffered great damage in the sum of $500,000.

And your orators do further say that the said defendants are continuing and

threaten to continue each and all of the unlawful acts aforesaid, and threaten

to procure and also to perpetrate and assist in the perpetration of the same,

and threaten to further continue to pay money from time to time, as it may

be required, for the purpose of continuing the unlawful and malicious acts

aforesaid, and have agreed to continue hereafter to pay money to procure a

continuation thereof, and such other and further unlawful acts as in the

judgment of the said defendants, their confederates and coconspirators, will

be effectual to destroy the business in which the cocomplainants and all

others of Chinese descent and nationality engaged in business in said

county of Silver Bow, or propose hereafter to engage therein.

And your orators say that they do not know the names of the members of

the several said unions, associations, assemblies, or organizations aforesaid,

and can not obtain the same, but that said associations, assemblies, unions,

brotherhoods, by delegates from each of said voluntary associations, have

organized a trade and labor assembly, which said trade and labor assembly,

in its own name and in the name of the foregoing organizations, is

continuing to boycott, persecute, and harass, as aforesaid.

And your orators say that unless such conspiracies, confederations, and

combinationswereorderedanddirectedbythelabororganizations

aforesaid, and the said trades and labor assembly, and the said defendants,

your orators would be permitted to enjoy their natural, essential, and

inalienable rights, among which is the right of enjoying their liberty of

acquiringpossessionandprotectingtheirproperty,andseekingand

obtaining their safety and happiness by the peaceful and untrammeled

conduct of the lawful business in which they are engaged. And your orators

do further say that there are in the said county of Silver Bow a large number

of Chinese persons, alien residents therein, subjects of the Empire of China,

engaged in the business of buying and selling merchandise thereat for a

profit, and of keeping restaurants for profit, and are engaged in the business

of making and selling clothing and raising garden vegetables for a profit,

and other lawful occupations. But the combinations and conspiracies of the

said defendants and others aforesaid is designed and intended by the said

defendants and others to prevent your orators, and all others who are

subjects and aliens of the Empire of China, from conducting their said

business legitimately within the limits of said county of Silver Bow, and to

intimidate and coerce the citizens of said county from patronizing your

orators and the other natives and subjects of the Empire of China aforesaid,

and they have succeeded in destroying most of the patronage heretofore

enjoyed by your orators and the Chinese subjects aforementioned.

And your orators do further say that from the very nature of the damage and

injury so as aforesaid perpetrated and incurred it is not possible to prove the

amount thereof in an action at law, and that the recovery of such damages as

are consequent thereon would involve a multiplicity of suits, and that if the

said defendants and the other citizens combining and confederating with

them shall be permitted to continue their unlawful and malicious acts

aforesaid the injuries to your orators and the other natives and subjects of

China residing in Silver Bow County will be irreparable, and that there is

no adequate remedy at law for the redress of the wrongs so suffered.

And your orators do further say that the said defendants, their aiders, and

abettors as aforesaid, are daily engaged in preventing by the unlawful

means aforesaid, customers from patronizing the stores, restaurants, tailor

shops, laundries, and ether places of business of your orators and the other

Chinese residents aforesaid, conducted by the natives and subjects of China

in the said county of Silver Bow, arid are daily causing your orators and

other natives of China aforesaid to suffer great loss in and about their

business in said county conducted.

And your orators do further say that the said defendants by reason of their

identification with said divers and sundry organizations have great power

andinfluenceoverthecommunityinwhichyouroratorsandtheir

countrymen have been doing business, and are able thereby to incite the

wicked and ignorant in said community to continue the perpetration of said

wrongs to your orators and others, and that they intend so to incite the

ignorant and wicked members of said community to continue their boycott

so wickedly and unlawfully incited, inaugurated, and maintained, and to

impair and render unprofitable the business in which your orators and

others are now and have for the last ten months been engaged.

And your orators further say that the said defendants did from time to time

a continuation of the unlawful acts aforesaid by them or some of them, and

they threaten so to continue to do.

And your orators do further say that the foregoing boycott and acts

constituting the same are perpetrated by the said defendants and others

wickedly, unlawfully, and maliciously in scorn of the public faith of the

United States, which by treaty and law is so solemnly pledged to protect

your orators and all other alien Chinese residents of the United States from

the maltreatment hereinbefore alleged and described.

And your orators do further say that damages accruing to your orators by

the said wrongs heretofore perpetrated by the said defendants exceeds the

sum of $50,000, and unless restrained by the court the further injury

hereafter to be perpetrated by a continuance of the said wrongs above set

forth and threatened will exceed the sum of $2,000, and that the good will

of their business so being conducted at Butte, in said county, would, by the

cessation of said wrongs so threatened and being perpetrated, be increased

more than $2,000.

And your orators do further say that all of the foregoing acts and doings are

contrary to equity and good conscience and tend to the manifest injury of

your orators in the premises and to the injury of all persons in like condition

and circumstance, for as much as your orators can have no adequate remedy

except in a court of equity, and to the end therefore that the defendants may,

if they can, show why your orators should not have the relief hereby prayed

and make a full disclosure and discovery of all the matters aforesaid and

accordingtothebestandutmostoftheirknowledge,remembrance,

information and belief, full, true, direct, and perfect answers make to the

matters hereinbefore stated and charged under oath, and answer under oath

being hereby expressly waived, and that the said defendants, their agents,

confederates, coconspirators, and all persons acting in the premises with

them may be enjoined and restrained from any farther violation of your

orator’s said rights, your orators pray that your honor may grant writ of

injunction, issuing out of and under the seal of this honorable court,

perpetually enjoining and restraining the said defendants, their clerks,

agents, servants, workmen, and confederates from further combining or

conspiring in the manner before mentioned and described to injure or

destroythebusinessaforesaidofyourorators,andfrominjuringor

destroying the business of those certain natives and subjects of the Empire

of China, resident in Silver Bow County, and conducting business therein,

and from boycotting your orators or the natives and subjects of the Empire

of China aforesaid so engaged in business in said county, and from

advising, threatening, or coercing any person or persons intending to

become patrons of your orators as aforesaid from so patronizing your

orators and their countrymen as they shall incline or desire, and from

causing to be carried through the streets of said Butte the said banners,

floats,transparencies,andmottoeswiththesameorlikelibelousor

defamatory pictures or mottoes thereon, and from remaining in the vicinity

of the places of business of your orators or their countrymen so engaged in

business in said Silver Bow County advising and notifying individuals not

to patronize your orators or other citizens of Chinese nativity, descent, or

citizenship, or threatening them in any manner if they so do; and they be

further enjoined and restrained from in any way or manner contributing any

money or moneys whatever to be by anybody used to injure the business of

your orators or their countrymen in said county, or to cause said floats,

banners, transparencies, mottoes, to be carried in the streets in the said town

of Butte or county of Silver Bow; that the said floats, transparencies,

mottoes, and other devices so unlawfully and maliciously used as aforesaid

may be destroyed or delivered up to your orators for that purpose; and that a

provisionalorpreliminaryinjunctionbeissued,restrainingthesaid

defendants, their clerks, attorneys, agents, workmen, and confederates as

aforesaid, pending this cause, and for such other and further relief as the

equity of the cause may require and to your honor may seem meet.

May it please your honor to grant unto your orators not only a writ of

injunction conformable to the prayer of this bill, but also a subpoena of the

United States of America directed to the said Frank Baldwin, Griffith E.

Taylor, George Moreheart, George P. Walters, P. H. Burns, Pat Kane, Ed.

Marsch, H. C. Morgan, M. J. Geiger, Louis Schaffer, Henry La Galla,

Charles Slayton, J. W. Hoffman, George W. Morgan, Frank P. Welden, Fred

Whatly, Albine A. Sandahl, Robert E. Taylor, J. H. Free, W. R. Martin, W.

H. Eddy, and John Doe and Richard Roe, whose real names are unknown,

commandingthemonacertaindaytoappearandansweruntothis

complaint and to abide and perform such order and decree in the premises

as to the court shall seem proper and required by the principles of equity

and good conscience.

SANDERS &SANDERS,
Solicitors for Complainants and of Counsel.
W.F.SANDERS,
Of Counsel for Complainants.
UNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,District of Montana, ss:On this the 13th day of April,

1897, before me personally appeared Huie Pock, one of the complainants

above named, who, being by me duly sworn, deposes and says, that he has

heard the foregoing bill of complaint read, and knows the contents thereof,

and that the same is true to his own knowledge except as to the matters

therein stated on information and belief, and as to these matters he believes

it to be true.
HUIEPOCK.
Sworn and subscribed to before me this 13th day of April, 1897.

[SEAL.]LEWISPENWELL,
Notary Public in and for the County of Lewis and Clarke, State of

Montana.
EXHIBITB.
TS M G O,
Helena,January 27, 1893.

Hon. HJH ,Attorney-General, City.
DS: I hand you herewith papers from Hon. Thompson Campbell, of

Butte City, which call attention to the fact that there has been such action

taken by that municipal government which he thinks conflicts with “treaty

obligations of the United States Government with that of China, and the

subjects thereof residing and being within the United States under said

treaty.”

You will please instruct this office what my duty is in the case under the

constitution and laws of the State.

I am, with respect, yours, very truly,
J.E.RICKARDS,Governor.
FEBRUARY21, 1893.

To His Excellency JOHNE.RICKARDS,Governor of Montana.

SIR: Herewith we note the receipt of a communication from your department

under date of January 23, 1893, inclosing papers from the Hon. Thompson

Campbell, of Butte City, which in themselves call attention to the fact that

there has been such action taken by the municipal government of the city of

Butte, which in the opinion of Mr. Campbell conflicts with “the treaty

obligations of the United States Government with that of China and the

subjects thereof residing and being within the United States under said

treaty.”

All of which has been submitted to this department with the request that we

advise you as to your official duties in the case under the constitution and

laws of the State.

The action of Mr. Campbell in submitting this matter to your department for

your consideration is predicated upon two documents therewith inclosed,

which for the purpose of review are noted as follows:

“H SBT LA ,

“Butte, Mont., ——, 1892.
“To the Mayor and City Council of the City of Butte.
“G : At a meeting of the Silver Bow Trades and Labor

Assembly,heldDecember4,1892,theundersignedwere

appointed a committee to wait upon your honorable body and to

ask the assistance of the city government in labor’s strenuous

endeavors to rid the city of the Chinese.

“For years, owing to the competition of the Chinese, a respectable

living in any classes of labor in this city has been uncertain and

precarious.Ourlaboringmencannotliveascheaplyas

Chinamen, and therefore can not afford to work in competition

with Chinamen. Considering it the duty of the city government to

look after the welfare of its citizens, we are confident that the

present city government, like its predecessors, will regard the

interests of the white men, who are citizens, rather than the

Chinamen, who are not citizens.

“The method in which we ask the city council to second our

efforts to rid the city of the Chinamen is by discharging all the

city employees who employ Chinese help directly or indirectly, or

who in any way patronize Chinese labor.

“Respectfully submitted.

“Per order,

“SILVERBOWTRADES ANDLABORASSEMBLY.
“Committee appointed by our body to submit this petition:

“CommunicationfromtheSilverBowTradesandLabor

Assembly, asking that all city employees patronizing Chinese be

discharged, was, on motion of Paxson, referred to the judiciary

committee.”

[“Extract from the report of the judiciary committee.]

“In the matter of the communication of the Trades and Labor

Assembly referred to your committee, we beg leave to report that

afterhavingconsideredsaidcommunicationyourcommittee

recommends that the heads of all departments of the city be

requested by the council to use their best endeavors to induce all

employees of the city, and that all employees be requested not to

employorpatronizeChinamen,eitherdirectlyorindirectly,

during the term that they are in the employ of the city in any

capacity. On the motion of Pascoe, the report was received and

adopted.”

The first of these documents appears to be a communication which was

prepared by a committee of the Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly of

Butte, Mont., under the authority and direction of such Trades and Labor

Assembly, and presented to the mayor and city council in the month of

December,1892,whichcommunicationwasreferredtothejudiciary

committee of said council, and thereafter the report of said committee being

received by the council the same was adopted.

Thismattersosubmittedtouspresentsforourconsiderationtwo

propositions, the first of which is international and the second a State

question and involving the violations of the stipulations or obligations of a

treaty, and second the enforcement of the laws of the State of Montana to

protect residents therein.

First. Is the action of the city council of the city of Butte in

contravention of any law of Congress or of any treaty stipulation

or obligation of the United States Government with that of China,

and the subjects thereof residing and being within the United

States under said treaty?

Second. Does this case present such a state of facts to your

excellency, if true, as will warrant executive interference in the

absence of any complaint on the part of the subjects of the

Chinese Government who are residing within the jurisdiction of

theStateofMontana,orademandforaninquirybythe

Department of State of the General Government?

The first treaty of any note that was entered into between the General

Government and China was one of peace, amity, and commerce between

the United States of America and Ta Tsing Empire of China, concluded at

Wang Hiya on July 3, 1844, and ratified by the President January 17, 1845.

One of the conditions of said treaty was to the effect “that there shall be a

perfect, permanent, and universal peace and a sincere and cordial amity

between the United States of America on one part and the Ta Tsing Empire

on the other part and between their people respectively without exception of

person or places.”

The object of said treaty was to open to the citizens of the United States five

Chinese ports and permit the citizens of the United States to proceed at their

pleasure with their vessels and merchandise to and from any foreign port to

either of said five ports, and from either of said five ports to any other of

them. At each of said five ports citizens of the United States lawfully

engaged in commerce were permitted to import from their own or any other

port in China and sell there and purchase therein, and export to their own or

any other ports therein, all manner of merchandise of which the importation

or exportation was not prohibited by said treaty. The former limitations of

trade of foreign nations to certain persons appointed at Canton by the

Government and commonly called Hong merchants was thereby abolished,

and citizens of the United States engaged in the purchase or sale of imports

or exports were by the article of said treaty admitted to trade with any and

all subjects of China without distinction, and were not to be subject to any

new limitations or impeded in their business by monopolies or other

injurious restrictions.

At the place of entry of the vessels of the United States the citizens of the

United States, merchants, seamen, or others sojourning there might pass and

repass in the immediate neighborhood, but they could not at their pleasure

make excursions into the country among the villages at large, nor could

they repair to their public marts for the purpose of disposing of goods

unlawfully and in fraud of the revenue.

All citizens of the United States in China peaceably attending to their affairs

were placed on a common footing of amity and goodwill with subjects of

China, and were entitled to receive and enjoy for themselves and everything

appertaining to them the special protection of the local authorities of

Government who were required to defend them from all insult or injury of

any sort on the part of the Chinese.

If the citizens of the United States had special occasion to address any

communication to the Chinese local officers or Government, they were

required to submit the same to their consul or other officer to determine if

the language was proper and respectful and the matter just and right, in

which event the consul would transmit the same to the appropriate authority

for their consideration and action in the premises, and if the controversy

should arise between citizens of the United States and subjects of China

whichcouldnotbeamicablysettledotherwisethesameshouldbe

examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the public

officers of the two nations acting in conjunction.

It was stipulated that the provisions of said treaty should not be altered

without grave cause; but inasmuch as the circumstances of the several ports

of China open to foreign commerce are different, experience may show that

inconsiderable modifications are requisite in those parts which relate to

commerce and navigation, in which case the two Governments will, at the

expiration of twelve years from the date of said convention, treat amicably

concerning the same by means of suitable persons appointed to conduct

such negotiations.

In 1858, which was nearly thirteen years after the ratification of the first

treaty with China and during the administration of President Buchanan, the

two Governments adopted and renewed in a manner clear and positive by

means of a treaty or general convention of peace, amity, and commerce, the

rules which in future were to be mutually observed in the intercourse of

their respective countries.

This treaty was substituted for the treaty of 1844, so far as it related to the

identical subjects, and had effect of opening additional ports to commerce

and permitted citizens of the United States with their families to trade

therein and to proceed at their pleasure with their vessels and merchandise

from any of said ports to any other of them.

Prior to the adoption of this last-named treaty the vessels of the United

States have not been admitted to trade freely with the ports of China on an

equal footing with the vessels of other countries; but this treaty had the

effect to open to the United States all the ports of China which were at that

time open to foreign commerce.

Following the rule laid down in article 34 of the treaty of 1844, which

provided that additional articles might be made thereto every twelve years,

the United States and the Ta Tsing Empire entered into articles additional to

the treaty of 1858, which were ratified by the President in 1868, and which

was known as the Burlingame treaty.

In the last-named treaty the Emperor of China was delegated with the right

to appoint consuls at ports of the United States who should enjoy the same

privileges and immunities as those which were enjoyed by public law and

treaty in the United States by the consuls of Great Britain and Russia, or

either of them.

This treaty by its articles recognized the inherent and inalienable right of

man to change his home and allegiance, and also the mutual advantage of

the free migration and immigration of citizens, respectively, from the one

country to the other for the purposes of curiosity, of trade, or as permanent

residents. It provided that citizens of the United States visiting or residing in

China should enjoy the same privileges, immunities, or exemptions in

respect of travel or residence as may there be enjoyed by the citizens or

subjects of the most favored nation, and reciprocally Chinese subjects

visiting or residing in the United States shall enjoy the same privileges,

immunities, or exemptions in respect to travel or residence as may there be

enjoyedbythecitizensorsubjectsofthemostfavorednation,and

reciprocally Chinese subjects visiting or residing in the United States shall

enjoy the same privileges, immunities, and exemption in respect to travel or

residence as may there be enjoyed by the subjects or citizens of the most

favored nation; but nothing therein contained should be held to confer

naturalization upon citizens of the United States in China nor upon subjects

It is further provided that Chinese subjects should enjoy all the privileges of

educational institutions under the control of the Government of the United

States which are enjoyed in the respective countries by the citizens or

subjects of the most favored nations; and that Chinese subjects may freely

establish and maintain schools within the United States at those places

where foreigners are by treaty permitted to reside.

Under the provisions of the treaty of 1868, as well as those of former

treaties, hordes of Chinese laborers, who were subjects of the Ta Tsing

Government, took advantage of the plenary conditions and literally poured

into the United States, and not until protest after protest had gone up from

the people against this influx of immigration which endangered the good

order of certain localities within its boundaries—namely, the Pacific coast

States and Territories—did the Government of the United States, by its

Congress, take legislative action thereon, and on May 6, 1892, passed what

was called the Chinese exclusion act. The act provided that the coming of

the Chinese laborers to the United States be, and the same is hereby,

suspended after the passage of the act and until the expiration of ten years

next thereafter.

Said act further provided that hereafter no State court or court of the United

States shall admit Chinese to citizenship. This act was intended to prevent

and did have the force and effect of preventing Chinese laborers from

immigrating into the United States, and for its constitutionality depended

upon the fact that it was a police regulation in this that the coming of

Chinese laborers to this country endangered the good order of certain

localities within the territory thereof. While this act exempted from its

provisions all the Chinese laborers who were in the United States on the

17th day of November, 1880, as well as those who came to the same before

the expiration of ninety days after the passage of said act, it was in itself, so

far as the United States could speak through that body, a Congressional

declaration that the subjects of Ta Tsing Empire and the Chinese are

objectionable to the people of the United States.

The people of the United States spoke through their Congress, which was

their sovereign power, and declared in plain and unmistakable language

“that Chinese cheap labor, which had taken or obtained so firm a root in

American soil, should be uprooted and transplanted into the soil of its

nativity.” It was a declaration that the fittest should survive, and a further

declaration that their presence in this country was prejudicial to and

endangered the good order of certain localities within the territory thereof.

The act of Congress of 1882, and as amended by the act of 1884, was

accepted, and must be understood as a proscription against the admission of

Chinese subjects into the United States by land or water, and any Chinese

person found unlawfully within the United States shall be caused to be

removed therefrom to the country from whence he came at the cost of the

UnitedStates,afterbeingbroughtbeforesomejustice,judge,or

commissioner of a court of the United States and found to be not lawfully

entitled to be or remain in the United States.

The first step that was taken to protect free white labor against competition

against Chinese cooly labor and discourage the immigration of Chinese into

the United States was taken by the miners in the State of California in the

years 1854 and 1855, and resulted in the passage of a law which fixed the

rate of a foreign miner’s tax at $4 a month as to all foreigners “eligible to

become citizens of the United States/’ and as to all foreigners “ineligible to

become citizens of the United States,” increased it $2 a month for every

successive year ad infinitum.

The agitation of this question which was so vital to the people continued,

and their opposition thereto was made manifest by further legislation by the

legislature of California, in 1858, by an act entitled “An act to prevent the

further immigration of Chinese or Mongolians into this State.”

The subject-matter of this act is noted in the two sections following: “On

and after the first day of October, A. D. one thousand eight hundred and

fifty-eight, any person or persons of Chinese or Mongolian races shall not

be permitted to enter this State, or the land therein, or at any port thereof,

and it shall be unlawful for any man or person, whether captain or

commander or other person in charge of or interested in or employed on

board of, or passenger upon, any vessel of any nature or description

whatsoever, to knowingly allow or permit any Chinese or Mongolian on

and after such time to enter any of the ports of this State, or land therein or

persons violating any of the provisions of this act shall be held and deemed

guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a

fine in any sum not less than four hundred dollars nor more than six

hundred dollars for each and every offence, or imprisonment in the county

jail of the county in which the said offense was committed for a period of

not less than three months nor more than one year, or by both such fine and

imprisonment.Section2. ThelandingofeachandeveryChineseor

Mongolian person or persons shall be deemed and held as a distinct and

separate offence, and punished accordingly.”

The legislature of California, influenced and urged on by the continued

opposition of Americans to Chinese cooly labor, in 1862 passed an act

entitled“Anacttoprotectfreewhitelaboragainstcompetitionand

discourage the immigration of Chinese into the State of California.”

As early as 1848 the States of New York and Massachusetts, by and through

their legislatures, enacted laws imposing a direct tax upon alien passengers,

the former $1 on cabin and $1.50 on steerage passengers, and the latter a

tax of $2 on each passenger, to be paid under both laws by the master,

owner, or consignee of the ships.

Upon the ground that the power of tolerance or intolerance of foreigners is a

question which should lie with the Federal Government, and act with the

State governments, the courts held the tax unconstitutional, although Chief

Justice Taney, in a case arising under the statute of New York, dissented

from a majority of the court and contended that the power over persons was

in the State and not in the Federal Government.

The advocates of the several measures disavowed the doctrine of State

sovereignty, but asserted the States as independent in the management of

their internal affairs; that in everything which contributed to their tranquility

they are the managers; that in all police regulations they are supreme; that

the State had an inalienable right to regulate all matters pertaining to its

public morals, must have the right to exclude paupers, criminals, and

dangerous persons, and that the exercise of this power and discretion rested

nowhere else than in the legislature. (Priggv. Penn., 16 Pet., 625; 5 How.,

525; 14 Pet., 565; 11 Pet., 142.) They stoutly maintain that the police of the

State. (Manningv. Clark, 5 How., 471.) Unquestionably the power exists in

the State absolutely to decide what is sufficient cause to forbid a continued

residence within its borders, and those considerations may be municipal or

economical—as for example, danger of pauperism, danger of health, danger

to morals, danger to property, danger to public principles by revolutions and

change of government, or danger to religion. (Passenger cases, 7 How.,

443.) The municipality of Butte being a component part of the State of

Montana, and governed by the existing laws of this State, has a coordinate

right with the State to enforce such rules and regulations which are not

inconsistent with the constitution and laws of the State to protect such

municipality from dangers of pauperism, danger to health, danger to morals,

danger to property, or danger to religion.

The attorney for the Chinese company must concede:

(a) That the Chinese are not bona fide residents in any sense of

the word; they will not even permit their bones to have sepulture

in our soil.

(b) That this request by the trades and labor union of Butte, even

if incorporated into a rule by the municipality of Butte, would not

interfere with the “possession or enjoyment” of property by the

Chineseorpreventthemfromengagingincommonwith

American citizens resident therein.

(c) That such a rule does not conflict with the treaty obligations of

the United States Government with that of China and the subjects

thereof residing and being within the United States under said

treaty.

That these two propositions are not mooted must be conceded. From the

very fact that the customs and habits of the Chinese are such as negative the

assumption that they are bona fide residents of this State and too that the

laws of Montana permit foreigners to engage in trade upon an equal footing

with the citizens thereof; and that this can not be regarded in any sense as

an inhibition upon the right of the Chinese to engage in trade.

The treaties that have been entered into from time to time between the

United States of America and Ta Tsing Empire show nothing more than that

they were intended for the purpose of trade and commerce between the two

countries and for maintaining permanent and universal peace between the

people of those Governments respectively.

We present a brief epitome of the several articles of treaty: The treaty of

1844 provided for the opening of five ports and permitted citizens of the

United States with their families to reside and trade there. It provided that

the United States might appoint consuls at these ports and restricted the

trade to these places. Citizens of the United States were allowed to engage

pilots for their vessels in entering said ports and to hire servants and clerks,

seamen, and laborers; that no cargo could be discharged without permits

from the superintendent of customs of the port. The tonnage duty on vessels

belonging to the United States was required on their being permitted to

enter. Duties on imports were required to be paid on the discharge of the

goods and duties of export on the landing of the same, payable either in

sycee silver or in foreign money at the rate of exchange as ascertained by

the regulations then in force.

It provides how houses and places of business may be obtained, the hiring

of sites for the inhabitants to construct houses and places of business, and

also hospitals, churches, and cemeteries, and that the local authorities of the

two Governments should select in concert the sites for the foregoing

objects. The citizens of the United States were not permitted at their

pleasure to make excursions into the country among the villages at large nor

to repair to public marts for the purpose of disposing of their goods. In case

any officer or citizen of the United States employed any citizen of China

such employee was protected from prosecution on the part of the Chinese

Government. It provides for the protection of dwellings or property when

attacked by mobs, incendiaries, or other lawless persons.

In case of controversies arising between citizens of the United States and

subjects of China, the same are to be examined and decided conformably to

justice and equity by the public officers of the two nations acting in

conjunction.

It provided that if merchant vessels of the United States were plundered by

robbersorpiratesinChinesewatersandtherobberscouldnotbe

apprehended by reason of territory and numerous population of China, that

the Chinese would not make indemnity for the goods lost.

It provided for the action on the part of the Chinese Government in case of

vessels wrecked or stranded on the coast of China.

It provided for the mode and manner of correspondence not only in case

where citizens of the United States desired to address the local officers of

China,butincaseofcorrespondencebetweentheauthoritiesor

representativesoftherespectiveGovernments,andprohibitedthe

interchange of presents between the two Governments.

It prohibited the citizens of the United States trading with any other ports of

China that were not open to foreign commerce, and that in case of such

violation they were not entitled to any countenance or protection from the

United States. It negatived any construction of the treaty that would confer

naturalization upon citizens of the United States in China, or upon subjects

of China in the United States. The so-called Burlingame treaty is the only

treaty in existence which purports to grant to subjects of the Ta Tsing

Empire residing in the United States rights, privileges, and immunities

coequal to those granted to the citizens of the United States residents of

such Empire.

As to those privileges, the treaty provides that Chinese subjects visiting or

residing in the United States shall enjoy the same privileges, immunities,

and exemptions in respect of travel or residence as may there be enjoyed by

the citizens or subjects of the most favored nation.

This latter paragraph does not, as will be perceived, grant to subjects of the

Chinese Empire residing in the United States the right to engage in trade

and deal in lands and estates, and the holding of any office therein is

practically inhibited by proscription of the rights of naturalization.

To asseverate that citizens of the United States under the articles of either

treaty have the right to freely engage in trade in any portion of the Ta Tsing

Empire, except such as are specifically enumerated in said articles, would

be to contend for that which is not therein written. All that is not therein

delegated is excluded therefrom for that such treaties are limitations of right

rather than a delegation of prerogative. They carry with them the stamp of

autocratic concessions on the one hand and monarchial reservations on the

other.

Thatwhichwassecuredby Americandiplomacyhasyieldedusan

inheritance of Mongolian vampirism, which has fastened itself upon every

source of living common to American wage workers.

Because we think to remove this human barnacle by lawful and legitimate

measure, we are met with the declaration that “such peaceful agencies are in

violation of the said treaty obligation.”

These treaties of peace, amity, and commerce never contemplated that we

should yield up to the subjects of the Chinese Empire every channel and

means by which the American wage worker secures a livelihood for himself

and family in order that his wealth might go to the former or that they might

compete with him to the extent that the exercise of such privileges would be

prejudicial to and endanger the good order of any locality within the United

States.

This is not a retrospect of facts, dependent upon speculation or idle fancy,

but a state of facts the existence of which is the nursery of crime and the

parent of poverty. How best to preserve the rights of the wage workers of

the country after their destruction through Mongolian labor is not the

inquiry, but how to preserve them from such destruction.

In view of the above facts and the articles of said mentioned treaties we

hold that the action of the city council of Butte was not in any manner or at

all in conflict with the treaty obligations of the United States Government

with that of China.
HJH ,Attorney-General.

EXHIBITC.
In the circuit court of the United States, ninth circuit, district of Montana.

HUMFAY,DEERYICK,HUMTONG, ANDHUIEPOCK, complainants,
v.
FRANKBALDWIN,GRIFFITHE.TAYLOR,GEORGEB. Walters, George Morehart, P. H. Burns,

Ed. Marchand, H. S. Morgan, M. J. Geiger, Louis Schaffer, Harry La

Galla, Charles Siaton, J. W. Huffman, George W. Morgan, Frank P.

Weldon, Fred Whately, Albin A. Sandahl, Robert E. Taylor, J. H. Freer,

W. R. Martin, W. H. Eddy, and John Doe and Richard Roe, whose real

names are unknown, defendants.

To the Hon. HIRAMKNOWLES,
Judge of the above-entitled court.

SIR: I have the honor to submit the report of my proceedings under the

following order of the court: “Pursuant to the written stipulation of the

respective parties hereto filed herein, it is ordered that the evidence herein is

referred to Henry N. Blake, esq., a master in chancery of this court, to

ascertain and report to this court the facts established thereby; that he pass

upon the objections to the evidence or any part thereof, and that he report

hisdecisionastothecompetency,relevancy,andmaterialityofany

objections thereto, as well as to the facts established by the competent proof

in writing to this court, and that he give reasonable notice to the solicitors of

the respective parties of the time and place of any hearing by him and

hereunder.

“HK
I have passed upon the competency, relevancy, and materiality of the

objections to the evidence which have been preserved in the record. Messrs.

SandersandSanders,andFrancisBrooke,esq.,solicitorsforthe

complainants, and Messrs. J. L. and M. L. Wines and John N. Kirk, esq.,

and George A. Clarke, esq., solicitors for the defendants, were given

reasonable notice of the time and place of the hearings had by me under

said order and appeared and were heard orally and submitted briefs. My

rulings upon the objections of the evidence have been reduced to writing

upon the pages where the same appear in the original report filed herein

August 23, 1898. I have examined the evidence and rejected the portions

thereof which were considered incompetent, irrelevant, and immaterial.

On consideration whereof, I have found there have been established, by

competent proof, the followingFINDINGS OF FACTS.
1. That the bill of complaint herein was filed April 14, 1897, by the

complainantsHumFay,Deer Yick,Hum Tong,andHuiePock;and

thereafter, upon the 7th day of April, 1898, the parties hereinafter named

filed herein their petition of intervention, reference to which is hereby made

for a full statement thereof, and joined said complainants in the prosecution

of this section to secure the same relief, to wit: Wah Shung Lung, Tom Hing

Jip, Tom Wah, Tom Hoi Quoi, Tom Huie Shorn, Tom Mun Hi, Tom Lick,

Hum Young, Tom Hi Lip, Lang Gung Fon, Jung Hing Sing, Quon Hock

Ben, Jung Mung Wy, Lou Quong, Chin Noy, Chin Thick, Chin Foo,

Charley King, Woo Shoo, Ye Gung, Wong Long Ben, Chin Wing Shoy,

Chin Sung, Chin Low, Quong Tuck Wing, Bow Shang Kong, Quong Fong,

Quon Que Sing, Wong Ming, Quon High, Quon Hong, Quong Hing Huie,

Lang Moy, Quon Long Quock, Quon Ying Quong, Quong Jung, Quon Hing

Gee, Quon Shick Shung, Hum Kee, Hum Town, Tom One Lung, Tom Fling

Ga, Tom Mon Chon, Young Tong, Ling Chee, Quong Chong Wa, Foo Kee,

Wauh Die, Chin Yu Dong, Gum Chong Hi, Leo Baugh Yu, Quon Quack

Hung, Leo Chung, Soo Mou, Lou Hong Ken, Lou Guch Yu, Lou Hock

Num, Wau Kee, Chang Saw, Soo Ye King, Long Ben, Woo Lem, Mook

Yick, Hop Lee, Jim Lee, Hing Jack, Jong Hong, Tom Que, Lee Mou, Tuoe

Fon, Quon Yow, Tom Buck, Tom Fong, Tom Show, Tom Tong, Quon Hing

Yow, Quon Kock Gow, Wong Foy You, Youn Quon, Jung Hock Jock, Chin

Yun, Jung Ching, Lim Fon, Ye Sin Fu, Chin Jew, Chin Fun, Don Len, Ah

Loy, Chin Ham Dong, Wah Chong Tai Co., Wong Hon, Lim Lee Lock, Chin

Quon Hing, Pow Mng Tong, Wong Wauh Son, Che Lou Fou, Tom Quong,

Lou Quon, Wong Jung, Woo Ling, Chin Toy, On Fook, Chin Toy Chin,

Buck Yum, Quon Ah Yung, Quon Son Jake, Quon Dong Ben, Quon Quock

Ben, Quon Ti Dick, Chung Ye Wah, Quon Sing Lee, Quon Wee, Jung Fung

Poy, Lang Foo Lee, Quon Lee, Quong Jing, Quong Lung Chung, Quon

Quagh Lung, Ong Du Fon, Quong Joe, Ong Tong Yong, Quon Kee, Quon

Den, Quon Hock, Song Yen, Sing Lee, Lang Hing, Quon Keo, Tom Quon,

Lee Faw, Quon Gwee Gwock, Quon Ming, Tom Gem, Tom Yen, Tom Ying,

Tom Hock, Tom Chung, Tom Li, Toin Shorn, Tom Hing, Tom Quong, Tom

Tong, Tom Huey, Tom Jim, Jung Sing Kee, Sam Young, Woo Sing You,

Quon Ling Ging, Chung Quon, Ah Mun, Tom Young, Tom Quong, Tom

Sing, Tun Dau, Tom Hung, Hum Wuh, Han Bor, Hum Kee, Hum Young,

Hum Mun Yee, Jung Bing Ling, Jum Kun Wee, Quon Fook Loy, Soo Tong,

Jung Hing, Soo Que, Jung Young, Jung Wing, Jung Fee, Hing Hum Hing,

Lee Youn, Tom Chee, Tom Jong, Tom Hee, Tom Ying, Tom Yick, Tom

Hong, Tom Fon, Tom Jim, Tom Woo, Tom Quock, Lee Sun, Tom Kin, Tom

Hoo, Quon Chong, Quon Chong, Quon Sin, Quon Hem, Tom Toy, Tom

Wing, Tom Wing Hee, Tok Fook Yen, Tom Lung, Tom Lee, Tom Sue, Wong

Chung, Tong You Loy, Chung Yun, Ah Kee, Chung Yuck, Tom Sam Lee,

Jen Ah Hem, Hum Tom, Woo Bauh, Jung Wot, Jung Yum, Jung Yen, Jung

Dick Chum, Toy Ton, Toy Sing Chu, Toy Ling, Toy Yick Mou, Quon Yock,

Tom Yea, Quon Sing, Quon Chea Sing, Lou Chin, Quon Egg, Quon Tong,

Jong Wong, Yuen Tuck, Chu King, Kee Yock, Sam Yick, Jung Chu.

2. That the complainants who filed the original bill of complaint herein, and

said parties who filed April 7, 1896, said petition of intervention, and are

named in finding one hereof, were, at the time of the filing of the said

original bill of complaint, and the said supplemental bill of complaint, and

for a period of eight years prior thereto had been domiciled in said county

of Silver Bow, State of Montana, and were conducting or desiring to

conduct lawful business therein, to wit, keeping of stores for the sale of

goods;keepingofrestaurantsandplacesprovidingfoodfora

compensation; the raising of vegetables; and working for hire as cooks,

servants, laborers, and laundry men; and that said complainants and parties

are natives of Chinese descent, and were during the time specified, and are

now, entitled to the protection which is accorded in the United States to

subjects of the Empire of China.

3. That the above-named defendants, at the time specified in said original

and supplemental bills of complaint herein, were citizens and residents of

the said county of Silver Bow; and that the said George B. Walters departed

this life since the commencement of this suit.

4. That the complainants, Hum Fay, Deer Yick, and Hum Tong, since the 1st

day of April, 1896, have been and are now doing business in said county of

Silver Bow in the buying and selling of Chinese and Japanese fancy goods

and in the maintenance and carrying on of a restaurant at No. 37½ West

Park street, in said city of Butte; and that the said complainant, Huie Pock,

since the 1st day of April, 1896, has been and is now conducting, in said

city of Butte, a store for the sale of Chinese and Japanese fancy goods.

5. That during the times in said bill of complaint mentioned there were and

are now in the city of Butte organizations generally known as labor unions,

associations, and assemblies; that the above-named defendants and their

aiders and abettors, hereinafter mentioned, and more than three thousand

residents of said county of Silver Bow were members thereof, according to

their respective trades and occupations; that among those organizations

wereandaretheWorkingmen’sUnion,theCarpenter’sUnion,the

Plumbers and Gas Fitters’ Union, the Tailors’ Union, the Bricklayers and

Stonemasons’ Union, the Brewers’ Union, the Bakers’ Union, the Millmen

and Smeltermen’s Union, the Tin, Sheet Iron, and Cornice Workers’ Union,

the Butchers’ Union, the Molders’ Union, the Musicians’ Protective Union,

the Millwright and Pattern Makers’ Union, the Barbers’ Union, the W. R.

Morely Assembly, the Pioneer Assembly of the Knights of Labor, the

Clerks’ Assembly, the Meaderville Assembly of the Knights of Labor, the

CooksandWaiters’ Union,theBrotherhoodofSwitchmen,andthe

Amalgamated Association of Engineers; and that each of said organizations

elected, for a term of six months, delegates according to their membership

to a body in said city of Butte designated the Silver Bow Trades and Labor

Assembly.

6. That meetings for the transaction of business were held at stated times

and places by said labor unions, associations, and assemblies, and the Silver

Bow Trades and Labor Assembly; that the decisions and orders of the said

members of the organizations represented by such delegates, and were in

force; that during the times in said bill of complaint specified, and the

period of five years prior thereto, it was one of the obligations of said

members to refrain from patronizing the Chinese and Japanese, and also all

persons who patronized the Chinese and Japanese; that with these objects in

view a boycott had been declared and was then in existence by said

organizations and the Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly upon the said

Chinese and Japanese and their patrons; that on or about the 1st day of

November, 1896, and from that time until the issuance of the restraining

order herein against the defendants, in the month of April, 1897, the acts

hereinafter specified in these findings were committed by the defendants,

who are mentioned in furtherance of a willful and malicious conspiracy and

combination of said members of said organizations to render more effective

the said obligations and boycott, and deprive the complainants and all

persons in whose behalf the original and supplemental bills of complaint

were filed of the means of earning a livelihood, and thereby compel them to

leave the said city of Butte and the county of Silver Bow.

7. That during the time in the said original bill of complaint specified, the

following general committee was organized in said city of Butte to devise

ways and means for the vigorous prosecution of said boycott against the

Chinese and Japanese in the sixth finding mentioned, by the collection of

funds and the hiring of men to be a working force to commit the acts in

these findings hereinafter specified, to wit: Members of the Cooks and

Waiters’ Union, the above-named defendants Frank Baldwin, Frank P.

Weldon, and George W. Morgan; members of the Hotel and Restaurant

Employer’s Association, the above-named defendants H. C. Morgan, W. R.

Martin, and one J. A. S. Dougherty; and the proprietors of three steam

laundries in said city of Butte, the defendants J. H. Free, owner of the Troy

Laundry, Frank Hurlbut, owner of the Union Laundry, and Robert E. Taylor,

acting for himself and his partner, the defendant Albion A. Sandahl, the

owners of the C. O. D. Laundry; that said Frank Baldwin was the secretary

thereof; that said joint committee was aided in its labors by the unions,

associations, and assemblies in the fifth finding specified and said Silver

Bow Trades and Labor Assembly; that the first working force consisted of

the defendants George B. Walters, George Morehart, and one Patrick Kean;

that the second working force was composed of the defendants, Louis

Schaffer, Charles Slayton, and Frank Baldwin; that said persons constituted

said working force and were hired by said joint committee and paid for their

service from said funds; and that each of the defendants and persons who

committed the acts in these findings mentioned conspired, combined, and

confederated with the members of said joint committee and said labor

unions, associations, and assemblies and the Silver Bow Trades and Labor

Assembly to maintain said boycott upon the Chinese and Japanese and all

persons patronizing them, until the complainants and the parties in whose

behalf this action is prosecuted, should be driven from the said city of

Butte, and county of Silver Bow.

8. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified, and by order of said joint committee, and the

said Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, the following notice was

printed in the Inter Mountain, a newspaper published in said city of Butte,

upon the 13th day of April, 1897, to wit:

“BOYCOTT.
“A general boycott has been declared upon all Chinese and

Japanese restaurants, tailor shops, and washhouses by the Silver

Bow Trades and Labor Assembly. All friends and sympathizers of

organized labor will assist us in this fight against the lowering

Asiatic standards of living and morals. Americav. Asia, progress
v. retrogression are the considerations now involved. American

manhood and American womanhood must be protected from

competition with these inferior races, and further reduction of the

wages of native labor by the employment of these people must be

strenuously resisted.

“By order of the Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly.

“PHB;President.

“GBW ,Secretary.
That the said P. H. Burns, at the time specified in said notice, was a member

of said Bricklayer and Stone Masons’ Union, and a delegate therefrom to

the said Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, and the president thereof;

and that said George B. Walters was then a member of said Clerks’

Assembly and a delegate therefrom to the said Silver Bow Trades and

Labor Assembly, and the secretary thereof.

9. That in pursuance of the said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified, and by order of said joint committee and said

Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, the said defendant Fred Whately

was employed to drive through the main streets of the city of Butte, in the

daytime, a spring express wagon, drawn by one horse; that the cover was

made of bleached muslin, extending downward, in the form of a letter A,

from a ridge pole to the center, and was 12 feet long and 6 feet wide; that

upon the outside of said cover on one side of said wagon was painted a

cartoon representing a Chinese washhouse, and a Chinese, with a long

queue, was squirting water from his mouth, sprinkling a shirt he was

ironing; that upon the outside of said cover, upon the opposite side, was

painted a cartoon representing a Chinese cook house, with a stove, and a

Chinese, with a long queue, was kneading dough and dropping a rat into a

pot containing soup; that these cartoons were designed to, and would, excite

in the spectators feelings of prejudice and hostility against the Chinese; that

said wagon was driven from time to time, during certain hours of the day, in

the months of January, February, March and April, 1897, and seen by

thousands of persons; that there was in said wagon a bell or gong, which

could be, and was, rung by the driver, who pushed his foot upon it to attract

the attention of the people; and that upon the outside of the cover, upon

both sides of the said wagon, were painted the following words: “Boycott

the Chinese and Japanese and all persons patronizing them. By order of the

Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, and all labor organizations”

10. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified herein, and by order of said joint committee and

said Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, and during the months of

November and December, 1896, and January, February, March, and April,

1897, some of the above-named defendants, to wit, Louis Schaffer, Charles

Slayton, Harry La Galla, Fred Whately, J. W. Huffman, W. K. Martin, M. J.

Geiger, George Morehart, Frank Baldwin, and George B. Walters, did

willfully and maliciously go to said place of business of said complainants

Hum Fay, Deer Yick, and Hum Tong, at No. 37½ West Park street, in said

city of Butte, and stand upon and forcibly occupy the highway and sidewalk

in front thereof, and warn people who were or were about to become

customers in their said business, and did, in behalf of the said unions,

associations,andassemblies,andsaidSilverBowTradesandLabor

Assembly mentioned in finding 5 hereof, advise and state to such persons

that such business and place of business was boycotted because the said

complainants were Chinese, and that persons ought not to and must not

patronize said complainants or the said restaurant and store; that said

customers of said complainants were sometimes held up by the use of force

by the said defendants, compelled to leave said complainants’ place of

business; that said defendants posted and distributed to said customers and

persons dodgers and printed notices of such boycott upon the Chinese, and

that duplicates thereof are exhibits filed herein August 23, 1898; and that

the effect of these acts and the other acts of the defendants in these findings

specified was to reduce materially said business of said complainants and

make the same unprofitable.

11. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified, and during the months of December, 1896, and

January, February, March, and April, 1897, some of the above-named

defendants, to wit, George B. Walters, Charles Slayton, W. R. Martin, Louis

Schaffer, and Fred Whateley, did willfully and maliciously go to said place

of business of the said complainant, Huie Pock, in said city of Butte, and

stand upon and forcibly occupy the highway and sidewalk in front thereof,

and warn persons who were or were about to become his customers in his

said business, and did in behalf of said union, associations, and assemblies,

and said Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, mentioned in finding 5

herein, and advise and state to such persons that said business and place of

business were boycotted because the said complainant was a Chinese, and

that such persons ought not to and must not patronize the said complainant

or his said store; that said defendants posted and distributed to said

customers and persons dodgers or printed notices of said boycott upon the

said Chinese, and that duplicates thereof are exhibits filed herein August 23,

1898; and that the effects of these and other acts of the defendants in these

findings specified was to reduce materially the said business of the said

complainant and make the same unprofitable.

12. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified herein, and during the months of December,

1896, and January, February, March, and April, 1897, the said defendant

George B. Walters, and one John Helm, called upon Mrs. Louise Holmes, at

her residence in said city of Butte, and asked her to discharge the Chinamen

in her employ; that said Mrs. Holmes had boarders from four to six in

number; that the said Walters and Helm, about a month after the first visit,

called upon said Mrs. Holmes, and notified her that they had been there

many times and requested her to discharge said Chinaman, and they wanted

her to understand if she did not comply with their request, they would be

compelled to cause her trouble; that they would immediately get out papers

to boycott her, and that it would cost her some money to have the boycott

raised; that the effect of these and other acts of the defendants in these

findings specified was a loss of some of her said boarders.

13. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified, and during the months of January, February, and

March, 1897, some of the above-named defendants, to wit, Griffith E.

Taylor,Ed.Marchand,GeorgeMorehart,FrankBaldwin,GeorgeB.

Walters, and Louis Schaffer, did willfully and maliciously go to the place of

business of Mrs. Eva M. Althoff, upon East Broadway in said city of Butte,

to wit, the Will House, and stand upon and forcibly occupy the highway and

sidewalk in front thereof, and invite and warn persons who were or were

Assembly mentioned in finding 5 herein, and advise and state to said

persons and customers that said Will House was boycotted because the said

Mrs. Althoff, the proprietress thereof employed a Chinaman; that said

defendants made threats to said lodgers and persons, that they would be

boycotted if they did not remove therefrom, and paste upon said Will House

and distribute to said persons and lodgers printed notices or dodgers and

cards, declaring that said Will House was boycotted; that duplicates of said

dodgers, notices, and cards, marked A, B, C, and D, were filed herein

August 23, 1898, and reference is thereby made to the same, and that the

effect of these and other acts of the defendants specified in these findings

was to reduce materially the said business of said Mrs. Eva Althoff, and

make the same unprofitable.

14. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in said sixth and

seventhfindingspecifiedherein,andduringthemonthsofJanuary,

February, March, and April, 1897, and by order of said joint committee and

said Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, Fred Oram and other persons

were hired to carry, and did carry, in the daytime, through the main streets

of said city of Butte, a transparency of bleached muslin about 4 feet long

and 3½ feet wide, and attached to a pole, and that upon the same were

printed the following words: “Boycott the Will House.” “Mrs. Will employs

Chinese.” “By order of the Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly.” That

said Mrs. Will was the former name of the said Mrs. Eva M. Althoff.

15. That the said Mrs. Althoff, in order to carry on her said business at said

Will House without molestation by the said defendants and persons in the

thirteenth and fourteenth findings herein named, was compelled to and did

payMarch16,1897,tosaiddefendantGeorgeB.Walters,asthe

representative of the defendants and the said unions, associations, and

assemblies and the Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, the sum of $45;

that the said Walters and the said defendants in the thirteenth finding

mentioned demanded said sum to pay the expense of hiring persons to

commit the acts in the thirteenth and fourteenth findings herein specified,

and paint the said transparency and print said dodgers and notices and

cards; that the receipt of the said Walters for the said sum of $45, marked

Exhibit F, was filed herein August 23, 1898, and reference is hereby made

to the same; and that thereupon the said defendant caused to be printed and

published in said newspaper, the Inter Mountain, a notice declaring said

boycott of the said Will House off, “by order of the Silver Bow Trades and

Labor Assembly;” and that a copy of said notice, marked Exhibit G, was

filed herein August 23, 1898, and reference is hereby made to the same.

16. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventhfindingsspecified,andduringthemonthsofNovemberand

December, 1896, and January, February, and March, 1897, a delegate from

the Cooks’ and Waiters’ Union made a report to the Silver Bow Trades and

Labor Assembly that Mrs. Margaret Noyes employed a Chinese cook; that

Mrs. Noyes was than keeping a boarding house in said city of Butte; that

some of the defendants, to wit, George S. Walters, George Morehart, and Ed

Marchand, called upon said Mrs. Noyes and notified her, in behalf of the

said unions, associations, and assemblies, that she must discharge the said

cook or she would be boycotted and her said business destroyed; that M. B.

Holtz, a member of said Clerks’ Assembly, was a boarder at said house and

was notified by the said Walters to quit because the said Mrs. Noyes

employed a Chinese; that printed dodgers or notices of a boycott upon the

said business of said Mrs. Noyes were distributed about her said house and

in the neighborhood; that said Morehart was hired to and did watch the said

house; that the effect of this and other acts of the said defendants in these

findings specified was to reduce materially the said business of the said

Mrs. Noyes, and make the same unprofitable; that the said Mrs. Noyes in

order to avoid pecuniary loss and controversy, and pursue her said business

without molestation by the said defendants, was required to sign a paper

promising that she would not employ Chinese and pay the sum of $12.50 to

the said Walters, as the representative of the said defendants and said union

and associations and assemblies and the said Silver Bow Trades and Labor

Assembly; that the said Walters and the defendants demanded said sum to

pay the expense of printing said boycott dodgers and notices and hiring the

said Morehart to watch her said house, and that thereupon the said boycott

was declared lifted.

17. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified herein, and during the month of January, 1897,

the said George B. Walters and George Morehart called upon Mrs. Rodgers

at her place of business in the said city of Butte; that Mrs. Rodgers then

kept a lodging house known as the Rodgers House, and employed a Chinese

to work in and about her said house; that they gave to the said Mrs. Rodgers

printed dodgers or notices, announcing that there had been a boycott upon

the Chinese and Japanese in said city of Butte, and asking the friends of

organized labor to help them make the boycott; that they then notified said

Mrs. Rodgers that if she did not discharge her Chinese help they would

boycott the house and make her roomers quit, and drive her out of business;

that duplicates of said dodgers or notices were filed herein as exhibits,

August 23, 1896; and that thereupon, the said Mrs. Rodgers, in order to

carryonhersaidbusinesswithoutmolestationbysaiddefendants,

discharged the said Chinese.

18. That in pursuance of the said conspiracy and combination in the sixth

and seventh findings specified, and during the months of December, 1896,

and January, February, and March, 1897, the said defendant George B.

Walters and one person whose name was not proved called upon D. N.

Dellinger in said city of Butte; that said Dellinger had charge of a block the

larger portion of which was used for stores, and the upper floor was used

for offices; that a Chinese janitor was employed in and about the said block;

that said Walters and said other person whose name was not proven gave to

said Dellinger a dodger or printed notice, which stated that the Chinese and

Japanese were boycotted; that the said dodger or notice is marked Exhibit

L, and was filed herein August 23, 1898, and reference is hereby made to

the same; that said Exhibit L is a duplicate of said Exhibit J, and that said

Walters and person then notified said Dellinger to discharge the said

Chinese.

19. That during the months of November and December, 1896, and January,

February, March, and April, 1897, one of the rules of said Clerks’ Assembly

was as follows, to wit: “A fine of $5 shall be imposed on any member for

eachofthefollowingoffenses:PatronizingChineseorJapanese.”

Reference is hereby made to Exhibit N, filed herein August 23, 1898,

section 1, article 9. That Fred Bacon and W. D. Fenner, members of said

Clerks’ Assembly, were fined for a violation of this by-law; that by-laws of

thesametenorweretheninforceinsaidunions,associations,and

assemblies and the Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly; that David M.

Matt, a member of said Butchers’ Union, was fined for the offense of

patronizingChinese;andthatinpursuanceofsaidcombinationand

conspiracy in the sixth and seventh findings specified, and during the times

aforesaid, and by order of the said joint committee and said Silver Bow

Trades and Labor Assembly, said by-laws were vigilantly enforced and the

penalties were inflicted.

20. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified, and during the months of January, February, and

March, 1898, and by order of the said joint committee and said Silver Bow

Trades and Labor Assembly, a boycott was placed on Fayette Harrington

because he employed a Chinese, and upon the Silver Bow National Bank,

of said city of Butte, because the said Harrington was the cashier of the said

bank, and said bank was conducting and prosecuting its business in the

Beaver Block, upon which a boycott had been placed, according to the

order contained in said Exhibit I; that for this reason money had been

withdrawn by one depositor in said bank; and that after a meeting had been

had by one O. K. Lewis, the president of said bank, and a committee,

consisting of said defendant George B. Walters and a person named Reed,

said boycott was taken off.

21. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventhfindingsspecified,andduringthemonthsofNovemberand

December, 1896, and January, February, March, and April, 1897, and by

order of said joint committee and said Silver Bow Trades Assembly, some

of the said defendants, to wit, Charles Slayton, George Morehart, Louis

Schaffer, and George B. Walters, watched and followed the Chinese who

went to houses in the said city of Butte where they were employed as cooks,

servants, laundrymen, and other occupations, and made report to said joint

committee and said labor union, associations, and assemblies and the said

Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, giving the names of persons who

were hiring Chinese in any capacity; that members of said working force

were then sent to said houses to see the occupants and request the discharge

of such Chinese; and that such request would be followed by an order to

have a boycott declared against them.

22. That in pursuance of said conspiracy in the sixth and seventh findings

specified, and by order of said joint committee and said Silver Bow Trades

and Labor Assembly, and during the months of December, 1896, and

January, February, March, and April, 1897, a printed notice of the boycott

upon all Chinese and Japanese restaurants, tailor shops, and washhouses,

and all persons employing them in any capacity, were circulated by said

working force and said defendants in said city of Butte, and that a duplicate

of said notice, marked Exhibit –— was filed herein August 23, 1898; and

reference is hereby made to the same.

23. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified herein, and by order of the said joint committee

and said Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, and during the months of

December, 1896, and January, February, March, and April, 1897, a printed

notice announcing that a general boycott had been declared upon the

Chinese and Japanese restaurants, tailor shops, and washhouses by said

Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, were circulated by said working

force of the defendants in the said city of Butte, and that a duplicate of said

notice, marked Exhibit K, was filed herein August 23, 1898, and reference

is hereby made to the same.

24. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings specified herein, and by order of said joint committee and

said Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, and during the months of

December, 1896, and January, February, March, and April, 1897, printed

notices announcing that said Butte Tailors’ Union had placed a boycott upon

all Chinese tailor shops were circulated by said working force of the

defendants in said city of Butte; and that duplicates of said notices, marked

Exhibit K, were filed herein August 23, 1898, and reference is hereby made

to the same.

25. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings herein specified, and by order of said joint committee and

said Cooks’ and Waiters’ Union, and during the month of March, 1897,

printed cards notifying members of organized labor that nine parties, whose

names or places of business are set forth, persisted in employing Chinese

and Japanese labor were circulated by said working forces of the defendants

in said city of Butte; and that duplicate of said card, marked Exhibit I, was

filed herein August 23, 1898, and reference is hereby made to the same.

26. That in pursuance of said conspiracy and combination in the sixth and

seventh findings herein specified, and daring the months of November and

December, 1896, and the months of January, February, and March, 1897,

some of said defendants, to wit, Robert E. Taylor, George B. Walters, M. J.

Geiger, and H. C. Morgan, circulated subscription papers in said city of

Butte, and collected money from D. K. Giard and George E. Palmer, and

working force, the printing of said boycott notices, dodgers, and cards, the

driving of said horse and wagon, the carrying of said transparency and the

printing of said advertisement in said Inter Mountain, and that all of said

expenses were paid from funds collected and from persons engaged in

business in said city of Butte, and the Cooks’ and Waiters’ Union, the Hotel

and Restaurant Keepers’ Association, and said proprietors of said Troy

Laundry, Union Laundry, and the C. O. D. Laundry, and the said Silver

Bow Trades and Labor Assembly.

27. That the public authorities and officers of said city of Butte and said

county of Silver Bow and said State of Montana did not protect any of said

complainants or parties in whose behalf this action is prosecuted, or any of

the persons mentioned in these findings in the enjoyment of the right to

pursue a lawful occupation, or hire persons to perform labor or expend

money in places of business; never caused any of said defendants to be

arrested or punished in any manner for the commission of any of said acts

hereinafter specified.

28. That books containing the records of the proceedings during the periods

under investigation, to wit, the months of November and December, 1896,

and January, February, March, and April, 1897, were stolen from the

custody of the officers of the following organizations, to wit: The Cooks

and Waiters’ Union, the Silver Bow Trades and Labor Assembly, the Clerks’

Assembly, the Hotel and Restaurant Keepers’ Association, and the joint

committee on the Chinese boycott; that said books were kept in divers

places, and were missing at the same time; and that the complainants

resorted to all legal process to obtain said books, but they were not

produced upon this hearing.

29. That the effect of the said acts hereinbefore specified in these findings

was to deprive said Chinese residents of said city of Butte of work and the

means of earning a livelihood, and compelled them to go to other places;

that from the 1st day of November, 1896, to the issuance of the restraining

order herein in the month of April, 1897, 350 of said Chinese residents,

about one-half thereof, were thereby driven from said city of Butte; and that

the conspiracy and combination in the sixth and seventh findings herein, to

compeltheplaintiffsandthepartiesinwhosebehalfthisactionis

prosecuted, failed solely through the issuance of said restraining order

herein.

Dated this —— day of March, 1899.
HENRYN.BLAKE,
Master in Chancery.
EXHIBITD.
In the circuit court of the United States, ninth circuit, district of Montana.

In open court, March 12, 1900.

HUMFAY ET AL., COMPLAINANTS, No. 40.
v.

FRANKBALDWIN ET AL., DEFENDANTS.
In this matter, heretofore argued and submitted for the consideration of the

court, it is— Ordered that a decree enter herein against all of the defendants

except the following: Frank L. Galla, W. H. Eddy, A. A. Sandahl, John Doe

and Richard Roe, and G. B. Walters, who is dead.

Attest: A true copy from minutes.

[Seal circuit court of the United States.]GWS ,Clerk.
In the circuit court of the United States for the ninth circuit, district of

Montana.

HUMFAY,DEARYICK,HUMTONG,HUIEPOCK,WAHSHANGLUNG,TOMHINGJIP, Tom Wah, Tom

Hoi Quoi, Tom Huie Shorn, Tom Mun Hi, Tom Four, Tom Shu, Tom

Quong Wy, Tom Hoy Sing, Tom Quon Hi, Tom Lick, Hum Young, Tom

Hi Lip, Lanf Gung Fon, Jung Sing Hing, Quon Hock Ben, Jung Mung

Wy, Lou Quong, Chin Noy, Chin Thick, Chin Foo, Charley King, Woo

Shoo, Ye Gung, Woo Long Ben, Chin Wing Shoy, Ching Sung, Chin

Low, Quong Tuck Wing, Bow Shang Kong, Quong Fong, Quon Que

Sing, Wong Ming, Quon High, Quong Hong, Quon Hing Huie, Lang

Noy, Quong Quock, Quong Ying, Quong Jung, Quon Hing Gee, Quon

Quock Shung, Hum Kee, Hum Town, Tom One Lung, Tom Hing Ga,

Tom Mon Shon, Young Tong, Ling Chee, Quong Chong Wa, Foo Kee,

Wuah Die, Chin Yu Dong, Gun Chong Hi, Leo Gaugh Yu, Quon Quack,

Hung, Leo Chung, Soo Mou, Lou Hong Ken, Lou Guch Yu, Lou Hock

Num, Wauh Kee, Chang Sam, Soo Ye King, Long Ben, Woo Lem, Mook

Yick, Hop Lee, Jim Lee, Hing Juck, Jong Hong, Tom Que, Lee Mou,

Tuoe Fen, Quon Yok, Tom Buck, Tom Fong, Tom Show, Tom Tong,

Quon Hing Yow, Quon Hock Gow, Wong Foy You, Yuon Quon, Jung

Hock Jock, Chin Yun, Jung Chin, Lim Fen, Yee Sin Fu, Chin Jew, Chin

Fun, Don Len, Ah Loy, Chim Ham Dong, Wah Chong Tai Co., Wong

Hon, Lim Chee Look, Chin Quong Hing, Pow Ning Tong, Wong Wauh

Son, Chew Lou Foue, Tom Quong, Lou Quon, Wong Jung, Woo Ling,

Chin Toy, On Fook, Chin Toy, Chin Buck Yum, Quon Ah Yung, Quon

Son Jake, Quon Dong Ben, Quon Quock Ben, Quon Ti Dick, Chung Ye

Wah, Quon Sing Lee, Quon Wee, Jung Fung Foy, Lang Foo Lee, Quon

Lee, Quon Jing, Quon Lung Chung, Quon Quag Lung, Ong Do Fon,

Quong Joe, Ong Tong Yong, Quon Kee, Quon Den, Quon Hock, Song

Yen, Sing Lee, Lang Hing, Quon Keo, Tom Quon, Lee Faw, Quon Gwee

Gwock, Quon Ming, Tom Gem, Tom Yen, Tom Ying, Tom Hock, Tom

Chung, Tom Li, Tom Shon, Tom Hing, Tom Quong, Tom Tong, Tom

Huey, Tom Jim, Jung Sing Kee, Sam Young, Woo Sing You, Quon Ling

Ging, Chung Quon, Ah Mun, Tom Young, Tom Sing, Yun Dau, Tom

Hung, Hum Wuh, Han Bor, Hum Kee, Hum Young, Hum Mun Ye, Jung

Bing Ling, Jum Kun We, Quon Fook Hoy, Soo Tong, Jung Hing, Soo

Que, Jung Young, Jung Wing, Jung Fee, Hing Hum Hing, Lee Youn,

Tom Chee, Tom Jong, Tom Hee, Tom Ying, Tom Yick, Tom Hong, Tom

Fon, Tom Jim, Tom Woo, Tom Quock, Lee Sun, Tom Kim, Tom Hoo,

Quon Chong, Quon Sin, Quon Hem, Tom Toy, Tom Wing, Tom Wing,

Kee Tok Fook, Yen, Tom Lung, Tom Lee, Tom Sue, Wong Chung, Tong

You Loy, Chung Yun, Ah Kee, Chung Yuck, Toy Ton, Jung Yum, Toy

Sing Chu, Toy Ling, Toy Yick Mou, Quon Egg, Quon Tong, Jong Wong,

Yuen Tuck, Chu King, Kee Yock, Sam Yick Quon, Yock Tom Yea, Quon

Sing, Quon Shea Sing, Lou Chin, Jung Cha, complainants,
v.
FRANKBALDWIN,GRIFFITHE.TAYLOR,GEORGEMOREHART,P.H.BURNS, H. C. Morgan, M. J.

Geiger, Louis Schaffer, Charles Slayton, J. W. Hoffman, George W.

Morgan, Frank P. Welden, Fred Whateley, Robert E. Taylor, J. H. Free,

W. R. Martin, Ed. Marchand, et al., defendants.

This cause came on to be heard upon motion for a final decree by Messrs.

Sanders & Sanders, solicitors for the complainants against the defendants,

their servants, agents, employees, confederates, and coconspirators, and all

associationsandorganizationsactingwiththeminandaboutthe

perpetration and continuation of the wrongs set forth in their said bill of

complaint; and thereupon, on consideration thereof, it is ordered that the

said motion be, and the same is hereby, granted, and it is— Ordered,

adjudged, and decreed that the foregoing-named complainants do have a

perpetualandfinaldecreeenjoiningandrestrainingtheabove-named

defendants and each of them, their agents, servants, workmen, confederates,

employees,andcoconspirators,andallassociationsandorganizations

heretofore, at, and before the institution of this suit, or which since the

institution of the same have joined the same, and purpose and intend to

continuethesaidboycottandconspiracy,fromsomaintainingand

continuing the same, and they and each and all of them are and shall be

enjoined and restrained from further combining or conspiring to injure or

destroy the business of the said complainants or any of them, and from

threatening, coercing, or injuring any person or persons becoming or

intending to become patrons of said complainants or any of them because of

such patronage or intent, and from publishing, carrying, or causing to be

carried or drawn or published through the streets of Butte 01 in said county

any libelous or defamatory pictures, transparencies, mottoes, banners, or

any other devices of the Chinese, and from remaining in the vicinity of the

places of business of said complainants or any of them upon the streets or

sidewalks,advisingornotifyingindividualsnottopatronizesaid

complainants or any of them, or persons of Chinese nativity, descent, or

citizenship, and from threatening such persons in any manner if they do so,

and from contributing money to be by anybody used with the intent and for

the purpose of injuring the business of said complainants for or on account

thereof, and from in any way or manner combining or confederating

together with the intent and for the purpose of destroying the business of

said complainants or any of them.

And it is further ordered, adjudged, and decreed that the said clerk of this

court, under the seal thereof, shall issue said injunction conformable to this

decree, and that said injunction shall be in force and binding upon the

defendants herein named and each of them and their agents, servants,

workmen, confederates, employees, and coconspirators from and after the

service upon them severally of said writ of injunction by delivering to them

severally a copy thereof duly certified by the clerk of this court.

And it is further ordered, adjudged, and decreed that the said complainants

shall have and recover of and from said defendants their costs in this behalf

heretofore taxed by the clerk of this court at the sum of $1,750.05, and that

they have execution therefor against the said defendants as upon judgments

at law.
HIRAMKNOWLES,Judge.
Filed and entered May 18, 1900.
In the circuit court of the United States for the ninth circuit district of

Montana.

TU S A ,District of Montana, ss:The President of the United

States to Frank Baldwin, Griffith E. Taylor, George Morehart, P. H. Burns,

H. C. Morgan, M. J. Geiger, Louis Schaffer, Charles Slayton, J. W.

Hoffman, George W. Morgan, Frank P. Weldon, Fred Whatley, Robert E.

Taylor, J. H. Free, W. R. Martin, Ed. Marchand, and each of them, their

agents, servants, workmen, confederates, employees, and coconspirators,

greeting: Whereas Hum Fay, Dear Yick, Hum Tong, Huie Pock, Wah Shang

Lung, Tom Hing Jip, Tom Wah, Tom Hoi Quoi, Tom Huie Shon, Tom Mun

Hi, Tom Fou, Tom Shu, Tom Quong Wy, Tom Hoy Sing, Tom Quon Hi,

Tom Lick, Hum Young, Tom Hi Lip, Lang Gung Fon, Jung Hing Sing,

Quon Hock Ben, Jung Mung Wy, Lou Quong, Chin Noy, Chin Thick, Chin

Foo, Charley King, Woo Shoo, Ye Gung, Wong Long Ben, Chin Wing

Shoy, Chi Sung, Chin Low, Quong Tuck Wing, Bow Shang Kong, Quong

Fong, Quon Que Sing, Wong Ming, Quon High, Quong Hong, Quong Hing

Huie, Mang Moy, Quong Long Quock, Quon Ying, Quong Jung, Quon

Hing Gee, Quon Shock Shung, Hum Kee, Hum Town, Tom One Lung, Tom

Hing Ga, Tom Mon Chon, Young Tong, Ling Chee, Quon Chong Wa, Woo

Kee, Wauh Die, Chin Yu Dong, Gun Chong Hi, Leo Baugh Yu, Quon

Quack, Hung Leo Chung, Soo Mou, Lou Hong Ken, Lou Guch Yu, Lou

Hock Num, Wauh Kee, Chang Saw, Soo Ye King, Long Ben, Woo Lem,

Mook Yick, Hop Lee, Jim Lee, Hing Juck Jong Hong, Tom Que, Lee Mou,

Tuoe Fon, Quon Yow, Tom Buck, Tom Fong, Tom Show, Tom Tong, Quon

Hing Yow, Quon Kock Gow, Wong Foy You, Yuon Quon, Jung Hock Jock,

Chin Yun, Jung Ching, Lim Fon, Yee Sin Fu, Chin Jew, Chin Fun, Don Len,

Ah Ley, Chin Ham Dong, Wah Chong Tai Co., Wong Hon, Lim Chee Lock,

Chin Quong Hing, Pow Mng Tong, Wong Wauh Son, Chew Lou Fou, Tom

Quong, Lou Quon, Wong Jung, Woo Ling, Chin Toy, On Fook, Chin Toy,

Chin Buck Yum, Quon Ah Yung, Quon Son Jake, Quon Dong Ben, Quon

Quock Ben, Quon Ti Dick, Chung Ye Wah, Quon Sing Lee, Quon Wee Jung

Fung Poy, Lang Fee Lee, Quon Lee, Quon Jing, Quong Lung Chung, Quon

Quagh Lung, Ong Du Fon, Quong Joe, Ong Tong Yong, Quon Kee, Quon

Den, Quon Hock, Song Yen, Sing Lee, Lang Hing, Quan Qeo, Tom Quon,

Lee Faw, Quon Gwee Gwock, Quon Ming, Tom Gem, Tom Yen, Tom Ying,

Tom Hock, Tom Chung, Tom Li, Tom Shon, Tom Hing, Tom Quong, Tom

Tong, Tom Huey, Tom Jim, Jung Sing Kee, Sam Young, Woo Sing You,

Quon Ling Ging, Chung Quon Ah Mun, Tom Young, Tom Quong, Tom

Sing, Yun Dau, Tom Hung, Hum Wug, Han Bor, Hum Kee, Hum Young,

Hum Mun Ye, Jung Bing Ling, Jum Kun We, Quon Fook Loy, Soo Tong,

Jung Hing, Soo Que, Jung Young, Jung Wing, Jung Fee, Hing Hum, Himg,

Lee Youn, Tom Chee, Tom Jong, Tom Hee, Tom Ying, Tom Yick, Tom

Hong, Tom Fon, Tom Jim, Tom Qoo, Tom Quock, Lee Sun, Tom Kim, Tom

Hoo, Quon Chong, Quon Sin, Quon Hem, Tom Toy, Tom Wing, Tom Wing

Hee, Tok Fook Yen, Tom Lung, Tom Lee, Tom Sue, Wong Chung, Tong

You Loy, Chung Yun, Ah Kee, Chung Yuck, Tom Sam Lee, Jen Ah Hem,

Hum Tom, Yoo Bauh, Jung Wot, Jung Yum, Jing Yen, Jung Dick Chun, Toy

Ton, Toy Sing Chu, Toy Ling, Toy Yick Mou, Quon Egg, Quon Tong, Jong

Wong, Yuen Tuck, Chu King, Kee Kock, Sam Yick Quon, Yock Tom Yea,

Quon Sing, Quon Chea Sing, Lou Ghin, Jung Che, citizens and subjects of

the Empire of China, residents and doing business in the city of Butte and

county of Silverbow, State of Montana, have heretofore filed on the

chancery side of the circuit court of the United States for the ninth circuit,

district of Montana, a bill against Frank Baldwin, Griffith E. Taylor, George

Morehart, P. H. Burns, H. C. Morgan, M. J. Geiger, Louis Schaffer, Charles

Slayton, J. W. Hoffman, George W. Morgan, Frank P. Welden, Fred

Whateley, Robert E. Taylor, J. H. Free, W. R. Martin, Ed. Marchand, their

agents, servants, workmen, confederates, employees, and coconspirators;

and have obtained an allowance for an injunction as prayed for in said bill;

Now, therefore, we, having regard to the matters in said bill contained, do

hereby command and strictly enjoin you, the said Frank Baldwin, Griffith

E. Taylor, George Morehart, P. H. Burns, H. C. Morgan, M. J. Geiger, Louis

Schaffer, Charles Slayton, J. W. Hoffman, George W. Morgan, Frank P.

Welden, Fred Whateley, Robert E. Taylor, J. H. Free, W. R. Martin, Ed.

Marchand, and each of you, your agents, servants, workmen, confederates,

employees, and coconspirators, from further combining or conspiring to

injure or destroy the business of the above named citizens and subjects of

the Empire of China and residents of and doing business in the city of Butte

and county of Silverbow, State of Montana, or any of them; and from

maintaining or continuing the boycott and conspiracy against said Chinese

existing at the institution of this case; and from threatening, coercing, or

injuring any person or persons becoming or intending to become patrons of

the said citizens and subjects of the Empire of China, or any of them,

because of such patronage or intent; and from publishing, carrying, or

causing to be carried or drawn or published through the streets of Butte or

in said county any libelous or defamatory pictures, transparencies, mottoes,

banners, or any other devices of the Chinese; and from remaining in the

vicinity of the places of business of said citizens and subjects of the Empire

of China and residents of and doing business in the city of Butte and county

of Silverbow, State of Montana, or any of them, upon the streets or

sidewalks advising individuals not to patronize the said above-named

Chinese, or any of them, or persons of Chinese nativity, descent, or

citizenship, and from threatening such persons in any manner if they so do;

and from contributing money to be by anybody used with the intent and for

the purpose of injuring the business of the said Chinese above named, or

any of them; and from threatening, coercing, or injuring any person or

persons intending to become patrons of the above-named Chinese for or on

account thereof; and from in any way or manner combining or

confederating together with the intent and for the purpose of destroying the

business of the said citizens and residents of the Empire of China and

residents of and doing business in the city of Butte and county of

Silverbow, State of Montana, or any of them.

And said commands and injunctions and each and all of them you are

respectfully required to observe and obey until our said circuit court shall

make further orders in the premises.

Hereof fail not, under penalty of the law thence ensuing.

Witness the Hon. Melville W. Fuller, Chief Justice of the United States, this

4th day of June, 1900, and in the one hundred and twenty-fourth year of the

Independence of the United States of America.

[SEAL.]GEO.W.SPROULE,
ByT.B.STEPHENS, Deputy.

[Document 90]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 4, 1901.

No. 188.]

SIR: Referring to your note No. 207, of July 6 last, presenting the claims of

several hundred Chinese subjects resident in the city of Butte, Silverbow

County, Mont., for $500,000 damages for injuries received by them at the

hands of lawless parties in said city and county between the year 1886 and

the date of your note, I have the honor to inform you that the Department

has given careful consideration to your note and its inclosure.

It is clearly shown that the rights of the Chinese subjects mentioned were

violated by the boycott placed upon them by various labor organizations of

the city of Butte, and it is equally obvious that for the redress of their

grievance an adequate remedy was and is afforded by the courts. The proof

of these facts is found in the findings and decree of the Federal court

enjoining the defendants from the commission of the acts complained of.

While it is stated in your note that the conspirators are still seeking to

executetheirconspiracybyclandestinemeans;thatthepersonswho

inflicted the damages are insolvent, and that no remedy can be found by

proceedings against the city or county authorities, yet neither of these

allegations seems to the Department to warrant the exercise of diplomatic

intervention.

The damages suffered could have been averted by a prompt appeal to the

court; and the facts that the complainants have suffered damages through

their laches in making the appeal does not justify a departure from the

ordinary rule that diplomatic intervention is improper in any case where

ample judicial remedies exist. If the complainants had promptly availed

themselves of their remedial rights, the injuries complained of could have

been prevented. Their failure and neglect to do so does not make the United

States culpable and responsible for the damages resulting.

Thestatementthattheconspiratorsarestillseekingtoexecutetheir

conspiracy by clandestine means is one which, to justify action, should be

sustained by proofs, on the submission of which to the court it is not

doubted that the penalties for disobeying the injunction will be applied.

The statement that no remedy could be found against the unlawful action of

the city or county authorities in aid of the conspirators, the Department is

unable to accept as correct in point of law.

The Department is glad to be able to assure you that while the action of the

Federal court is sufficient proof that the rights of the subjects of the Empire

of China domiciled in the city of Butte will be protected and enforced by

the judiciary, it may yet add that the Executive will not fail, should the case

arise justifying its interposition, to use all its power to secure to them all the

rights, privileges, immunities, and exemptions guaranteed by the United

States Constitution and by treaty between the Governments of the United

States and China.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 91]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,September 18, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to state that I have received an Imperial edict, a

translation of which is herewith respectfully inclosed.

In obedience to the command of the edict, I beg to express to your

Government the feelings of deep sympathy and sorrow which Her Majesty

theEmpressDowagerandHisMajestytheEmperorsharewiththe

Government and people of the United States.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.
[Inclosure.]
IMPERIAL EDICT TRANSMITTED BY THE PRIVY COUNCIL UNDER DATE OF SEPTEMBER16, 1901,TO MINISTER WU, AND RECEIVED BY HIM

ON SEPTEMBER17, 1901.
“By direction of Her Majesty, the Empress Dowager, this edict is issued by

us.

“The plenipotentiaries (Prince Ching and Viceroy Li) have memorialized

the Throne by telegraph that they have received a note from the United

States minister at Pekin, conveying the sad intelligence of the death of the

President of the United States.

“It is with unspeakable sorrow and consternation that Her Majesty and

Ourself have heard the distressing news. The late President always gave

manifestations of sincere friendship, and during the events of the past year

he pursued a policy marked by a high sense of justice.

“WuTing-fangisherebyinstructedtoconveytotheUnitedStates

Government this message of Our sincere condolence. Respect this.”

[Document 92]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 4, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the memorandum left by

you at this Department on the 18th ultimo, embodying the message of

sympathy extended by their Majesties, the Emperor and the Empress

Dowager of China, in view of the shooting of the late President of the

United States.

I shall be pleased if you will convey to their Majesties an expression of the

grateful appreciation of the Government and people of the United States for

their kind messages, the acknowledgment of which has been delayed until

now owing to the pressure of public affairs attendant upon the shooting and

death of President McKinley.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 93]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,October 14, 1901.

No. 776.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith a translation of the bond for the

lump sum or total indemnity of 450,000,000 taels, which, in compliance

with paragraph (c) of Article VI of the Final Protocol, was yesterday

delivered to his excellency Mr. B. J. de Cologan, as dean of the diplomatic

corps, signed and sealed by the plenipotentiaries, Prince Ch’ing and Li

Hung-chang, and bearing the official seal of the imperial board of revenue. I

will send a copy of the bond in French and Chinese as soon as it can be

obtained.

I am, etc.,
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]

We, Prince Ch’ing, Grand Secretary Li Hung-chang, and the ministers of

finance, deliver the present bond, according to the clauses of Article VI of

the Protocol signed September 7, 1901, by the plenipotentiaries of the

eleven Powers, viz, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Spain, the United

States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Holland, and Russia,

and by the Chinese plenipotentiaries, who stipulate the following: By an

imperial Edict dated May 29, 1901, His Majesty the Emperor of China

agreed to pay the Powers an indemnity of 450,000,000 Haikwan taels,

calculated in gold at the rate of the Haikwan tael to the gold currency of

each country, as indicated below:

Haikwan tael =marks 3.055

=Austria-Hungary crown 3.595

=gold dollar 0.742

=francs 3.750

=pound sterling 0. 3s. 0d.

=yen 1.407

=florin, Netherlands 1.796

=gold ruble (17.424 dolias find) 1.412

This sum in gold shall bear interest at 4 per cent per annum, and the capital

shall be reimbursed by China in thirty-nine years, under the conditions

indicated in the plan of amortization annexed to the said Protocol.

The principal and interest shall be payable in gold or at the rates of

exchange corresponding to the dates at which the different payments fall

due.

The amortizations shall be paid annually.

The interest shall be paid semiannually and shall start from the 1st of July,

1901, but the Chinese Government shall have the right to pay off, within a

term of three years, commencing January 1, 1902, the arrears of the first six

months, finishing December 31, 1901, on condition, however, that it pays

compound interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum on the sums the

payments of which shall have thus been deferred.

The present bond shall be converted into fractional bonds, signed by the

delegates of the Chinese Government designated for this purpose.

The resources assigned as security for the bonds are the following:

1. The balance of the revenues of the imperial maritime customs,

after payment of the interest and amortization of previous loans

secured on these revenues, plus the proceeds of the raising to 5

per cent effective of the present tariff on maritime imports,

including articles until now on the free list, but exempting rice,

cereals, and flour from abroad, gold and silver bullion, and coin.

2. The revenues of the native customs, administered in the open

ports by the imperial maritime customs.

3. The total revenues of the salt gabelle, exclusive of the fraction

previously set aside for other foreign loans.

The product of the resources assigned to the payment of the bonds shall be

remitted monthly to the commission of bankers designated by the various

Powers for the collection of the sums belonging to each of them.

Thepresentbondrepresentsthesumof450,000,000Haikwantaels,

calculated in gold at the rate corresponding to the gold currency of each

country as indicated above.

[Document 94]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 4, 1901.

No. 804.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose to you herewith copies of correspondence

relating to the claim to American citizenship of one Lanx Chung Wa, a

Chinese living at Canton, and to be, etc.
E.H.CONGER.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. McWade, consul, to Mr. Goodnow, consul-general.
CONSULATE OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Canton, China,October 16, 1901.

No. 193.]

MYDEARMR.GOODNOW: Will you kindly give me your advice in the following

case: Lam Chung Wa, a resident of Canton, has called on me at the

consulate and preferred a request to be registered here as an American

citizen. He was a resident of the Hawaiian Islands for seventeen years, prior

to that Territory becoming our property. His papers show that he was a

naturalized Hawaiian subject. He left Hawaii in 1897 for Canton, where

immediately after his arrival he engaged in business as a merchant. He is

still a merchant and in good standing. I inclose for your courteous perusal

and decision all of his original papers and his photograph.

I have told Lam Chung Wa that I will refer his case to you for decision. I

hope that I am not giving you too much trouble.

With kindest regards, etc.,
ROBERTM.MCWADE,Consul.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Goodnow to Mr. Conger.
CONSULATE-GENERAL OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Shanghai,October 22, 1901.

No. 357.]

SIR: I hand you herewith Consul McWade’s No. 193, and hope you will

instruct him.

I am, etc.
JOHNGOODNOW.
[Inclosure 3.]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Goodnow.
NOVEMBER1, 1901.

SIR: I have to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch No. 357, of the 22d

ultimo, transmitting Consul McWade’s dispatch No. 193, of the 16th ultimo,

requesting instructions upon the citizenship of one Lam Chung Wa.

It appears from the evidence submitted that the said Lam Chung Wa is a

native of Heong Sang, in the province of Kuangtung, Empire of China; that

on the 19th day of August, 1886, he was naturalized as a citizen of the

Kingdom of Hawaii before W. M. Gibson, minister of the interior; that he

was recognized as such naturalized citizen by passport No. 1454, issued to

himSeptember1,1890,bytheactingconsul-generalofHawaiiat

Hongkong, and again by a special certificate issued to him by H. E. Conger,

minister of foreign affairs of Hawaii, on November 22, 1897.

The act of Congress of April 30, 1900, entitled “An act to provide a

government for the Territory of Hawaii,” provides as follows: “SEC. 4. That

all persons who were citizens of the Republic of Hawaii on August 12,

1898, are hereby declared to be citizens of the United States and citizens of

the Territory of Hawaii.”

By virtue of the above Lam Chung Wa is a citizen of the United States,

unless he has renounced such citizenship.

In this connection I call your attention to the statement in Mr. McWade’s

dispatch that Lam Chung Wa left Hawaii in 1897 for Canton, where

immediately after his arrival he engaged in business as a merchant, and

where he is still a merchant in good standing.

A citizen of the United States “may reside abroad for purposes of health,

education, amusement, or business for an indefinite period, and may even

acquireacivilorcommercialdomicilethere,withoutexpatriation,

providing he does so with the intention in good faith of returning to the

United States. But if he permanently withdraws himself and his property

and places both where neither can be made to contribute to the national

necessities, acquires a political domicile in a foreign country and avows his

purpose not to return, he has placed himself in the position where his

countryhastherighttopresumethathehasmadehiselectionof

expatriation.”

This presumption arises more readily “when a naturalized citizen of the

United States returns to his native country and resides there for a series of

years with no apparent purpose of returning.” By some of our naturalization

treaties a residence of two years in the country of nativity without the

intention of returning being in some way made apparent, is sufficient to

give rise to the presumption of self-expatriation.

I beg to suggest that Consul McWade be advised to exercise great care

before registering Lam Chung Wa as a citizen of the United States, that “his

claim to American citizenship shall not be made the pretext of avoiding

duties to one country while absence secures him from duties to another.”

I am, etc.,

[Document 95]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Conger.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 21, 1901.

No. 429.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch, No. 804, of the 4th

ultimo, inclosing a copy of correspondence between you and the United

Statesconsul-generalatShanghai,respectingtheclaimtoAmerican

citizenship of one Lam Chung Wa, a Chinaman, living at Canton.

Your instruction to the consul-general in the matter is approved by the

Department.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 96]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Pekin,November 6, 1901.

(Mr. Conger reports that Earl Li’s death is momentarily expected.)
[Document 97]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Conger.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 6, 1901.

(Mr. Hay directs Mr. Conger to express deepest sympathy with China in the

imminent loss of her great statesman.)
[Document 98]
Mr. Conger to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

L U S,
Pekin,November 7, 1901.

(Mr. Conger reports the death of Earl Li at 11.15 on the morning of the 7th

of November.)
Mr. Hay to Mr. Conger.

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
November 8, 1901.

No. 407.]

aSIR: I confirm herewith telegramsfrom and to you respecting the death of

Earl Li Hung-chang.

The Government and people of the United States sympathize with China in

the loss sustained by her in the death of the statesman who for so many

years shone preeminent in the councils of his country, and who gave many

proofs of his esteem and friendship for the United States.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
aPrinted, ante.

[Document 100]
Mr. Wu to Mr. Hay.
CHINESELEGATION,
Washington,November 8, 1901.

SIR: It is my painful duty to announce to you the death of His Excellency Li

Hung-chang, Earl of Suh-yih of the First Rank, Grand Tutor of the Heir

Apparent, Grand Secretary of State, Viceroy of Chihli, and Plenipotentiary

of China, etc., which, according to telegraphic information received by me,

occurred on the 7th instant about noon.

Accept, etc.,
WUTING-FANG.

[Document 101]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wu.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 11, 1901.

No. 185.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 8th

instant, announcing the death, on the 7th instant, of His Excellency Li

Hung-chang, Earl of Suh-yih of the First Rank, Grand Tutor of the Heir

Apparent, Grand Secretary of State, Viceroy of Chihli, and Plenipotentiary

of China, etc.

In reply I beg to assure you that the Government and the people of the

United States sympathize with China in the loss of her great statesman, who

gave so many proofs of his esteem and friendship for the United States.

The United States minister to China, who had already reported the death of

Earl Li, has been instructed to offer appropriate condolences.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 102]
President Marroquin to President Roosevelt.
[Telegram.]

BOGOTÁ,September 23, 1901.

May it please your excellency to accept the expressions of condolence of

the Colombian Government and people for the demise of the illustrious

President McKinley.
JOSÉMANUELMARROQUIN,
President of Colombia.

[Document 103]
President Roosevelt to President Marroquin.
[Telegram.]

EXECUTIVEMANSION,
Washington,September 23, 1901.

I cordially acknowledge your message of condolence for the great loss

suffered by the people of the United States.
THEODOREROOSEVELT.

[Document 104]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,March 13, 1901.

No. 194.]

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith, for your information, a copy of a

letter from Lars Chris. Jensen, Cooleyville, Minn., and of mine in reply

thereto, regarding the effect of his naturalization in the United States on his

former allegiance to Denmark.

I have, etc.,
LAURITSS.SWENSON.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Jensen to Mr. Swenson.
COOLEYVILLE,MINN.,January 29, 1901.

DEARSIR: As I am a native of Denmark, emigrated to America at the age of 21

years, 1890, am now 32 years, and a full citizen of America, I would like to

be released from all allegiance to Denmark or any sovereign thereof, but as

I do not know the form it has to go through, would like very much to get

your advice about it, and whom to apply to if you are not the right party,

and about what the expenses will be. I intend to make a visit to Denmark in

the near future and would not like to go through the Danish army for the

pleasure of visiting my native country one or two months. If any reference

is necessary in regard to this matter, please write William Rob. Anderson,

register of deeds, Albert Lea, Minn. I was born in Wejen Lendum Sogn,

Jyland, July 27, 1868.
L CJ

[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Jensen.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,February 18, 1901.

SIR:Replyingtoyoursofthe29thultimo,Ibegtosaythatyour

naturalization as a citizen of the United States has released you from your

former allegiance to Denmark, and that no further steps are necessary for

that purpose.

Denmark recognizes the right of expatriation, and in case you return here

without the intention to reside permanently you will be treated as a citizen

of the United States.

Having emigrated to America at the age of 21, and having acquired full

citizenship there, you are not liable to military service on your temporary

return to Denmark.

I would advise you to bring with you your certificate of naturalization, and

to procure a passport either from the Department of State at Washington or,

on your arrival, from the legation of the United States here.

Respectfully, yours,
L SS

[Document 105]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,March 26, 1901.

No. 197.]

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies of the correspondence in

themilitary-servicecaseofSörenLauridsSörensen,aformerDane,

naturalized in the United States, who, upon his return to Denmark, has been

summoned for military duty.

I respectfully submit my report without any further comment, as the facts in

the case are fully set forth in the inclosures herewith.

I have, etc.,
LAURITSS.SWENSON.
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]
Mr. Sörensen to Mr. Blom, vice-consul.
BRAMMINGE,September 24, 1900.

S: I would request you to enlighten me on the following question: I

emigrated to America at the age of 21 years 6 months. I resided in the

UnitedStatessevenyears,andacquiredAmericancitizenshipby

naturalization. When I returned to Denmark three years ago I met at the

conscription session, and on exhibiting my certificate of naturalization, I

was informed that if I was in the country two years from that time I was to

present myself again at that place. I returned to America, however, before

the expiration of the two years, remaining there about one year.

OnmyreturnheretwoweeksagoIwasnotifiedtoappearatthe

conscription session, where I was enlisted for military service. No notice

was taken of my citizenship papers. Can I be required to perform military

duty? If so, why was I not pressed into the service three years ago. I

attained my thirty-second year in August this year. I desire to be informed,

at your earliest convenience, if the authorities have a right to require me to

meet for duty immediately after my return here, when I am an American

citizen. Had I been conscripted three years ago, and then left the country,

the case would have been different.

Note the fact that I am 32 years of age and have resided in America as

stated above.

Respectfully, yours,
SÖRENL.SÖRENSEN.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Sörensen.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,September 28, 1900.

SIR: Before giving any definite reply to your communication of the 24th

instant to Mr. Jules Blom, I beg that you will be good enough to inform me

if at the time of your emigration to the United States you had completed

your military service, if you secured a permit to emigrate, and if you intend

to return to the United States for the purpose of residing and performing the

duties of citizenship there.

Kindly send me your certificate of naturalization, which will be returned to

you after examination.

Respectfully, yours,
L SS
[Inclosure 3.—Translation.]

Mr. Sörensen to Mr. Swenson.
BRAMMINGE,September 29, 1900.

SIR: Thanking you for yours of the 28th instant, I beg to say that I had not

completed my military service when I emigrated to America.

I emigrated before I was 22 years of age; and before that time one is not

required to meet at the session to be conscripted for service. I reported my

emigration to the proper authority in Denmark. I intend to return to America

if I can get my affairs here arranged satisfactorily. But you know better than

I do that I can live two years abroad as an American citizen; that is what the

consul in Chicago informed me before I left. I inclose my certificate of

naturalization, which you will please return.
SÖRENL.SÖRENSEN.
[Inclosure 4.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Schested, minister for foreign affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,October 1, 1900.

No. 105.]

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to invite your excellency’s attention to the

following military-service case: Sören L. Sörensen, who emigrated from

Denmark to the United States at the age of 21 (he is now 32), was duly

naturalized as an American citizen in 1895. In 1897 he visited his native

country, returning to the United States after a stay of less than two years.

About the middle of last September, he again returned to Denmark, and he

hasrecentlybeennotifiedthathisnamehasbeenenteredonthe

conscription rolls for military duty. His present address is Bramminge,

Jutland. No military service had been required of him before his emigration,

and he secured the usual permit before leaving the country. He appears to be

here on a matter of business, which he wishes to arrange so as to be enabled

to return to the United States. He appeals to me for intervention in his

behalf; and I would respectfully request that your excellency be good

enough to bring his case to the attention of the proper authorities, to the end

that his name may be stricken from the conscription rolls and that he may

be exempted from military duty.

I avail, etc.,
LAURITSS.SWENSON.
[Inclosure 5.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Sörensen.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,October 1, 1900.

SIR: Replying to yours of the 29th ultimo, I beg to inform you that I have

this day addressed a communication to the Danish minister of foreign

affairs requesting that your name be stricken off the conscription rolls and

that you be exempted from military duty.

Your certificate of naturalization is returned herewith.

Respectfully, yours,
LAURITSS.SWENSON.
[Inclosure 6.]
B ,January 24, 1901.

S: Replying to yours of November 29, 1900, I beg of you to kindly inform

me if I am stricken off the conscription rolls and exempted from military

duty.

Please let me know soon as possible.

Respectfully, yours,
SÖRENL.SÖRENSEN.
[Inclosure 7.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Sörensen.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,January 25, 1901.

SIR: Replying to yours of the 24th instant, inquiring if your name has been

stricken off the conscription rolls, I beg to say that the ministry of justice

has not yet notified the foreign office as to what action has been taken in

your case. As soon as I receive such notice I shall advise you.

Respectfully, yours,
LAURITSS.SWENSON.
[Inclosure 8.—Translation.]
The minister of foreign affairs to Mr. Swenson.
COPENHAGEN,March 12, 1901.

MM : In a note, dated October 1, 1900, you have been good enough to

invite my attention to the case of Sören Laurids Sörensen, who, though a

naturalizedcitizenoftheUnitedStates,hasbeenentereduponthe

conscription rolls of Denmark, the country of his birth, where he is making

a short sojourn for the purpose of arranging certain business matters.

After having corresponded with my colleague, the minister of justice, I have

the honor to inform you as follows regarding the case of the person in

question: The above-named Sören Laurids Sörensen, who was born in

Denmark in 1868, and who at the age of 17 was entered on the conscription

rolls, emigrated in 1890, after having notified the proper authorities as

he returned to Denmark, and in July of that year he purchased a piece of

property at Nöraa, in the commune of Bramminge, which, in the month of

March,1898,heexchangedforpropertysituatedinthevillageof

Bramminge, thus for a second time becoming a proprietor. He remained in

Denmark until the month of September, 1899; that is to say, more than two

years. In September, 1899, he entered upon his second journey to the United

States; not, however, with the intention of remaining; but for the purpose of

selling a piece of property which he owned there.

Finally,onhisreturntoDenmarkinSeptember,lastyear,hewas

summoned for military duty.

The above-named Sörensen having been domiciled in Denmark more than

two years, having become a proprietor, and having made his living both as

agriculturist and as keeper of a temperance hotel, my colleague, the minister

of justice, considers his summons to military service entirely legitimate, in

accordance with Article III of the convention concluded between Denmark

and the United States July 20, 1872.

I avail, etc.,
SCHESTED.
[Inclosure 9.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Sörensen.
L U S,
Copenhagen,March 16, 1901.

S: Referring to my letter of January 25, last, I now inform you that the

minister of justice has decided your case.

After a careful investigation he has come to the conclusion that you are

liable to military duty in Denmark. From a note addressed to me by the

Danish minister of foreign affairs I learn the following facts regarding your

case: You were born in Denmark in 1868. At the age of 17 you were entered

on the conscription rolls. In 1890 you emigrated to America, after having

notified the proper authorities, as required. Your name was not, however,

stricken from the military rolls. In May, 1897, you returned to Denmark,

and in July of that year you purchased a piece of property at Nöraa, in the

communeofBramminge,which,inthemonthofMarch,1898,you

exchanged for property situated in the village of Bramminge, thus for a

second time becoming a proprietor.

You remained in Denmark until the month of September, 1899; that is to

say, more than two years. In September, 1899, you entered upon your

second journey to the United States; not, however, with the intention of

remaining, but for the purpose of selling a piece of property which you

owned there. Finally, on your return to Denmark, in September, last year,

you were summoned for military duty.

The above facts establish a strong presumption that you have withdrawn not

only your person, but also your interests, from the United States, and, on

their face, show absence of intent to return for the purpose of residing and

performing the duties of citizenship there.

You appear to have returned to the country of your original allegiance to

secureapermanentlivelihoodthere.Unlessyoufurnishstrongand

satisfactory proof in rebuttal of the contention made by the minister of

justice,namely,thatyouhavetakenupyourpermanentdomicilein

Denmark without intent to return to the United States, I have no authority to

intercede with the Danish Government in your behalf.

Respectfully, yours,
L SS

[Document 106]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Swenson.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 12, 1901.

No. 113.]

SIR: Your No. 197, of the 26th ultimo, relative to the detention of Sören L.

Sörensen, a naturalized citizen of the United States, for military duty, has

been received.

The note of the minister of foreign affairs to yourself of March 12 ultimo

would seem to throw upon Mr. Sörensen the onus of showing that his acts,

as recited in the note, do not evince an intention on his part to acquire a

permanent domicile in Jutland, and your letter of the 16th ultimo in that

sense to Mr. Sörensen has, therefore, the Department’s approval.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 107]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 10, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF DENMARK WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet it is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Military service becomes compulsory to a subject of Denmark during the

calendar year in which he reaches the age of 22 years.

In November or December of the year in which he becomes 17 years old he

is expected to report for enrollment on the conscription lists. If he neglects

to do so he maybe fined from 2 to 40 kroner; but if his neglect arises from a

design to evade service he may be imprisoned.

In case he fails to appear when the law requires that he be assigned to

military duty he is liable to imprisonment.

When one whose name has been or should have been entered on the

conscription lists emigrates without reporting his intended departure to the

local authorities he is liable to a fine of from 25 to 100 kroner.

A person above the age of 22 years entered for military service must obtain

a permit from the minister of justice to emigrate. Noncompliance with this

regulation is punishable by a fine of from 20 to 200 kroner.

ThetreatyofnaturalizationbetweentheUnitedStatesandDenmark

provides that a former subject of Denmark naturalized in the United States

shall, upon his return to Denmark, be treated as a citizen of the United

States;butheisnottherebyexemptedfrompenaltiesforoffenses

committed against Danish law before his emigration. If he renews his

residence in Denmark with intent to remain, he is held to have renounced

his American citizenship.

A naturalized American, formerly a Danish subject, is not liable to perform

military service on his return to Denmark, unless at the time of emigration

he was in the army and deserted, or, being 22 years old at least, had been

enrolled for duty and notified to report and failed to do so. He is not liable

for service which he was not actually called upon to perform.

Passports are not required to secure admission to Denmark, but they are

useful or necessary as means of identification, or in proof of citizenship.

They should be exhibited whenever evidence of citizenship is required.

[Document 108]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,May 10, 1901.

No. 204.]

SIR: Referring to my No. 160, dated March 29, 1900, relative to the

banishment from Denmark of two Mormon missionaries, I have the honor

to transmit herewith copies of correspondence touching the request of one

of these persons, Mr. Rönnow, for permission to visit Denmark before

returning to the United States.

You will observe from the inclosures herewith, which are self-explanatory,

that his request has been granted by the Danish ministry of justice.

I have, etc.,
LAURITSS.SWENSON.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Rönnow to Mr. Swenson.
T N ,March 13, 1901.

DS: You no doubt recollect the “banishment case” against Mr. Thomas

P. Jensen and myself, which was brought before you in January, 1900, and

perhaps recall our last conversation, which was to the effect that you would

secure permission for me to return to Denmark before my return to

America.

My desire is, if all goes as expected, to visit Denmark about June 1, and

would therefore feel greatly obliged to you if you could secure for me that

privilege.

If possible, I should like this permission granted so that it wouid be

perpetual; that is, so I could come and go at will at any and all times in the

future, or if possible, to have the banishment decree revoked or annulled.

Yours, truly,
CHAS.C.RÖNNOW.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Schested, minister for foreign affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,March 16, 1901.

No. 116.]

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a letter from Mr.

CharlesC.Rönnow,aMormonmissionary,whowasbanishedfrom

Denmark last year. His case was fully discussed in my No. 82, of January 9,

1900, and my No. 85, dated the 29th of the same month, and in your

excellency’s notes, in reply thereto, dated January 26 and February 28,

1900.

In an interview which I had with the minister of justice in March last year

regarding the decree of banishment in question, he assured me that in case

the parties affected should desire to visit Denmark at some future date for

legitimate purposes, they would experience no difficulty in obtaining the

required permission from the ministry of justice.

Mr. Rönnow now desires me to procure for him such permission. I will

thank your excellency to invite the attention of the minister of justice to the

request contained in the inclosure herewith, to the end that favorable action

thereon may be taken at the earliest convenient date.

Be pleased, etc.,

LAURITSS.SWENSON.
[Inclosure 3.—Translation.]
Mr. Schested to Mr. Swenson.
COPENHAGEN,May 7, 1901.

MR.MINISTER: Replying to your note of March 16 last, requesting permission

for Charles C. Rönnow, a Mormon missionary, to visit Denmark, on a short

sojourn, I have the honor to inform you that my colleague the minister of

justice, finds no objection to granting the desired permission.

I avail, etc.,
SCHESTED.
[Inclosure 4.]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Rönnow.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
COPENHAGEN,May 9, 1901.

SIR: Referring to your letter of March 13 last, and to mine of March 16, in

reply thereto, I now beg to inform you that the Danish ministry of justice

has granted your request for permission to visit Denmark before returning

to the United States.

Respectfully, yours,
L SS

[Document 109]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Swenson.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 23, 1901.

No. 117.]

SIR: Your No. 204, of the 10th instant, with inclosures, has been received,

and your efforts, resulting in permission for Charles C. Rönnow, who was

expelledfromDenmarklastyear,tovisitthecountry,havethe

Department’s approval.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL.

[Document 110]
Mr. Brun to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

LEGATION OFDENMARK,
Bar Harbor, Me.,September 14, 1901.

I am directed to express to your excellency the deep sorrow of the King, of

His Majesty’s Government, and of the Danish nation, at the sad death of the

President.
BRUN,Danish Minister.

[Document 111]
Mr. Swenson to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Copenhagen,September 16, 1901.

Crown Prince called to-day to express his own and King’s condolence.

King of Greece personally, Empress Dowager of Russia through minister,

request me to convey sympathy to Mrs. McKinley, Government, and

people.
SWENSON.

[Document 112]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Swenson.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1901.

Please make earnest acknowledgment of condolences of His Majesty, the

Crown Prince, the King of the Hellenes, and Empress Dowager of Russia,

in name of Government, American people, and Mrs. McKinley.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 113]
Señor Vasquez to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

LEGATION OF THEDOMINICANREPUBLIC,
Mew York,September 14, 1901.

In the name of my Government and of myself I offer sincerest sympathy

and condolence upon the death of His Excellency President McKinley, who

knew how to command the admiration of the whole world.
F.LEONTEVASQUEZ,
Chargé d’Affaires, Dominican Republic.

[Document 114]
Mr. Hill to Señor Vasquez.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

SIR: The pressure of public business attendant upon the death of President

McKinley has delayed until now an acknowledgment of your telegram of

the14thinstant,conveyinganexpressionofthesympathyofthe

Government of the Dominican Republic with that of the United States in

the loss it has sustained by that sad event.

I shall be obliged if you will assure your Government of the grateful

appreciation of the Government of the United States for its message of

condolence.

At the same time I beg to thank you for the expression of sympathy made

on your own behalf.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 115]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Sampson.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 10, 1901.

No. 168.]

SIR: I inclose copy of a letter from Rev. John Lee, of Chicago, who asks

certain specified questions concerning the passage in Ecuador of a civil

registry law and one relating to education.

The Department will be pleased to have you give it the information

necessary to answer the inquiry made.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Lee to Mr. Hay.
57 WASHINGTONSTREET,CHICAGO,ILL.,April 5, 1901
marriages, births, and deaths law? Has it received the approval of

the Executive; and if so, when?

2. Did the Ecuadorean Congress pass a law providing that no

priest or monk can teach in any school under Government control,

and that no school conducted as a private affair by priests can

hereafter confer any degrees, except in an ecclesiastical line? Has

this law received the approval of the Executive; and if so, when?

IftheStateDepartmentisinpossessionofanyrecentintelligence

concerning “more liberal laws relating to marriages and public worship” in

either Ecuador or Bolivia, I shall thank you most sincerely for such

intelligence.

Yours, most respectfully,
JOHNLEE.

[Document 116]
Mr. Sampson to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Quito,May 10, 1901.

No. 249.]

SIR: You can say to Rev. John Lee, in answer to his questions, copies of

which you inclose me in your No. 168 of April 10, 1901, as follows:

First. The Ecuadorean Congress did pass the civil registry bill for

the registry of marriages, births, and deaths. It was approved by

the President October 25, 1900.

Second. The same Congress did pass a law forbidding priests or

monks to teach in any school under Government control, except

as appointed to teach religion; said law also prohibits any school

under the control of the priests or monks from conferring any

degreeexceptecclesiastical.Thislawwasapprovedbythe

President October 18, 1900.

Third. Information desired as to “more liberal laws,” etc., October

5, 1900, the President approved a law passed by Congress to buy

(compulsorysaleofchurchrequired)thecemeteriesofthe

country, so anyone could be buried in them.

A representative of the Pope has just left Ecuador.

While here he and the minister of foreign affairs negotiated a treaty between

church and state granting civil marriage for non-Catholics, and a division of

all cemeteries, so that in one part may be buried non-Catholics and in the

other Catholics. This is to save the Government the expense of buying the

cemeteries.

This treaty must be approved by Congress of Ecuador and the Pope before

[Document 117]
Mr. Carbo to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OFECUADOR,
Buffalo,September 12, 1901.

Mr.SECRETARY:Ihavethehonortocommunicatetoyouthefollowing

cablegram that I have just received from the President of Ecuador:

QUITO,September 12, 1901.

Minister Ecuador, Buffalo:
InternationalpolicyofpresentGovernment,strictneutrality.

Frontiers mutually and perfectly respected; complete peace within

and without Republic. Deny all news to the contrary.

PLAZA.
With sentiments, etc.,
L.F.CARBO.

[Document 118]
Mr. Hay to Señor Carbo.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 20, 1901.

No. 31.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 12th

instant embodying the text of a telegram received by you from the President

of Ecuador, translation of which reads as follows:

InternationalpolicyofpresentGovernment,strictneutrality.

Frontiers mutually and perfectly respected; complete peace within

and without Republic. Deny all news to the contrary.

This information has been received with much pleasure by the Government

of the United States, which naturally feels a lively solicitude that good will

and harmony shall prevail among American States.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 119]
President Plaza to the Vice-President of the United States.
[Telegram.]

QUITO,ECUADOR,September 15, 1901.

The Ecuadorian people and Government join in the legitimate sor row of

the Great Republic for the demise of its illustrious President.
PLAZA,President.

[Document 120]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Sampson.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1901.

ExpressgratefulthanksforsympathycabledbyPresidentPlazaand

Ecuadorian Congress.
HAY.

[Document 121]
M. Cambon to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

EMBASSYFRENCHREPUBLIC TOUNITEDSTATES,
Washington,January 7, 1901.

MR.SECRETARY OFSTATE: By order of my Government I have the honor to send you

herewith a copy of a memorial by which Messrs. Marty & D’Abbadie,

French citizens and shipowners at Haiphong (Tonkin), represent how they

have been injured by certain decisions made concerning them by the

American authorities in the Philippines.

This claim, as you will see, arises from the fact that the Federal authorities

at Manila believe themselves authorized to compel vessels that touch at

ports in the Philippines to leave the whole of their cargoes there, even

though it may be impossible to sell them.

Specifically,thesteamerSullberg,charteredbyMessrs.Marty&

D’Abbadie, found it impossible owing to events then transpiring at Iloilo to

carry to that port merchandise that were booked for it, and for seventeen

days the head of the customs service at Manila refused to allow the said

vessel to sail for Asia with that merchandise. For all the losses sustained in

consequence of the detention of their vessel our fellow-countrymen claim

an indemnity of 22,471 Mexican dollars.

In the opinion of my Government the pretension of the American authorities

at Manila seems contrary to the rules followed in all merchant countries.

Indeed, the principle which is constantly observed in all policed States is

that the master of a merchant vessel laden with merchandise is permitted to

discharge in the port for which it is bound, or at which it may put in, such

part only of the cargo as he may designate for the purpose either of his own

motion or under the orders of his employers. Moreover, only that part of the

merchandise so designated that is entered for consumption is subject to

customs duties, and not such as may be warehoused in bond or manifested

for transit.

The pretension to which Messrs. Marty & D’Abbadie object is so clearly

contrary to the prevalent usages that it seems to rest on the personal

decision of a customs official and not on any formal provision of the new

customs regulations of the Philippines to which it seems that General Otis

would not have failed to refer in a precise manner if the possibility of such a

reference had occurred to him.

I can but commend this claim to your kindly attention and embrace this

opportunity to renew, etc.
JULESCAMBON.
[Inclosure.]

M. Auguste Rafael Marty, a native of Porta (Eastern Pyrenees), France,

born August 16, 1844, and M. Jules Edouard d’Abbadie, born at Tonnay,

Charente (Charente-Inférieure), France, June 18, 1853, partners, doing

business under the name of Marty & D’Abbadie, the said partnership

having been entered into in pursuance of an instrument under private seal

dated September 11, 1886, and extended by an instrument, likewise under

privateseal,January1,1897,untilDecember31,1906,shipowners,

residing at Haiphong, Tonkin, have the honor to address to the United States

Government the present reclamation, the object of which is to secure an

indemnity of 22,471 piasters,by way of redress for the injury done them

by the arbitrary detention of the steamerSullbergwith a cargo of salt and

rice on board in the waters of Manila, from February 13 to March 2, 1899.

This indemnity would be payable to the firm of Marty & D’Abbadie,

charterers of theSullberg, by way of redress for the losses occasioned to

them by paying for the use of the vessel during her detention and by the

expenses caused by the acts of the American authorities, and also for the

losses experienced on the cargo and on the freight that would have been

earned by the vessel during the time of her detention.

The owner of the vessel, Mr. H. N. Struve, Hauptstrasse C. 63, Blankenese,

Germany, agent at Hongkong for Messrs. Siemssen & Co., is not interested

in the present claim, the amount of the freight agreed upon in his favor

having been duly paid.

No claim has been, and none can be, brought by any person whatever on the

ground of the acts that have given rise to the present claim for indemnity.

There is no reason for paying any attention to the insurers of the goods,

since the present petition has reference only to the damage caused by the

detention of the vessel during a period of seventeen days. In support of this

claim the claimants have the honor to furnish the following detailed

information: The steamerSullberg, carrying the German flag, Mr. H. N.

Struve, of Hauptstrasse C. 63, Blankenese, Germany, being the owner, and

Messrs. Siemssen & Co. being the agents at Hongkong, and the vessel

having been chartered by Messrs. Marty & D’Abbadie, French shipowners,

residing at Haiphong, Tonkin, left Quinhone, Anam, on the 9th of February

last, with a cargo of rice and salt belonging to the charterers.

The rice was to go to Manila, while the salt was to be taken to Iloilo.

At the time of its departure from Quinhone there was nothing that could

cause the charterers to suppose that the vessel could not make the proposed

voyage and land successively at Manila and at Iloilo the goods which were

intended for those ports.

The steamer arrived at Manila on the 14th day of February, and effected the

discharge of its cargo of rice with great difficulty. The difficulties were such

that the grain could not be warehoused before the 28th of February.

Consequently the rice remained in the lighters for thirteen days, and during

its stay the quantity of 94 piculs and 74/100 was removed (i. e., stolen).

As soon as the vessel arrived the captain of theSullberylearned that, in

consequence of the hostilities between the United States Government and

the Philippine insurgents, the city of Iloilo had, in a great measure, been

burned, and that any commercial transaction there was impossible. He was

therefore compelled to renounce entering that port.

The captain then decided that he would leave Manila after discharging the

rice (evidently thinking that the discharge would be effected within the

normalperiodoffromtwelvetoeighteenhours),inordertogoto

Hongkong, where he hoped to be able to negotiate, in due time, the sale of

the 18,000 piculs of salt remaining on board of his vessel. Contrary to all

expectation, however, not only did the American authorities create all

possible difficulties in order to prevent the landing of the rice, but they

objected to the departure of theSullberg, and, furthermore, claimed that the

captain must be compelled to discharge his salt at Manila. Feeling confident

that the right was on his side, the captain refused to do this.

Notwithstanding his energetic protest and the intervention of the General

Tobacco Company (which was the consignee of the vessel) and of the

consul of France, the American authorities maintained their opposition.

This state of things continued until the 2d of March, when the American

authorities decided to remove the interdiction and to authorize the departure

of the vessel.

TheSullberghad been detained at Manila from February 13 to March 2—

that is to say, for seventeen days.

Wasthisdetentionlegal?Wasitinconformitywiththerulesof

international law? Can it at least be explained by the necessities of the

conflictbetweentheUnitedStatesGovernmentandthePhilippine

insurgents? Evidently not.

In the first place, and even if a state of war were recognized between the

Philippine insurgents on the one hand and the United States Government on

the other, and even if the latter consequently invoked belligerent rights in its

favor, the fact is that no proclamation of a blockade had been issued as

regarded the coasts of Manila. And no blockade could be established there,

asManilaisnowunderthedefactosovereigntyoftheAmerican

Government.

The entrance into and departure from the port of Manila had necessarily

therefore to remain free to all vessels carrying a neutral flag.

No special notice had been given to the captain of theSullberg, and when

he entered the port of Manila he had a right to suppose that he could trade

there, freely, as usual.

Even if a state of war had been proclaimed and a regular blockade had been

established subsequently to theSullberg’sentrance into the port of Manila,

that vessel would have had a perfect right, recognized by all powers, to

depart free with her cargo, and a certain time should have been allowed to

her for that purpose.

Thus, even admitting that a state of war existed, the detention of the
Sullbergin the manner in which it took place was absolutely at variance

with the rules of international law.

Furthermore, there was nothing to justify it.

Will it be said that theSullbergwas suspected of having arms or munitions

for the rebels on board? TheSullberghad sailed from Anam direct to

Manila, which port is now under the high authority of the United States

Government. This circumstance was in itself sufficient to show that there

was no intention to commit fraud or to introduce articles contraband of war.

If the captain of theSullberghad had arms for the rebels, he evidently

would not have gone to Manila to discharge them.

The ship’s papers were, moreover, in proper order; the manifest, which had

been viséd by the French authorities on her departure from Quinhone,

mentioned nothing but a cargo of rice and salt, and it is a principle received

in international law that a ship’s papers which have been regularly viséd by

the authorities of one power are entitled to full faith and credit among the

other powers.

Finally, even supposing that the American authorities had any reason to

suspect a fraud on the part of the captain of theSullberg, they had no right

to detain that vessel for seventeen days in the waters of Manila.

If the United States Government invoked the rights of belligerent powers, it

could not exercise, on board of theSullberg, anything more than a mere

right of search, and it could not hold the vessel any longer than was

necessary to make that search.

In no case can the right of search imply the right to require the discharge of

the goods.

These are well-founded principles, and the law of nations establishes a right

to indemnity when a search has shown the suspicions to be unfounded and

to have caused injury to the captain or the owners of the vessel. With all the

more reason this must be true in the case of a prolonged detention which

was wholly uncalled for, and which was not justified by the allegation of

any fraud.

Besides, other vessels have been in the same case as theSullberg, and have

beenobligedbythepoliticalsituationofthePhilippinestogiveup

discharging their goods. The local government, so far from detaining them,

has facilitated their departure.

Why was an exception made in the case of theSullberg, and why were

these vexatious measures taken against her?

The captain of theSullbergin no way objected to admitting the local

authorities on board of his vessel, and the custom-house officers who were

placed on board might easily have ascertained that the vessel carried no

arms or munitions of war.

If the American Government had been able, in the beginning, to conceive

the slightest suspicion, the loyal attitude of the captain ought to have been

sufficient to dispel it.

The charterers, whose commercial uprightness is well known, earnestly

protest against any such suspicion.

As soon as they were able to do so without subjecting themselves to

inadmissible demands, they made it a point to justify themselves.

On the 6th day of March, when theSullbergarrived at Hongkong, Mr. A. R.

Marty, their agent, wrote to the United States consul-general, informing him

of the vessel’s arrival, and requesting him to send a representative to

witness the discharge of the cargo of salt.

The consul-general was pleased to comply with this desire, and his delegate

ascertained that there were neither arms nor munitions of war on board of

theSullberg.
Owing to the numerous obstacles placed in the way of the discharge of the

rice, and by the detention of theSullbergfor seventeen days at Manila, the

United States Government caused a serious loss to Messrs. Marty &

d’Abbadie.

This detention, as we have just shown, was in violation of the law of

nations, and can not be justified by any of the necessities which are

allowable in case of war, in favor of the belligerents. It took place without

any good reason, on a mere suspicion of fraud, which had no foundation

whatever.

The United States Government must itself have recognized this, since it

authorized the departure of theSullbergafter she had been illegally detained

for seventeen days.

It is, therefore, under obligations to furnish redress for the injury which it

caused.

It remains for us to establish the amount of the damage done.

This damage is composed of five elements, to wit:

1. Payment of freight during the period of detention, i. e., for

seventeen days at 350 piasters per day, the sum of 5,950 piasters.

2. Payment of the expenses occasioned by the act of the American

authorities,costoftelegrams,removal(defacement)ofthe

captain, expenses of sojourn on board of theSullberg, etc.—that

is to say, the sum of 1,045 piasters and 65 cents.

3.Thelossoccasionedonthesaleofthecargobythe

postponement of that sale. The 18,000 piculs of salt were, as we

have already remarked, to be taken to Iloilo, where they were to

be sold at one piaster per picul. The salt had to be sent to

Hongkong, where its average price per picul is but 50 cents. On

its arrival, however, it could find no purchasers. In the interval

which elapsed between February 10 (meaning 13th) and March 6

(meaning 2d)—that is, during the detention of the vessel at

Manila—theHongkongmarkethadbeensupplied.Itwas

therefore necessary to warehouse it, and its sale will hardly be

possible in less than three or four months, while the cost of

warehousing, etc., will be about 10 cents per picul. The failure to

earninconsequenceoftheactiontakenbytheAmerican

authorities at Manila is therefore 5.60 (meaning 0.60) cents per

picul, or a total of 10,800 piasters.

4. The damages for the freight which would have been earned by

theSullbergduring her detention; this may be estimated at 3,000

piasters.

5. Finally, the refunding of the expenditures occasioned by the

numerous difficulties raised in connection with the discharge of

the rice, which might have been effected in one day at most in

ordinarytimes,whereasitwaseffectedinthirteendays.

Furthermore, payment for the 94 piculs and seventy-four one-

hundredths which were stolen, making, in the aggregate, 1,675

piasters and 35 cents.

The total amount of the claim of Messrs. Marty & d’Abbadie is 22,471

piasters.

By procuration of Marty & d’Abbadie.
(Signed) —— ——.

Haiphong, November 20, 1899.
RECAPITULATION
1. Payment of the price called for by the charter for seventeen
$5,950.00

days, at 350 francs (piasters?) per day

2. Repayment of the expenses incurred during the aforesaid
1,045.65

detention at Manila, 466.57; at Hongkong, 579.08

3. Loss on the sale of salt, .60 per picul, i. e., on 1,800 piculs 10,800.00

4. Damages for the freight that might have been earned by the3,000.00

Sullbergduring her detention

5. Repayment of the expenses incurred through the difficulties
1,675.35

raised in connection with the landing of the rice and the

quantity stolen

Total 22,471.00

On this 22d day of November, 1899, before us, Eugene Domergue, resident

mayor of the city of Haiphong, appeared Mr. Auguste Raphael Marty,

member of the firm of Marty & d’Abbadie, shipowners, and, acting in the

name of said firm, who, being called upon by us to affirm the truth of the

statements made by him in his demand written opposite, bearing date of

November22,1899,andhavingreferencetoaclaimforindemnity

presented to the American Government for damages occasioned to their

chartered steamer, theSullberg, in the waters of Manila, replied “I affirm,

on my soul and on my conscience, that the sum of 22,471 piasters, which I

claim for the damage done to us, is really and legitimately our due.”

Of which affirmation, we, the resident mayor of the city of Haiphong, have

given a certificate to the said Mr. Marty, representing his firm, and have

drawn up the present paper, which he has signed with us after it had been

read to him.

By procuration of Marty & d’Abbadie.

D ,

AM

Examined for authentication of the signature of Mr. Domergue, resident

mayor of Haiphong, and that of Mr. A. Marty above affixed.

For the superior resident and by delegation.

The resident, head of the cabinet.

(Signed) —— ——.

Hanoi, November 25, 1899.

Examined for authentication of the signature, affixed opposite, of the

resident, head of the cabinet, for the resident superior of Tonkin and by

delegation, authenticating the signature of Messrs. A. R. Marty, member of

the firm of Marty & d’Abbadie, and Domergue, resident mayor of the city

of Haiphong.

For the consul of France and by delegation,
G.GOUDEREAU,The Chancellor.
HONGKONG,December 7, 1899.
aFrench persons in the United States frequently use the word piaster as

equivalent to the American dollar. The dictionary of the French Academy

(sixth edition) says that the piastre is a silver coin whose value is about 5

francs. Its value, however, differs in different countries.

[Document 122]
Mr. Hay to Mr. de Margerie.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 2, 1901.

No. 425.]

SIR: I have the honor to refer to Ambassador Cambon’s note of January 7

last, in which he transmitted the memorial of Messrs. Marty & d’Abbadie,

French citizens, preferring a claim against this Government for $22,471, on

account of the detention at Manila for a period of seventeen days in

February and March, 1899, of the shipSullberg.
In this note Mr. Cambon stated that theSullberg“found it impossible,

owing to events then transpiring at Iloilo, to carry to that port merchandise

that was booked for it, and for seventeen days the head of the customs

service at Manila refused to allow the said vessel to sail for Asia with that

merchandise,” and that in the opinion of his Government the pretension of

the American authorities seemed contrary to the rules followed in all

merchant countries. He asserted that the principle which is constantly

followed in all policed States is that the master of a merchant vessel laden

with merchandise is permitted to discharge in the port for which it is bound

or at which it may put in such part only of the cargo as he may designate for

the purpose, either of his own motion or under the orders of his employers;

that only the part of the merchandise so designated that is entered for

consumptionissubjecttocustomsduties,andnotsuchasmaybe

warehoused in bond or manifested for transit. He added: “The pretension to

which Messrs. Marty & d’Abbadie object is so clearly contrary to the

prevalent usages that it seems to rest on the personal decision of a customs

official and not on any formal provision of the new customs regulations of

the Philippines to which it seems that General Otis would not have failed to

refer in a precise manner if the possibility of such a reference had occurred

to him.”

The claimants also complain that they were delayed about twelve days in

landing the rice, because of difficulties thrown in the way by American

authorities, and that during this time a large quantity of rice (94.74 piculs)

was stolen.

The statement of the claimants upon which the statement in Mr. Cambon’s

note is evidently based, that a part of the cargo (the salt) was destined to

Iloilo, is incorrect. The manifest shows that the entire cargo was consigned

ato Manila. A copy of that document is inclosed herewith.
The only entry made at Manila, however, was for the rice. When the vessel

had discharged the rice the consignee asked for a clearance to Hongkong

without discharging the balance of the cargo, which consisted of 1,099,600

kilos of salt in bulk. Under paragraph 3 of the United States provisional

customs tariff and regulations then in force, promulgated in General Orders,

No. 10, from the office of the military governor in the Philippines under

date of October 26, 1898, clearance of the vessel could not be granted until

all her cargo had been landed and accounted for. The request of the

consignees was therefore refused. The regulations prohibiting the clearance

of a vessel under such circumstances were taken from the existing United

Statescustomsregulations,anditissubmittedthattheywerenot

unreasonable under the conditions existing.

It may be observed, moreover, that the military governor had been advised

that theSullbergwas suspected of having arms concealed on board and had

instructed the collector to have a careful examination made of all cargo

discharged therefrom, and after the cargo had been completely discharged

to make a thorough search of the vessel. The character of the cargo—salt in

bulk—offered the greatest facilities for the concealment of arms and other

contraband.

After the vessel had been detained for a period of seventeen days she was

cleared, under a suspension of the operation of the regulation which the

military governor had the power to authorize, without having discharged the

salt cargo. The authorities in the Philippines state that this suspension was

notmadebecauseeitherthemilitarygovernororthecollectorwas

convinced that the suspected arms were not on board, but for other reasons

which seemed satisfactory to the military governor.

In regard to the statement of the claimants relative to the delay in landing

the rice and of the theft of a portion thereof, the collector of the port at

Manila reports that “the claimants were not delayed in landing their rice

cargo by any conditions thrown in the way by the American authorities, and

no claim or statement was ever submitted to this office as to the loss of

94.74 piculs of rice (estimated value $236.85) which claimants state were

stolen. The examination of this rice was made on board the vessel, and it

was released by the customs officials in charge at the ship’s side, hence, if

any part of the cargo was stolen, the theft must have occurred after the rice

had been released by this department, and was under full control of the

consignees or their agent.”

The Department perceives no basis for a claim for an indemnity in behalf of

Messrs. Marty & d’Abbadie.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
aNot printed.

[Document 122a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 21, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY CITIZENS OF FRANCE WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

All Frenchmen who are not declared unfit or excused may be called upon

for military duty between the ages of 20 and 45 years. They are obliged to

serve three years in the active army, ten in the reserve of the active army,

six in the territorial army, and six in the reserve of the territorial army.

If released from all military obligations in France, or if the authorization of

the French Government was obtained beforehand, naturalization of a former

French citizen in the United States is accepted by the French Government;

but a Frenchman naturalized abroad without the consent of his Government,

and who at the time of his naturalization was still subject to military service

in the active army or in the reserve of the active army, is held to be

amenable to the French military laws. Not having responded to the notice

calling him to accomplish his military service, he is placed on the list of

those charged with noncompliance with the military laws, and if he returns

to France he is liable to arrest, trial, and upon conviction is turned over to

the army, active, reserve, or territorial, according to his age. Long absence

from France and old age do not prevent this action.

A Frenchman naturalized abroad, after having passed the age of service in

the active army and the reserve, nevertheless continues on the military list

until he has had his name struck from the rolls, which may usually be done

by his sending his naturalization certificate through the United States

embassy to the proper French authorities.

The French Government rarely gives consent to a Frenchman of military

age to throw off his allegiance. Application on the subject may, however, be

addressedtotheministerofjusticeatParis,accompaniedbyafull

statement of the particulars and a fee of 675 francs. If the request is granted,

the name of the person concerned is erased from the military list and he

may return to France safely.

There is no treaty between the United States and France defining the status

of former French citizens who have become naturalized American citizens.

Passports are not necessary to enter France, but are usually required from

sojourners or travelers afterwards. They are recognized without being

visaed or indorsed.

[Document 123]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Porter.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 6, 1901.

No. 879.]

SIR: Under date of the 1st instant the Acting Secretary of the Navy transmits

a copy of a letter from Commander Karl Rohrer, commanding the U. S. S.
Annapolis, in which that officer reports that in order to repair an injury

which occurred to the safety valve of the vessel’s boiler on February 2 last a

particular piece of brass tubing which was required could not be obtained in

the port of Algiers, where the vessel then lay, and that therefore the

commander, accepting the kind offer which had been made by Rear-

Admiral Albert Servan, the commandant of the French naval station at that

place, applied to him for assistance. There being no pipe of the required size

in stock, the admiral ordered an ingot to be cast, bored, and turned, gave to

the commander two sections of tubing of the size and length required, and

declined to have a bill made out for the material and work involved.

You will express to the Government of the French Republic the thanks of

the Navy Department for the kind and courteous treatment extended by

Rear-AdmiralServantoavesseloftheUnitedStatesandtoher

commander.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 124]
Mr. de Margerie to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OF THEFRENCHREPUBLIC IN THEUNITEDSTATES,
Manchester by the Sea,August 3, 1901.

Mr. SECRETARY OFSTATE: The minister of war of France has decided to invite the

foreign military attachés to witness the grand maneuvers which will be

performed this year by the First, Second, Sixth, and Twentieth Army corps,

under the direction of General Brugère.

HavingbeeninstructedtotransmitthisinvitationtotheFederal

Government, I will thank you to inform me, as speedily as possible,

whether it desires the military attaché of the United States embassy at Paris

to witness these maneuvers.

I will add that if said officer goes to the French grand maneuvers he will

have to present himself on the 10th of September next to the staff of the

army (second bureau), where he will be informed of the arrangements made

regarding foreign officers. These officers will attend the maneuvers on and

after September 13 and the final review on the 19th.

Be pleased to accept, etc.,
PM

[Document 125]
Mr. Adee to Mr. de Margerie.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 13, 1901.

No. 417.]

SIR: Replying to your note of the 3d instant, I have the honor to inform you

that the Acting Secretary of War, under date of the 10th idem, says that the

invitation of the Government of the French Republic to that of the United

States to be represented at the grand maneuvers of the First, Second, Sixth,

and Twentieth French Army corps in September next, is accepted with

pleasure, and that suitable instructions have been sent to the military attaché

of the United States at Paris.

Accept, etc.,
ALYEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 126]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Vignaud.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 14, 1901.

No. 938.]

SIR: I inclose a copy of a letter from the War Department relative to the

courtesies extended to Capt. T. Bentley Mott, U. S. A., military attaché, the

official representative of the United States at the recent French maneuvers,

by Colonel de Fontenilliat, who was in charge of the foreign officers, and

his assistants, and reciting the thoughtfulness and delicacy on the part of

General Brugère, commanding the French army, at a dinner to the foreign

officers, in not offering the usual toasts to the sovereigns and chiefs of state

whoserepresentativeswerepresent,owingtothedeathofPresident

McKinley.

It is desired to have you express this Government’s thanks for the courtesies

extended to Captain Mott, and its profound appreciation of the action of

General Brugère on the occasion referred to.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
WD ,Washington,October 7, 1901.

S: I have the honor to request that the American ambassador at Paris,

France, may be instructed to express in appropriate terms to the French

GovernmentthehighappreciationbythisDepartmentofthemany

courtesies extended to Capt. T. Bentley Mott, military attaché, the official

representative of the United States Army, while attending the recent French

grand autumn maneuvers, and especially the polite attentions shown to him

by Colonel de Fontenilliat, who had charge of the foreign officers, and his

assistants.

The thoughtful and delicate action in memory of the death of President

McKinley on the part of General Brugère, the general commanding the

army, on the occasion of the dinner to the foreign officers, in not offering

the usual toast to the sovereigns and chiefs of state whose officers were

present, and directing that the regimental music should not play during the

dinner as a mark of respect to the official representative of the United States

Army, is profoundly appreciated by this Department.

Very respectfully,
WM.CAREYSANGER,
Acting Secretary of War.

[Document 127]
Mr. Vignaud to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Paris,November 2, 1901.

No. 899.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s No. 938 of October

14, instructing this embassy to express the thanks of our Government for

the courtesies extended to Captain Mott during the recent maneuvers of the

French army, and its profound appreciation of General Brugère’s delicacy in

not offering the usual toast to the sovereigns at a dinner given to the foreign

officers, owing to the death of President McKinley. This instruction was

complied with October 25 last.

I have, etc.,
HENRYVIGNAUD.

[Document 128]
Mr. Delcassé, minister for foreign affairs, to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

PARIS,September 14, 1901.

I beg your excellency to accept the sincere and keen condolences of the

French nation and Government, who share with all their hearts in the

mourning of the nation and Government of the United States.
DELCASSÉ.

[Document 129]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Deleassé.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

In the name of the American people and their Government I thank your

excellency for the fraternal message of sympathy and sorrow on the part of

the French Government and people.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 130]
Mr. Vignaud to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Paris,November 5, 1901.

No. 902.]

SIR: Some time ago a naturalized American of French origin, Mr. Emile

Robin, applied to this embassy for the purpose of having his name erased

from the French military rolls. Robin was born in France on the 9th of

January, 1869. After having served in the active army the full term of three

years, to which every Frenchman has to submit, he proceeded to the United

States, where he was naturalized March 31, 1900. At that time, although

released from the active army, he was still liable to serve in the reserve, and

therefore, according to the French law of June 26, 1889, new article 17 of

the code, he could not renounce his French nationality without the consent

of his Government.

At his urgent request the embassy applied, nevertheless, for his complete

discharge from all military obligations in France, and I am now in receipt of

Mr. Delcassé’s reply. The application is refused, on the ground that, as the

period during which Robin is liable to serve in the active army (comprising

the reserve) only expires on the 12th of March, 1903, when he would be

transferred to the territorial army, and further, as he failed to apply to the

authorities to obtain consent to change his nationality, his naturalization in

the United States has no value in the eyes of the French Government.

Such reply was fully expected and contains nothing new, but it defines the

position the French Government takes when cases of this kind arise, in a

manner so precise that I have deemed it advisable to send you a copy and

translation of it.

I have, etc.,
HV

[Inclosure—Translation.]
Mr. Delcassé to Mr. Vignaud.
PARIS,October 31, 1901.

MR.CHARGÉD’AFFAIRES: The 3d of July last the ambassador of the United States

applied for my mediation to obtain the striking off our army roll of Mr.

Robin (Emile), who had obtained American naturalization on the 31st of

March, 1900.

My colleague, the minister of war, to whom I hastened to refer the matter,

informs me that the result of the information collected by his department is

that Mr. Robin has not been authorized by the French Government to be

naturalized abroad. By the terms of article 17 of the Civil Code, if a

Frenchman is still subject to the obligations of military service in the active

army, naturalization abroad will not cause him to lose the quality of

Frenchman unless it was authorized by the French Government.

As Mr. Robin would have been transferred to the territorial army only on

March 12, 1903, he was subject to the formality of an authorization when

he acquired, in 1900, his American naturalization. That authorization not

having been applied for, the naturalization acquired in America by Mr.

Robin is without value in the eyes of the French Goverment.

General André charges me, in these circumstances, to express to you his

regret at being unable to order the striking off of Mr. Robin’s name from

our army roll.

Accept, etc.,
D

[Document 131]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,January 17, 1901.

No. 1510.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that on the 11th ultimo the embassy was

informed by the consulate at Hamburg that Max Friedrich Schaaf had been

ordered to leave that city within fourteen days, and that intervention was at

once made in Schaaf’s behalf to the end that he might be permittsd to

remain there until the autumn of 1901, or, if that were not convenient, until

next spring (F. P. No. 846.) Schaaf was born at Leipzig in 1872 and

emigrated with his parents in 1882 to the United States, where he became a

citizen through the naturalization of his father in 1889. After his father’s

death he returned to Leipzig, in September, 1899, where he remained for

about a year, then going to Altona, near Hamburg. A short time after his

arrival in that city he was expelled from Prussia on account, it is said, of his

father having neglected to obtain his release from German allegiance before

his immigration, and he then moved to Hamburg, whereupon he soon

received the order referred to above.

To-day I have been informed by the foreign office that, in view of the

embassy’s interest in the case, Schaaf will be allowed to remain in Hamburg

until April, but that the senate of the “Free and Hanse City” felt compelled

to maintain the order of expulsion, as it was assumed that Schaaf had

emigrated in order to evade military service.

I am, etc.,
A DW

[Document 132]
Mr. Hay to Mr. White.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 5, 1901.

No. 1159.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 1510, of the 17th ultimo,

reporting the case of Max Friedrich Schaaf, a naturalized American citizen,

who was taken to this country when 10 years old, became a citizen through

the naturalization of his father, and, having returned to Germany, has been

ordered to leave the city of Hamburg in April next.

The German contention in this case appears to be extreme and even

scarcely reasonable, as Mr. Schaaf emigrated in his father’s care when only

10 years old. This Government would much regret if this case, and others

which have within the past two years been reported to your embassy, and

the consulates in Germany, should indicate a purpose to hold all American

citizens of German origin, who emigrated during minority, amenable to the

imputation of intention to evade military service, no matter what their age

may have been at the time of emigration. Whilst it may be licit to deduce

from the facts of any particular case that the emigration of the minor was

for the sole purpose of evading military service and that conditions exist in

his instance which make his return to and sojourn in his native place

detrimental to public order or interests, the application of this exceptional

procedure to all minor emigrants would not be in consonance with the spirit

and intent of the existing conventions of naturalization between the two

countries, and would in fact almost amount to the injection into the treaty

stipulations of a requirement of prior consent to change of allegiance, a

requirement not admitted by the negotiators of those conventions.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 133]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,February 16, 1901.

No. 1542.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt this morning of your

instruction No. 1159, referring to the expulsion case of Max Friedrich

Schaaf, and in this connection to report that the embassy’s dispatch No.

1510, with regard to this case contained practically the whole (not a

summary) of the foreign office’s note in question. Of late the foreign office

has refrained from entering upon any discussion of such cases. The position

taken by the royal Prussian authorities is that it is to be presumed that any

one who emigrates from Prussia without having performed military service

emigrated for the purpose of evading such service, the age of the person in

question at the time of his emigration not being taken into account. The

Prussian authorities hold that no such person should be allowed to settle in

Prussia or to make a prolonged visit in that country while still of an age

when, had he remained a Prussian subject, he might be called upon for

military service. They consider that the provisions of the Bancroft treaties

are sufficiently complied with if the person in question is allowed to visit

his former home and to remain there a few weeks; and of late years, in

certain parts of the country, expulsion orders have become more or less

frequent. The question of having obtained permission to change allegiance

does not appear to influence the case, the idea being merely that a person

should not be able, through a few years’ residence abroad and naturalization

in a foreign country, to return to his native place and to there sojourn free

from the duties and obligations of other men of the same age who have

livedtherecontinuously.Itsometimeshappens,ofcourse,thatlocal

officials show too much zeal and that there is real hardship connected with

a case of expulsion, but it must not be forgotten that the number of persons

expelled or otherwise molested on account of their not having performed

military service is relatively very small when considered in connection with

the great number of American citizens of German origin who visit their

former homes every year.

In Germany a record is kept of every male child born in the country. At the

beginning of each calendar year official notice is published to the effect that

all males born during the twentieth preceding calendar year are to report for

examination as to their fitness for military service. At the end of the year

proceedings are taken against all those who have failed to report, and they

are all sentenced to pay a fine or undergo imprisonment, and warrants are

issued for their arrest. When such a person returns from the United States or

any other country, unless the fact of his change of nationality is recorded

and his name has been taken from the lists, he is liable at any time to be

called upon to pay the fine, the same being almost invariably refunded, in

the case of an American citizen, upon intervention being made by the

embassy. In Zahl’s case he was probably sentenced several years before he

became a citizen of the United States.

In this connection I beg to call attention to Mr. Kasson’s dispatch No. 124,

of January 6, 1885, and to the inclosures therein. (F. Rels. 1885, p. 392 .) I

am, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.

[Document 133a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 23, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF GERMANY WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

A German subject is liable to military service from the time he has

completed the 17th year of his age until his 45th year, active service lasting

from the beginning of his 20th year to the end of his 36th year.

A German who emigrates before he is 17 years old, or before he has been

actually called upon to appear before the military authorities, may, after a

residence in the United States of five years and after due naturalization,

return to Germany on a visit, but his right to remain in his former home is

denied by Germany, and he may be expelled after a brief sojourn on the

ground that he left Germany merely to evade military service. It is not safe

for a person who has once been expelled to return to Germany without

havingobtainedpermissiontodosoinadvance. A personwhohas

completed his military service and has reached his 31st year and become an

American citizen may safely return to Germany.

The treaties between the United States and the German States provide that

German subjects who have become citizens of the United States shall be

recognized as such upon their return to Germany if they resided in the

United States five years.

ButanaturalizedAmericanofGermanbirthisliabletotrialand

punishment upon return to Germany for an offense against German law

Germany. If he emigrated after he was enrolled as a recruit in the standing

army; if he emigrated while in service or while on leave of absence for a

limited time; if, having an unlimited leave or being in the reserve, he

emigrated after receiving a call into service or after a public proclamation

requiring his appearance, or after war broke out, he is liable to trial and

punishment on return.

Alsace-Lorraine having become a part of Germany since our naturalization

treaties with the other German States were negotiated, American citizens,

natives of that province, under existing circumstances, may be subjected to

inconvenience and possible detention by the German authorities if they

return without having sought and obtained permission to do so from the

imperial governor at Strassburg The authorities of Wurttemberg require that

theevidenceoftheAmericancitizenshipofaformersubjectof

Wurttemberg which is furnished by a passport shall be supplemented by a

duly authenticated certificate showing five years’ residence in the United

States in order that fulfillment of the treaty condition of five years’

residence may appear separately as a fact of record.

A former German subject against whom there is an outstanding sentence, or

who fears molestation upon return for an offense against German law, may

petition the sovereign of his native State for relief, but this Government can

not act as intermediary in presenting the petition.

Travelersarenotrequiredtoshowpassportsonenteringorleaving

Germany, but they are likely to be called upon to establish their identity and

citizenship at any time, and especially so if living in boarding houses or

rentingapartments.Theyareconsequentlyrecommendedtoprovide

themselves with passports. They do not usually require to be visaed or

indorsed, but the local authorities sometimes demand a German translation.

[Document 134]
Mr. von Holleben to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Washington,February 9, 1901.

MR.SECRETARYOFSTATE: On the 19th of October of last year the United States

marshal of Philadelphia libeled the Hamburg steamshipAssyria, code signal

R. L. C. G., of the Hamburg-American Packet Navigation Stock Company,

then lying in that port, without advising in advance, conformably to Article

XII, paragraph 2, of the consular convention of December 11, 1871,

between the United States and the German Empire, the imperial consul at

Philadelphia of this process serving on board the ship.

While bringing the foregoing case to the knowledge of your excellency, I

ahave the honor, with reference to my noteof the 31st of March of last year,

aand your excellency’s obliging noteNo. 417, of the 19th of April, to apply

to your kindly intercession to the end that the officials concerned be

instructed, in order to avoid the recurrence of similar violations of the

provisions of Article XII of the consular convention between the United

States of America and Germany, to advise the imperial consular officers in

the future before serving processes on board German merchant vessels, and

thus afford the said consular officers an opportunity of being present at such

serving.

Be pleased, etc.,
H
Not printed.
Not printed.

[Document 135]
Mr. Hay to Mr. von Holleben.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 23, 1901.

No. 561.]

EXCELLENCY: In reply to your note of the 9th instant, relative to the reported

violation of the consular convention of December 11, 1871, by the United

States marshal at Philadelphia in libeling the Hamburg-American Line

steamshipAssyriawithout first having notified the German consul at that

city, I have now the honor to inform you that the Attorney-General, to

whom the matter was referred, wrote on the 16th instant that he brought the

matter to the attention of the marshal and instructed him to avoid in future

any similar occurrence in contravention of the terms of the convention

referred to above.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 136]
Mr. Hay to Mr. von Holleben.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 1, 1901.

No. 565.]

EXCELLENCY: On the 23d ultimo I had the honor to inform you, in reply to your

note of February 9, that the Attorney-General had brought the matter of the

alleged violation of the consular convention of 1871, between the United

States and Germany, by the United States marshal at Philadelphia, in

libeling the Hamburg-American Line steamshipAssyriawithout first having

notified the German consul at that city, to the attention of the marshal and

hadinstructedhimtoavoidinfutureanysimilaroccurrencein

contravention of the terms of the convention.

I am now in receipt of a communication from the Attorney-General, dated

February 26, stating that, after further consideration of the language of

Article XII of the consular convention referred to, it appears to him that the

previous notice to be given to the consular officers of the respective nations

relates only to an examination or search of merchant vessels by judicial

authorities or custom-house officials, and to the taking of the depositions or

statements of officers or persons belonging to the crew of a vessel of the

respective nations, to be made or used in judicial proceedings. In his

judgment, therefore, the service of a writ of attachment upon a vessel is not

within the language or intent of said Article XII; and as immediate service

of such a writ is often the very essence of the claimant’s or creditor’s right,

as showing due diligence, especially where preferences are concerned, he

thinks the reasons are obvious why the service of an ordinary attachment

was not intended to be, and was not in fact embraced, in the proceedings

which require previous notice under Article XII of the treaty aforesaid.

Accept, etc.,
JH

[Document 137]
Count von Quadt to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Washington,November 8, 1901.

MR.SECRETARY OFSTATE: By a note, No. 565, of March 1 of this year, relative to the

attachmentofthesteamerAssyria,ofHamburg,yourexcellency

communicated to the imperial ambassador a letter, dated February 26 of this

year, from the Attorney-General, in which he declared that upon further

examination of Article XII of the consular convention of December 11,

1871, concluded between the United States of America and Germany, he

hadformedtheopinion,atvariancewithhisearlierview,thatthe

attachment of merchant vessels did not come within the class of judicial

proceedings previous notice of which is to be given to the consular officer

under Article XII of the aforesaid consular convention.

The contents of your excellency’s note have been brought to the knowledge

of the Imperial Government, by which I am now instructed to make the

following communication to your excellency.

The Imperial Government is unable to concur in the opinion advanced in

the Attorney-General’s letter of the 26th of February of this year and

repeated in your excellency’s note of March 1 last. To be sure, the

attachment of vessels is not specially mentioned in the aforesaid convention

at its proper place, yet, in the opinion of the Imperial Government, it is to

be assimilated to the cases enumerated in Article XIII, loco citato, and in

like manner requires that the consular officer be called upon.

The Imperial Government has always adhered to the opinion that the

obligation of notifying the imperial consular officers concerned extends, if

not to all official proceedings of American local authorities on board

German merchant vessels, at least to all such as affect the interests of the

vessel or its service.

ThisviewhasbeenupheldbytheImperialGovernmentinseveral

instances, and notably in connection with the conflict between police

officers of Hoboken and firemen of the Norddeutschen Lloyd steamerElbe
in 1890, and has been conceded in Assistant Secretary William F. Wharton’s

note of June 19, 1891.

Amongtheofficialproceedingsof Americanauthoritiesaffectingthe

interests of the vessel or its service, an attachment is indeed to be placed in

the first rank, and it has been thus expressly conceded by the Government

of the United States itself in the cases of attachment of the vessels
Schleswig, Rhaetia, Magdalene, andR. C. Rickmers. I venture, in this

arespect, to refer to the noteof Secretary of State John Sherman, of

aNovember 9, 1897, No. 395; the notesof Secretary of State William R.

Day, of June 2, 1898, No. 60, and of the 23d of August of the same year,

aNo. 99; and the noteof Assistant Secretary of State David J. Hill, of the

19th of April of last year, No. 417.

The Imperial Government does indeed grant that an attachment must in

most cases be executed without delay. But this does not come in support of

the opinion advanced by the Attorney-General, because the obligation to

callupontheassistanceoftheconsulsintheproceedingsunder

consideration has never been understood otherwise than that a notification

of any official proceeding whatever was to take place before execution only

when its object was not to be defeated by reason of the loss of time thereby

involved, but that a notification given immediately after entering upon its

execution would be deemed sufficient. Vessels of a foreign nation in

Germany enjoy a similar right.

Under the circumstances, the Imperial Government thinks it may express its

expectation that the United States Government will not depart from the

interpretation of article 12 of the consular convention as accepted in the

above-mentionedcases,andthattheattachmentofavesselwill,as

heretofore, be counted among the official proceedings therein specified,

which require a previous notification.

While respectfully asking that your excellency will take the views of the

Imperial Government as herein presented into favorable consideration and

favormewithareplyatyourconvenience,Iavailmyselfofthis

opportunity to renew, etc.
A.QUADT.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.

[Document 138]
Mr. Hay to Mr. von Holleben.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
January 6, 1902.

No. 707.]

EXCELLENCY: Referring to Count von Quadt’s note of November 8 last, relative

to the construction of Article XII of the consular convention of December

11, 1871, I have the honor to inclose a copy of a letter from the Attorney-

General, stating why he is constrained to adhere to the decision of his

predecessor, communicated to you March 1, 1901, that service of an

attachment on a vessel was not intended to be and was not embraced in the

proceedings which require previous notice to consular officers.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Knox to Mr. Hay.
D J ,
December 28, 1901.

S: I have the honor to state that I have given careful consideration to your

letter of November 19 and to the note from the German embassy which you

inclose, with its accompanying papers, relative to the construction of Article

XII of the convention of 1871 between the United States and Germany. The

language of that article is that “the judicial authorities and custom-house

officials shall in no case proceed to the examination or search of merchant

vessels without having given previous notice to the consular officers of the

nation to which the said vessels belong, in order to enable the said consular

giving such notice when statements by officers or members of a crew are to

be made in court or before a magistrate, in order to prevent error or false

interpretation which might impede the correct administration of justice.

The view of Mr. Griggs (letter of February 26, 1901), to which the

embassy’s note refers, was that the service of a writ of attachment upon a

vessel is not within the language or the intent of this article of the treaty,

especially since immediate service of such writ is often the very essence of

the right of a claimant or creditor. The note of the German embassy, while

claiming that the service of attachments is covered by the language of

Article XII, concedes generally that when the object of the proceedings can

otherwise not be attained, or be attained but partially, the obligation to give

previous notice is so far qualified, and that the proximity of a vessel’s

departure justifies the failure to notify before the attachment is effected,

provided due notice is subsequently given.

On review of the entire subject, I concur in the conclusion announced in my

predecessor’s letter of February 26, 1901, viz, “that the reasons are obvious

why the service of an ordinary attachment was not intended to be and was

not in fact embraced in the proceedings which require previous notice under

Article XII of the treaty.”

Very respectfully,
P.C.KNOX,Attorney-General.

[Document 139]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,February 14, 1901.

No. 1535.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that in December last, under general

instructions from the Department, intervention was made in behalf of Lewis

T. Cannon and Jacob Müller, American citizens, who had been residing in

Cologne, “in the capacity of missionaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of

Latter Day Saints (otherwise known as the Mormon Church),” who had

been found “lästig” (troublesome, objectionable) by the local authorities

“because of the preaching and practice” of their religion, and who had

consequently been expelled from Prussia. In the case of Mr. Müller, who

had no present intention to return to Germany, the request was made that

the order for his expulsion might be recalled, so that he might not be liable

to arrest and punishment in case he ever found it desirable to make another

visit. Mr. Müller is a naturalized American citizen of Wurttemberg origin,

and is about 60 years old. Mr. Cannon, however, who is a native American

citizen, wished to be allowed to return to Prussia as a student in case he

should not be permitted to do so as a missionary.

To-day the embassy is in receipt of a note from the imperial foreign office

in which it is stated that the Royal Prussian Government does not consider

it practicable (“angängig”) under the circumstances either to recall the

orders of expulsion or to permit Cannon to stay in Prussia as a student. This

information has at once been communicated to Mr. Cannon, who was at

Zurich, Switzerland, when last heard from, and he has been asked to

communicate it to Mr. Müller, whose address is not known to the embassy.

I am, etc.,
A DW

[Document 140]
Mr. Hay to Mr. White.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 8, 1901.

Convey through appropriate channel fitting expression of the President’s

sympathy for the Emperor’s painful accident and his sincere congratulations

upon His Majesty’s escape from more serious injury.
HAY.

[Document 141]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,March 9, 1901.

No. 1565.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt this morning of your

atelegraphic instructions,and to inform you that I have at once acted in

accordance with the same and have communicated with Baron Richthofen,

the imperial secretary of state for foreign affairs.

I am, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 142]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,March 16, 1901.

No. 1574.]

SIR: Referring to the ambassador’s dispatch No. 1565, of the 9th instant, I

have the honor to report that I am to-day in receipt of a note from the

imperial foreign office in which I am informed that the German ambassador

in WashingtonhasbeeninstructedtoconveytoourGovernmentan

expression of the sincere gratitude of the Imperial Government for the

evidence of friendly sympathy on the occasion of the assault on the German

Emperor at Bremen on March 6, 1901.

I have, etc.,
JOHNB.JACKSON.

[Document 143]
Mr. von Holleben to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Washington,March 29, 1901.

MR.SECRETARYOFSTATE: The ambassador of the United States at Berlin has

expressed to the Imperial Government the sympathy and congratulations of

your excellency’s Government on the occasion of the accident which

recently befell His Majesty, the Emperor and King, at Bremen.

By order of the chancellor of the Empire, I have the honor to convey to

your excellency the most sincere thanks of the Imperial Government for this

friendly token of sympathy.

Be pleased to accept, etc.,
HOLLEBEN.

[Document 144]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
Berlin,March 30, 1901.

No. 1589.]

aSIR: Referring to the embassy’s dispatch No. 1492,of December 31, 1900, I

have the honor to append hereto a memorandum report of certain military

cases,particularlymentionedbelow,whichhavebeenbroughttoa

satisfactory conclusion during the current quarter, and which have not been

referredtoheretoforeintheembassy’scorrespondencewiththe

Department.

I have, etc.,
JOHNB.JACKSON.
[Inclosure.]

1. Ladislaus Golus brought his case to the attention of the embassy in May,

1900, and after certain correspondence the embassy intervened in his behalf

(F. O., No. 704), on the 17th of that month.

Golus was born at Gollub in 1873, and emigrated in 1890 to the United

States, where he duly became naturalized as a citizen in New York, in April,

1900. He returned on a visit to Gollub soon thereafter, and on May 12 he

had been arrested and kept in prison, in spice of his protest as an American

citizen, until he had paid a fine on account of his nonperformance of

military service.

The embassy again invited attention to this case on June 21, 1900 (F. O.,

No. 735), September 10 and 17 (F. O., Nos. 804 and 810), and December 20

(F. 0.,No. 849). Under date of January 14, 1901, Golus having in the

meantime returned to the United States, the foreign office notified the

embassy that the money in question would be refunded to his father at

Gollub.

2. Xaver Sylvester Balz informed the embassy in December, 1900, that he

wished to visit his former home in Alsace, had made the usual formal

request, and hoped that the embassy would support the same. He had been

born at Buchsweiler in 1863, and when 18 years old had emigrated to the

United States, where he had duly become naturalized as a citizen.

On January 5, 1901 (F. O., No. 862), and again on the 10th of the same

month, Balz, having informed the embassy in the meantime that the

minister for Alsace-Lorraine at Strassburg had refused his request, owing to

the fact that a warrant had been issued for his arrest on account of his

evasion of military duty, the embassy communicated with the foreign office

in regard to the case, and under date of January 24 a reply was received to

the effect that permission had been granted Balz to visit Buchsweiler for six

weeks at some time before the 1st of next June.

3. The brothers Michael, Nicholas, and Mathias Gent brought their case to

the attention of the embassy in April, 1900, and, after correspondence,

intervention was made in their behalf (F. O., No. 715), on May 30. They

werebornatBüschdorfin1866,1870,and1874,respectively,had

emigrated to the United States, and had duly become naturalized as citizens

at Creston, Iowa, where all three now reside. Recently their representative

at their former home had been compelled to pay fines amounting in all to

624.21 marks on account of their not having reported for military service.

Attention was again called to this case in June, September, and December,

1900, and under date of January 29, 1901, the foreign office notified the

embassy that the fines had been remitted and the money paid would be

refunded.

4. Henry Kauffmann, writing from his home in the United States, informed

the embassy that he desired to be permitted to make a visit to his former

home in Alsace, and had already been in correspondence with the imperial

ministry at Strassburg in the matter. On January 29, 1901, the embassy

addressed a note (F. O., No. 882) to the imperial foreign office in support of

Kauffmann’s request, and under date of February 21 it was informed that

permission had been granted him to visit Strassburg for three weeks.

5. Alfred Nachtigall’s case was brought to the attention of the embassy on

January 22, 1901, and intervention was at once (F. O., No. 880) made in his

naturalized as a citizen in 1890, at Grand Rapids, Mich., at which place he

continued to reside. A previous effort, made by his father, to obtain his

release from German allegiance was said to have been unsuccessful. Under

date of March 23, the embassy was notified by the foreign office that

Nachtigall had been recognized as an American citizen and his name taken

from the German military lists.
aPrinted Foreign Relations, 1900, p. 519 .

[Document 145]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
BERLIN,July 1, 1901.

No. 1660.]

SIR: Referring to Mr. Jackson’s dispatch No. 1589, of March 30, 1901, I

have the honor to append hereto a memorandum report of certain military

cases,particularlymentionedbelow,whichhavebeenbroughttoa

conclusion during the past quarter, and which have not heretofore been

referred to in the embassy’s correspondence with the Department.

I am, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.
[Inclosure.]

1. Sigmund Meyers (Mayer) emigrated from Germany to the United States

aboutnineyearsago,anddulybecamenaturalizedasacitizenin

Philadelphia, on May 29, 1899. On account of his not having appeared for

military service, his father (it was claimed), in Bavaria, had been ordered to

pay a fine. The case was brought to the attention of the embassy by Messrs.

Gutman Klein & Son, of Philadelphia, and under date of February 12, 1901,

intervention (F. O., No. 894) was made in Meyers’s behalf to the end that he

“be recognized as an American citizen, his name taken from the German

military lists, and all proceedings against him on account of his failure to

present himself for military service stopped.”

Under date of April 11, the foreign office replied to the embassy’s note,

stating that Meyers’s name had been taken off the military lists and that no

criminal proceedings had been commenced against him on account of his

evasion of military service.

2. Diedrich Ebken was born in Bremen in 1876, and emigrated in 1891 to

the United States, where he became naturalized as a citizen at Cincinnati in

1900. In January, 1901, he returned to Bremen on a visit, when he was

almost immediately informed that he must leave the country. At his own

request, however, permission was granted him to remain until April 5. He

was nevertheless arrested soon after and compelled to pay a fine of 200

marks, on account of his not having performed military service. His case

was reported to the embassy by the consul at Bremen, and under date of

March 19, 1901, intervention (F. O., No. 915) was made in his behalf.

Under date of April 16, Consul Diederich informed the embassy that

Ebken’s fine had been refunded (this information being confirmed by the

foreign office on April 25) and the money forwarded to him at his home in

the United States.

3. Gustav A. Seitz, an American citizen of German origin residing in

Zumbrota, Minn., brought his case to the attention of the embassy hi

November, 1900. He had emigrated from Baden without having performed

military service, and although permission had been granted him to visit his

former home, it appeared uncertain that he had been fully recognized as an

American citizen. Seitz had addressed a petition to the Grand Duke of

Baden, and under date of March 1, 1901, the embassy notified the foreign

office (F. O., No. 901) that it desired to give all proper support to the same.

Seitz had exhibited evidence of his naturalization in the United States in

1881.

Under date of April 19 the foreign office informed the embassy that it had

communicated with the Baden authorities in regard to the case, and that

they would communicate directly with Seitz, from whom the embassy

subsequently learned that he had been notified that he was at liberty to visit

Baden under the same conditions as all other foreigners could do so, and

that he was not liable to any military obligation.

4. Louis Wiess emigrated to the United States from Alsace-Lorraine in

1873, after having been drafted for military service. He became naturalized

as a citizen in 1878. In March, 1901, he made application to the imperial

authorities at Strassburg (as instructed to do by the embassy in May, 1900)

O., No. 921) the embassy addressed a note to the foreign office in support

of his request.

On April 29 the embassy was informed by the foreign office that Wiess had

been granted permission to spend six weeks at his former home at some

time during the current year.

5. (John) Jacob Häberle had been in personal correspondence with the

authorities of the Kingdom of Wurttemberg (from which he had emigrated

to the United States) and had encountered difficulties in effecting his

recognition as an American citizen. He first brought his case to the attention

of the embassy in the summer of 1900, and after the required authentication

of his papers intervention was made in his behalf (F. O. No. 855) on

December 28, 1900. Attention was again called to the case (F. O. No. 911)

on March 14, 1901.

A reply was received from the foreign office on May 11, in which it was

stated that Häberle had been recognized as an American citizen, and that an

attachment placed upon his property on account of his evasion of military

service had been removed.

6. Robert H. Just applied to the embassy in person on April 9, 1901, and

intervention (F. O. No. 924) was at once made in his behalf. Just was born

in Berlin in 1874 and, when 11 years of age, had been taken by his parents

totheUnitedStates,wherehedulybecameacitizenthroughthe

naturalization of his father while he was still a minor. In October, 1900, he

returned to Germany for the purpose of studying music, and subsequently

he was interrogated by the police authorities and ordered to leave Prussia

within four weeks from April 1, or again become a German subject.

Under date of May 13, however, the foreign office informed the embassy

that the expulsion order had been recalled and that Just would be permitted

to remain in Berlin until further notice.

7. Siegmund Stern, a naturalized American citizen of German origin,

informed the embassy in a letter which was received on April 8, 1901, that

he had been ordered to leave Prussia within fourteen days, and the embassy

at once (F. O. No. 923) made intervention in his behalf, requesting, in

accordance with Stern’s wish, that he be allowed to remain until about the

1st of July. Stern stated that he had important business to attend to and that

he wished to be allowed to stay at Schlüchtern for two months longer.

Under date of May 23 the foreign office informed the embassy that the

Prussian authorities did not find themselves in a position to cancel the

expulsion order, as Stern, who emigrated from Germany in 1890 without

having performed military service had repeatedly returned and had already

been permitted to sojourn in Schlüchtern since July 1, 1900.

It is understood that Stern was not molested pending the final decision of

his case, and it will be noted that the decision that he must go was not made

untilsixweeksafterattentionhadbeencalledtothecase.Hewas

consequently enabled to remain in Prussia up to within about two weeks of

the time when he intended to leave.

8. Max Kuechlin’s case—his arrest, imprisonment, and release, and the

ultimate refunding of his military fine in accordance with intervention made

by the embassy in April, 1901—has, it is understood, been fully reported by

the United States consul at Freiburg, Baden.
J. B. J.

[Document 146]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,September 30, 1901.

No. 1743.]

SIR: Referring to the embassy’s dispatch No. 1660, of July 1, 1901, I have

the honor to append hereto a memorandum report of certain military cases,

particularly mentioned below, which have been brought to a conclusion

during the quarter ending to-day, and which have as yet not been fully

reported to the Department.

I have, etc.,
JOHNB.JACKSON.
[Inclosure.]

1. Nick Britten commenced a correspondence with the embassy with regard

tohismilitarystatusinApril,1900,theresultofwhichwasthat

intervention was made in his behalf (F. O. No. 881) on January 23, 1901, to

the end that he be recognized as an American citizen and his military fine

remitted.

Britten was born in the Rheinprovinz in 1864, and had emigrated to the

United States in 1882, subsequently becoming naturalized as a citizen in the

State of Iowa, where he continues to reside. Certain money coming to him

by inheritance had been attached on account of his failure to perform

military service.

Attention was again invited to this case on February 26 (F. O. No. 900),

March 14 (911), and June 19 (972), and under date of July 10, 1901, a note

was received from the foreign office in which it was stated that the fine

which Britten had been sentenced to pay, on April 6, 1887, had been

2. Lawrence M. Metzger (see case No. 1, in report accompanying Mr.

aJackson’s dispatch No. 1416,of September 29, 1900) had been permitted

to make a visit to his former home in Germany, and after leaving for the

United States an application had been made for the remission of his military

fine (F. O. No. 77, of August 1, 1900).

Under date of August 18, 1901, a note was received from the foreign office

in which it was stated that the fine and the court’s costs had been remitted.

Certain other costs, amounting in all to 12 marks, had already been

collected and this amount was not refunded. No further action in the case is

contemplated.

3. Herrmann E. Meisner brought his case to the attention of the embassy in

June, 1901, and on the 26th of that month intervention (F. O. No. 982) was

made in his behalf, to the end that he might be allowed to remain in Prussia

for about two months longer.

Meisner was born in Prussia in 1858. When about 20 years of age, and after

having been found unfit for military service, he emigrated to the United

States, where he duly became naturalized as a citizen in 1886. In 1892 he

had remained in Germany for about two months without molestation. In

December, 1900, he had again returned, on a visit to his mother, and on

June 15 he had received an order to leave Prussia within fourteen days, the

order having been issued by the Berlin police presidency.

Under date of August 21, the foreign office notified the embassy that

Meisner would be permitted to remain until September 15.

4. Friedrich Koch, as reported by the United States consul at Bremen, was

born in Prussia in 1872, and, after having obtained his release from Prussian

allegiance, emigrated to the United States in 1888. He became naturalized

as a citizen in due time, and passport No. 42878 was issued to him by the

Department. He returned to Germany in July, and soon thereafter he was

notified by the local authorities at his former home in Schleswig-Holstein,

that he must leave the country by September 2.

On August 13, 1901, intervention (F. O. No. 1006) was made by the

embassy in his behalf, as Koch wished to be permitted to remain in Prussia

until October 8, and under date of September 13 the foreign office replied

that he might do so until October 1—in view of the special circumstances in

this particular case.

5. August Meyer was born in Prussia in 1876 and emigrated to the United

States in 1892, where he duly became naturalized as a citizen. He returned

to Germany about July 1, 1901, and soon thereafter he received an order

from the local authorities to leave within five days. As permission had been

granted Meyer’s brother to remain until September 1, the embassy made

intervention in his behalf (F. O. No. 998) on July 25 to the end that like

permission might be granted him.

As nothing further has been heard of this case, either from Meyer himself or

from the American consul at Bremen, by whom it was brought to the

attention of the embassy, it is presumed that Meyer was able to finish his

visit without further molestation and that he has now returned to the United

States.
J. B. J.
aPrinted Foreign Relations, 1900, p. 517 .

[Document 147]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,December 31, 1901.

No. 1814.]

SIR: Referring to Mr. Jackson’s dispatch No. 1743 of September 30, I have

the honor to report that the only military case—not already mentioned—

which has been brought to a conclusion during the quarter ending to-day is

that of Karl Kammerer, and that almost no such cases are pending at the

present time.

The facts in Kammerer’s case are substantially as follows: Born near

Villingen, in the Grand Duchy of Baden, in 1869, he emigrated in 1886 to

the United States, were he duly became naturalized as a citizen in 1894. In

1892 he was sentenced by the Baden authorities to pay a fine of 200 marks

on account of his evasion of military service. This fine had not been

collected.

As Kammerer wished to make a visit to his native place, and as he feared

trouble unless this fine should be canceled, he brought his case to the

attention of the embassy, and intervention was made in his behalf (F. O. No.

999) on July 30, last. Attention was again called to the case (F. O. No. 1034)

on September 27.

Under date of October 12, however, the embassy was informed by the

imperial foreign office that the judgment against Kammerer would not be

executed, and that there was nothing to prevent his making the desired visit

to his former home. This information was communicated to Kammerer at

his residence in the United States (York, Pa.), and nothing has since been

heard from him.

I am, etc.,

[Document 148]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,April 13, 1901.

No. 1604.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that the embassy has been requested by the

Imperial foreign office to use its good offices in the matter referred to

herein. It will be remembered in this connection that the German law

relating to insurance against disability and old age (see Mr. Coleman’s

dispatch No. 182, of October 7, 1890) compels all persons working in a

position of dependence upon regular wages, unless the wages exceed a

certain amount per annum, to insure themselves against certain liabilities,

the insurance to be effected by means of stamps pasted on the insurance

cards, one half the cost of the stamp being paid by the employer, the other

half by the employee. It will also be remembered (see Mr. Phelps’s

adispatchNo. 220, of January 13, 1891) that the members of this mission

voluntarily submitted themselves and their households (domestic servants

alone being concerned) to the provisions of this law at the time of its going

into force, the same course of action, so far as I am aware, having been

pursued by those who have joined the mission subsequently and by consular

officials of the United States generally throughout Germany.

And now I turn to the case in point. At our consulate at Breslau there are

employed (or were employed during the incumbency of Mr. Charles W.

Erdman) two German subjects—the one as secretary and the other as

messenger—whose cases fall within the provisions of the law mentioned

above. Were these two men employed under existing conditions by a

German or a nonofficial foreigner, both they and their employers would be

compelled to pay for the insurance stamps in the usual manner. Consul

Erdman, however, claimed that under Article III of the convention of

December 11, 1871, between the United States and the German Empire,

neither he nor they were obliged to do so, as they were employees of the

consulate, and as he was exempted from taxes of any kind whatsoever. The

foreign office, on the contrary, considers it doubtful if the consul is freed

from the obligation to contribute toward the payment for the stamps by the

treaty. It also says that, even if the two men concerned are considered as

officials of the United States, they have no claim to any pension, and

German Beam ten under similar conditions are not freed from an obligation

to insure. The good offices of the embassy having on one or more occasions

been used in the cases of domestic servants employed by American consular

officers, the foreign office has now requested the embassy to act in the case

in point to the end that the two German subjects in question may not be

deprived of advantages which would come to them were they in other

employ.

complying with the law. The case in point, however, presents hew features,

and after talking it over with Consul-General Mason I decided to submit it

to the Department. There have always been uncertainties about the exact

meaning of Article III of the convention of 1871 in so far as it refers to

consular officers (vice and deputy consuls, etc.) and employees of German

nationality, but the general practice has been to exempt such persons from

taxation, although, so far as I am aware, no formal decision in the matter

has ever been made by the competent authorities. It therefore seems

possible that, if the question be made one of principle, the existing practice

may be changed to the disadvantage of the parties concerned, and I

personally think that this would be quite probable, as I fail to see the reason

for the exemption of a German subject from local taxation merely because

his employer happens to be an American official. Consequently, in view of

the possibilities, I do not feel authorized to act in this matter without

instructions, and I therefore refer it to the Department for such action as

may be found proper.

I have, etc.,
JBJ
Not printed.

[Document 149]
Mr. Hill to Mr. White.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 30, 1901.

No. 1196.]

SIR: The Department has received Mr. Jackson’s No. 1604, of the 13th

instant, relative to the question as to whether or not a consul of the United

States in Germany and German subjects in the employ of an American

consulate in Germany are exempt from the employees’ insurance tax.

Under the provisions of Article III of the treaty of 1871 the consul at

Breslau, not being a German subject, is exempt from the payment of the

tax. But, in the opinion of the Department, that exemption can not be

claimed for the secretary and messenger of the consulate, who are German

subjects.

The Department notes Mr. Jackson’s statement that the members of the

embassyatBerlinandtheUnitedStatesconsularofficersgenerally

throughout the German Empire have voluntarily submitted themselves and

their employees to the provisions of the insurance tax law. The consul at

Breslau should be advised to follow the same course, as it is to the

advantage of his employees. He can undoubtedly arrange so that they shall

bear the payment of the quota of the contribution which he is asked to pay.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 150]
Memorandum.
IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Washington,April 16, 1901.

I. On June 26, 1875, the Attorney-General of the United States rendered an

opinion that children who are born in the United States and whose father is

a naturalized American citizen shall be considered American citizens even

if their father has left the United States after the children’s birth and

renounced his American citizenship and allegiance.

These children, however, shall be afforded an opportunity when they reach

the age of 21 of electing whether they will return and take the nationality of

their birth or retain the nationality acquired by the act of their father.

II. In 1883, in the case of a young Jew, the Imperial German legation was

informed by the Department of State that the United States Government had

adoptedtheprinciplethatminorchildrenwhowerebornwithinthe

dominion of the United States do not lose their American citizenship eo

ipso if their father changes his nationality, but that these children will be

afforded an opportunity of making formal option of allegiance at their

coming of age.

III. In 1896 it was stated by the Department of State that a child of foreign

parents who was born in the United States and taken abroad by his father

during his minority shall retain, according to the point of view established

by the executive branch of the United States Government, his American

citizenship by birth in the United States and may claim it after attaining

majority.

It was added, however, that the executive branch of the United States

Government was not competent to declare this, but that this had to be done

by the competent court, either State or Federal, as the case may be.

IV. In the case of a Chinese child born in the United States whose parents

had not been naturalized in the United States, and who had been taken to

China by his parents and wanted to return to this country later, the United

States Supreme Court stated in a decision rendered in October, 1897, “that

all children born within the dominion of the United States of foreign parents

holding no diplomatic office became American citizens merely by birth.”

V. A decision contradictory to the previous decisions was issued by the

Treasury Department on February 28, 1899, No. 20747, stating that children

born in the United States of nonnaturalized aliens and taken abroad by their

fathershould,upontheirreturntothiscountry,beadjudgedalien

immigrants.

The papers in this latter case had been referred to the Solicitor of the

TreasuryDepartment,who,afteracarefulreviewoftheauthorities,

rendered an opinion that a child born in this country of a foreign father and

taken abroad by his father, acquired said parent’s domicile and nationality.

[Document 151]
Memorandum.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 27, 1901.

Relative to the matter of the contradiction between certain cases cited in the

memorandum of the German embassy of April 16, last, as determined by

the Department of State, the Attorney-General, and the Supreme Court of

theUnitedStates,andonedeterminedbytheTreasuryDepartment,

announced on February 28, 1899, in Treasury, decision No. 20747, upon the

question of the nationality of a child born in the United States and taken out

ofthecountrybyhisparents,theDepartmentofStatefindsupon

investigation that the Treasury decision was overruled by the district court

of the United States for the southern district of New York, which held that

thetwoAmerican-bornchildrenofAcbertoAnselmoandhiswife,

Giovanna, Italians, were not aliens but citizens of the United States, and as

suchentitledtoadmissionintotheUnitedStates.(Vide93,Federal

Reporter, 659.) This decision of the district court is admitted, in a letter

from the Secretary of the Treasury of the 20th instant, to be binding and

conclusive upon that Department and is now followed by it.

[Document 152]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Jackson.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 16, 1901.

No. 1189.]

SIR: I inclose herewith copies of two dispatches from the consulate-general

at Frankfort with respect to the issuance of an order by the Prussian

GovernmentrestrictingtherightofsojourninPrussiaofnaturalized

Americans of German birth.

The order seems to apply only to such former German subjects as have

acquired American citizenship, and to be therefore a discrimination against

them on that account.

In order that the Department maybe fully advised as to this, it would be

pleased to have you report whether former Germans who have become

naturalized in other countries than the United States are, upon their return to

Prussia, expelled therefrom after a limited stay of a few weeks or months,

or whether they are permitted to reside there indefinitely and to carry on

business either for themselves or as agents of foreign commercial houses.

I am, etc.,
JH
[Inclosure 1.]
C G U S,
Frankfort on the Main,January 11, 1901.

No. 55, Consular clerk series.]

SIR: As a matter of considerable importance to a large class of American

citizens, I have the honor to inclose a copy of a letter recently addressed to

the consul at Magdeburg by the royal police praesidium at that place, which

apparently indicates clearly that a general order has recently been issued by

the Prussian Government restricting for our naturalized citizens of German

birth the right of temporary sojourn in Prussia, thus discriminating between

our native and naturalized citizens in what seems to me direct violation of

the protocols appended to the convention of February 22, 1868, under

which naturalized citizens are entitled to the same rights as native citizens.

The recognized right of a government to expel individuals seems to me to

be a different thing from a general order which affects an entire class,

especially if it applies only to Germans who have become American

citizens and not to Germans who have been naturalized in other countries.

If it be held that this is not a matter in which protest can properly be made,

are not our citizens of German birth at least entitled to know of this decision

in order that they may take the risk into consideration before going to the

expense of returning to Germany for brief visits or as representatives and

promoters of American trade? (See circular of March 27, 1899.) During the

year that I have recently spent in Germany I have had five or six such cases,

usually poor people who have had no intention or desire to remain in

Germany more than a month or two. I have never known of a case where a

wealthy American citizen of German birth has been interfered with in this

way upon his return to Germany for prolonged or permanent residence.

In every case which I have reported to the embassy it has succeeded in

obtaining for the person permission to extend his visit two or three weeks,

but in each instance the American citizen has informed me that he would

not have gone to the expense of the journey if he had been cognizant of the

fact that he could be expelled at once by order of an official having local

authority, no matter how peaceably he might conduct himself.

In most such cases the object of the order of expulsion seems to be merely

tocompeltheindividualtorenouncehis Americancitizenship,thus

removing the one obstacle to his enforced enlistment in the German army.

In some cases the expulsion may be meant simply as a warning to would-be

In the special case of Albert Ehrenstroem the embassy has asked for an

extension of his time, but I hope that the Department will decide that it is

right to give to the press the substance of the letter addressed by the Royal

Prussian police presidium at Magdeburg to Consul Baehr.

I have, etc.,
GEORGEH.MURPHY,
Consular Clerk.
[Subinclosure.—Translation.]

Magdeburg,December 21, 1900.

Answer to a letter of December 12, 1900:

The order to Albert Ehrenstroem to leave Prussian territory before February

1, 1901, is based upon an instruction from a higher source under which

Germans formerly liable for military service who return to Germany after

having acquired American citizenship are to be permitted to remain only for

a short time, which is to be measured by the circumstances and purposes of

their sojourn. The period allowed in the above-mentioned case appears to be

sufficient.
L
Memorandum: Ehrenstroem emigrated with his parents when he was 13

years of age. He was then too young to serve in the army, and his

emigration was not opposed. It is clear that he was not an evader of any

obligation to the Prussian Government, but that as a child he naturally

accompanied his parents.
G. H. M.
[Inclosure 2.]

CONSULATE-GENERAL OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Frankfort on the Main,March 21, 1901.

No. 58, consular clerk series.]

SIR: Referring to my dispatch of January 11 last, reporting the issuance of an

orderbythePrussianGovernmentrestrictingtherightofsojournin

Germany of naturalized American citizens of German birth, I have the

honor to inclose herewith a clipping from the Frankfort Kleine Presse

containing the same information as the letter from the police president at

Magdeburg, a copy of which accompanied my former report.

It accordingly now appears certain that a general order has been issued

discriminatingagainstsuchexpatriatedGermansashaveacquired

American citizenship. No mention is made either in the letter of the police

president or in the inclosed newspaper article of Germans who have

acquired any other nationality.

It is furthermore of interest to our citizens of German birth who may desire

to visit their old homes or to settle in Germany as representatives of

American commercial houses and promoters of American trade that the

question as to how long they may be permitted to remain is left to the

decision of the local police authorities, and that such permission can not be

extended beyond weeks or months at most, if the person emigrated without

first performing military service.

This restriction of the right of sojourn applies even to persons who emigrate

as minors with their parents before they have reached the age when they can

be compelled to serve in the army.

I have, etc.,
G HM ,
Consular Clerk.
[Subinclosure.]

Military.—Byhigherauthoritytheattentionofpoliceandmunicipal

officials has been called to the following: Persons who, before fulfilling

their military obligations or for the purpose of avoiding the same, have

emigrated to the United States of America, and there acquired American

citizenship, will be permitted to remain in Germany only for a period of

weeks or months according to the circumstances of each case, but they will

not be permitted to settle permanently in Germany.

[Document 153]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
Berlin,May 4, 1901.

No. 1624.]

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith a report made to me to-day by Mr.

Jackson (to whom the instruction was addressed) with reference to your No.

1189, of April 15, 1901, which was received at the embassy on the 26th

ultimo.

I am, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. White.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA,
Berlin,May 4, 1901.

SIR: With reference to the State Department’s instruction No. 1189, received

by me on the 26th ultimo, I have the honor to submit the following report:

After more than ten years’ experience at this post, and after having had

frequent conversations with my colleagues and with German officials upon

the subject of the expulsion of former German subjects, I feel at liberty to

say with positiveness that there is no intention on the part of the Prussian

Government to discriminate against American citizens. In the question

under consideration it is very difficult to draw a parallel. In the first place,

no other treaty similar to our Bancroft treaties of 1868 exists between the

German Empire, or any German State, and any foreign country. In the

second place, obligatory military service exists in almost all continental

countries, and consequently the emigration of young Germans to those

informal understandings, or even formal agreements, exist, in accordance

with which their respective nationals are reciprocally handed over to their

home authorities where an attempt is made to evade military service. Where

no treaty exists the returned German is not considered as entitled to be

protected by the authorities of the country in which he has acquired

nationality, and he is generally punished in accordance with German law

without any intervention on their part. This is even the case with British

subjects, the Department of State being probably aware of the fact that it is

the general practice of the British Government to decline to intervene in

behalf of a naturalized subject who returns to the land of his birth. As there

is no compulsory military service in Great Britain, there is a comparatively

large emigration of Germans to that country, but, as I am informed by the

British ambassador here, it rarely happens that intervention is made in

behalf of such a person (even to ask for permission for one to spend a few

weeks in Germany, on a visit, or to make a cure at some watering place),

although the instances where they get into trouble are by no means

infrequent.

The general rule is to make it unpleasant for all persons of German birth

who have evaded military service in their native country, whether their

emigration took place for the purpose of evading such service or not, upon

their return to Germany after having acquired another nationality, it being

held by the authorities, especially those in Prussia, that the sojourn of such

persons for any length of time causes discontent and dissatisfaction among

their companions of the same age who have remained at home. It is of

course possible that certain of the minor local officials may entertain

particular grudges against American citizens of German origin on account

of the frequency with which they have to do with annoying cases where

they are involved, but I am confident that these views are not shared by the

superior officials of the Prussian ministry of the interior, or at all generally

by their subordinates.

WithregardtotheorderinthecaseofAlbertEhrenstroem(see

correspondence with Mr. George M. Murphy, consular clerk) and to the

recent general order, I have to state that I have been informed by the

Prussian ministry of the interior that attention has been merely called to

what has been the practice for a long time, so that persons who do not know

that objection exists to their renewing their residence in Germany may not

be subjected to hardship.

I am, etc.,
JOHNB.JACKSON,
Secretary of Embassy.

[Document 154]
Mr. Hill to Mr. White.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 21, 1901.

No. 1205.]

SIR: Mr. Jackson’s unnumbered dispatch of the 1st ultimo, transmitting

returns of passports issued by your embassy during the preceding quarter,

has been received.

Miss Ella Seemann applied for a passport through the consul at Hamburg,

and received one February 20, 1901, No. 2671. The form used was that

intended for a person claiming citizenship through the naturalization of the

parent,andshewasrequiredtoproduceherfather’snaturalization

certificate. In another case—that of Miss Henrietta Augusta Herrmann,

whose application was also through the consul at Hamburg—the applicant

could not show her father’s naturalization certificate, but was required to

make the statements usually required from a person whose citizenship is

derived from the naturalization of the father. As both of these women were,

as their statements show, born in the United States and had not forfeited

their allegiance, they should not have been required to make the statements

or produce the proof which the consul required, their citizenship being

derived, not from their parents’ naturalization, but from the fact of their

American birth. The provisions of the statutes on this subject and the

decisions of the Federal courts, as well as this Department’s repeated

rulings,arebasedprimarilyuponthefourteenthamendmenttothe

Constitution of the United States, which provides that “All persons born or

naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are

citizens of the United States and of the State where they reside.”

You will instruct the consul at Hamburg in this sense.

I am, etc.,

[Document 155]
Mr. Hill to Mr. White.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 14, 1901.

No. 1210.]

aSIR: I inclose herewith copy of a letterfrom Bernard D. Thorner, who was

naturalized on April 4, 1887, in the city court of Birmingham, Ala., and who

received a passport, No. 219, dated January 14, 1890, from the legation of

the United States at Berlin for himself, wife, and minor son, Eugene Guido,

then 3½ months old.

It appears from Mr. Thorner’s statement that the son was born in Germany

while his parents were on a temporary visit there, and that notice of the

birth was given to the legation at Berlin, which’ failed to make record of it.

He contemplates sending this son to Germany for the purpose of study, and

fears that by reason of his own birth and that of his son in Germany the lad

will, upon reaching the military age, be called upon for service. He

therefore desires that the American citizenship of his son be recognized by

the German Government.

There is no doubt that the boy is an American citizen under section 1993 of

the Revised Statutes, and is entitled to all the protection this Government

can give him as such. The Department will be pleased, therefore, to have

you do what you can to have his American citizenship recognized by the

German Government.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.
Not printed.

[Document 156]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,October 24, 1901.

No. 1772.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that on the receipt, on June 28, of the

Department’s instruction No. 1210, of June 14, 1901, intervention was

made in behalf of Eugene Guido Thorner, to the end that he be recognized

as an American citizen and permitted to come to Germany for a somewhat

prolonged course of study, and that, no answer having been received from

the foreign office in the meantime, attention was again called to the case on

September 27. To-day, however, I have been notified by the foreign office

thatthereisnothingtopreventthe Americancitizen,EugeneGuido

Thorner, from making a prolonged stay in Germany.

In this connection I have to state that there are at the present moment no

pending military cases of long standing, and that there are fewer such cases

pending at all than at any time since my connection with this mission—a

period of almost eleven years.

I have, etc.,
JBJ

[Document 157]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,July 10, 1901.

No. 1665.]

SIR: I have the honor to invite attention to the case of one Paul N.

Friedlaender, a naturalized American citizen of German origin, and to

request that such instructions may be given in regard thereto as may be

found appropriate.

Friedlaender was naturalized at Chicago, on May 28, 1897, after having

resided in the United States for a full term of five years. He had had

permission to emigrate from Germany and had regularly renewed his

German passport until the time of his becoming an American citizen. His

mother, who lives at Potsdam, near Berlin, was called upon about a year

ago to pay a fine on his account—for being absent without permission—and

she had become involved in correspondence with the local authorities. In

March, 1901, Friedlaender applied to the embassy for its assistance, and on

the 23d of that month a note (F. O. No. 918) was addressed to the foreign

office asking that such steps might be taken as were “necessary to effect the

return to Friedlaender of his American papers, the refunding of any money

which may have already been paid on account of his failure to report for

military service, the cessation of all proceedings against him which may

have been taken on the same account, and his recognition as an American

citizen.”

To this note the foreign office replied, under date of June 12, returning

Friedlaender’s naturalization certificate and certain other papers, and stating

that he had been sentenced to pay a fine of 30 marks or to undergo

imprisonment for ten days by a local court, on April 10, 1900, on account of

his “unauthorized emigration,” but that Friedlaender had not yet paid the

fine and costs and as he was in America there was no necessity, at present,

to take steps looking toward his pardon.

The embassy at once replied (F. O. No. 969) that Friedlaender expected to

return to Germany upon a visit during the present year, and requested that

such steps might be taken as were necessary to set aside the sentence

against him.

Under date of June 28, the foreign office addressed another note to the

embassy, advising that Friedlaender petition the Emperor directly in order

that the judgment against him might be set aside before his return to

Germany, and suggesting that, in order to expedite matters, the embassy

should support such a petition when made.

To this note the embassy replied at once (F. O. No. 987) requesting a

reconsiderationofthecase,asFriedlaender’soffensewasmerely

emigrationwithoutpermission,andnotdesertion,andas“underthe

circumstances, in the opinion of the embassy and in accordance with

precedent, the case falls within the provisions of the treaty of 1868, and the

two Prussian ministerial decrees of July of that year, copies of which are

transmitted herewith. As the Prussian ministry of justice has decreed that

‘diedurchstrafbare AuswanderungverwirkteStrafe***nichtzur

Vollstreckung gebracht werden soil,’ there would appear to be no reason for

Friedlaender’s making a formal petition for pardon.”

To this note the foreign office has now replied, under date of the 8th instant,

that the ministerial decrees referred to above presupposed the actual return

toGermanyofthepersoninquestion,thatitwasprobablethat

Friedlaender’s fine would be remitted by an act of clemency, and that it

would be advisable for him to send in a petition to the Emperor before

coming to Germany, as if he did not do so he might be called upon to pay

the fine and take the consequences.

The embassy will make no reply to this note for the present. The foreign

office’s advice has, however, been communicated to Friedlander, who has

been informed that while the embassy holds that he is entitled to visit

Germany without molestation under the terms of the treaty itself, and that

no pardon is necessary, it might enable him to avoid possible trouble if he

acted upon this advice. He has been requested to inform the embassy with

regard to his decision and his movements in the event of his coming to

Without instructions, however, the embassy would not feel at liberty to give

support to any petition which Friedlaender may determine to send in, as by

so doing it might be considered that the embassy admitted the correctness

of the position now taken by the foreign office. If it is necessary for

Friedlaender to send in a petition in order to secure such rights as would

appear to be his under the treaty, there is no reason why the same course

should not be followed by every American citizen of German origin who

desires to visit his former home, and this, under existing circumstances, the

embassy is not prepared to admit.

I have, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.

[Document 158]
Mr. Hill to Mr. White.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 26, 1901.

No. 1230.]

SIR: Your No. 1665, of the 10th instant, reports that Paul N. Friedlaender, a

native of Germany, was naturalized at Chicago May 28, 1897, after having

resided in the United States for a full term of five years; that his mother was

called upon about a year ago to pay a fine on his account, and that the

embassy had addressed the foreign office asking the refunding of any

money already paid on account of his failure to report for military service

and the cessation of all proceedings against him which may have been taken

on the same account and his recognition as an American citizen.

In the second paragraph on the first page of your dispatch you state that

Friedlaender had permission to emigrate from Germany, while in the fourth

paragraph of the second page you state that “his offense was merely

emigration without permission.” You further state that Friedlaender had

been sentenced to pay a fine or suffer imprisonment by the judgment of a

local court April 10, 1900, on account of his unauthorized emigration; that

theGermanforeignofficehasadvisedthatFriedlaenderpetitionthe

Emperor directly for a vacation of the judgment or remission of the penalty,

and suggested that in order to expedite matters his petition be supported by

the embassy, which the latter declined to do for the reason that the case is

governed by the naturalization treaty of 1868 and by the two ministerial

decrees of July of that year, and that since the Prussian minister of justice

has decreed that as the penalty for punishable emigration is not to be

executed there would appear to be no reason for a formal petition of pardon.

To this the foreign office replied, advising that Friedlaender send in a

petition before coming to Germany, as otherwise a demand for payment

will be made upon him and difficulties for him will arise therefrom, as then

the remission of the penalty will not at that time have been introduced in the

official way.

You express doubt whether you should give support to any petition by

Friedlaender, as by so doing it might be construed as an admission of the

correctnessofthepositiontakenbytheforeignoffice,renderingit

necessary to pursue the same course in respect of every American citizen of

German origin desiring to visit his former home.

The naturalization convention of 1868 provides:

ARTICLEI. Citizens of the North German Confederation who become

naturalized citizens of the United States of America and shall

have resided uninterruptedly within the United States five years

shall be held by the North German Confederation to be American

citizens and shall be treated as such. This article shall apply as

well to those already naturalized as those hereafter naturalized.

ARTICLEII. A naturalized citizen of the one party remains liable to

trial and punishment for an action punishable by the laws of his

original country and committed before his emigration, saving

always the limitations established by the laws of his original

country.

ARTICLEIV. If a German naturalized in America renews his residence

in North Germany without the intent to return to America, he

shall be held to have renounced his naturalization in the United

States. * * * The intent not to return may be held to exist when

the person naturalized in the one country resides more than two

years in the other country.

The circular of the minister of justice, dated July 5, 1868, states that it was

the prevailing intention of the treaty that in conformity with its second

article the punishment incurred by punishable emigration is not to be

brought to execution on occasion of a return of the emigrant to his original

country if the returning emigrant has obtained naturalization in the other

country in conformity with the first article of the treaty.

The circular of the minister of the interior, dated July 6, 1868, states that it

was the prevailing intention of the treaty that in conformity with Article II

ofthetreatythepunishableactioncommittedbytheunauthorized

emigration of a citizen of the confederation to the United States of America

should not be made the ground for a penal prosecution upon the return of

such person to his former country after absence of not less than five years,

and that the punishment for such action, even though already legally

declared, should not be consummated if the person has acquired in America

the right of citizenship in conformity with Article I of said treaty.

A State has the unquestionable legal right to regulate under penalties either

the emigration of its subjects or the immigration of aliens, as also to punish

its nationals for failure to report for military service, except so far as

restrained by treaty (1 Rivier, 269; 2 Wharton, sec. 171).

AStatedoesnot,however,necessarilytakeofficialnoticeofthe

naturalization of its subjects as citizens of another State. Consequently, in

the absence of such official knowledge, it may, if authorized to do so by its

own laws, proceed against them by judicial trial and condemnation, even in

their absence. With such treatment by it of its own subjects no other State

has any concern.

As the case is stated, Friedlaender was a native-born German subject and

appears to have been condemned as for punishable emigration. If he had

received permission to emigrate, the judgment was not unlawful, though

erroneous in point of fact, unless the fact was shown at the trial; if he had

not received such permission, it was not unlawful unless at the trial proof

was submitted showing his naturalization in the United States and his

compliance with the terms of the treaty. As the case is stated, it does not

appear that the judgment was unlawfully rendered, although erroneous. And

as the German court or Government would not know this error without

evidence of the facts which brought Friedlaender within the exemption of

the treaty, it is entirely proper that he should take steps before the court to

have the judgment vacated and set aside, on proof of the facts which would

have constituted a good defense of the action if they had been presented at

the trial, or that he should petition the Emperor to vacate the judgment,

submitting the facts and proofs necessary to show that the judgment was in

fact given in” violation of the treaty.

While this may result in some inconvenience in practice, it is the course

pursued in the United States in analogous cases. If a judgment by default

has been rendered against a person during his absence, provision is usually

made for his application to the court, within a given period, to have the

judgment set aside for error of law or fact. If a person has been condemned

as a criminal, he may have judicial proceedings to correct an erroneous

conviction, and in the last instance may appeal to the Executive to grant a

pardon.

The advice of the German foreign office that an appeal be made to the

Emperor to set aside the judgment on the grounds stated in your dispatch,

so far from involving a concession that the conviction was not erroneous in

fact, may be accepted in the sense that it was erroneous because rendered in

violation of the treaty, as authentically interpreted in the circulars. A pardon

would be inappropriate as implying a guilt which is shown not to exist in

fact, yet if this is the only way the Emperor can lawfully proceed, the

proceeding should be accompanied by you with this interpretation.

The better course in all such cases is for the naturalized American to have

proceedings instituted in the proper court to vacate the judgment, if such

remedy is given by the local laws; and in all cases if they have notice they

should make defense by counsel if allowable to suits of that character while

pending. They should not burden the embassy by asking it to relieve them

from the consequences of their own neglect to defend; but it is, of course,

proper for you to render them all necessary assistance, even when they

could have avoided trouble by timely attention to their own interests.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 159]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,July 18, 1901.

No. 1672.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that permission has been granted the United

States shipEnterprise(Massachusetts nautical school ship) to pass through

the Kaiser Wilhelm (Kiel) Canal, en route to the North Sea, in accordance

with a request made by the embassy a few days ago. This request was made

at the instance of Commander Edward M. Hughes, United States Navy,

commanding theEnterprise, who is at present cruising in the Baltic Sea and

expects to arrive at Kiel about August 1.

I have, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.

[Document 160]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,October 19, 1901.

No. 1765.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that, in accordance with a statement furnished

the embassy by Mr. Sartori, our consular agent at Kiel, the canal dues paid

by the U. S. S.Enterpriseamounted to 400 marks, and those of the U. S. S.
Buffaloto 900 marks, which, considering the saving in time and coal, would

apparently indicate that it is less expensive for our ships to go through the

Kaiser Wilhelm Canal than it would be for them to round the Danish

peninsula.

DuringthepastfewmonthsthreeUnitedStatesnavalvessels,the
Enterprise, Hartford, andBuffalo, have visited Kiel, and while all have

made a good impression—theHartford, on account of her beauty and

historical connections, and theEnterpriseandBuffalo, as showing the

admirable way in which landsmen are trained for both our commercial and

military navies—I am of the opinion that it would be advantageous to have

more modern ships visit German ports. During “regatta week” at Kiel there

is usually quite an assemblage of German naval vessels in port, as well as a

more or less international (principally English) gathering of pleasure and

racing yachts. It is the known desire of the German Emperor to increase the

international character of the regatta, and I feel confident that the presence

of American vessels during the week would be favorably regarded. In view

of the recent reestablishment by us of an “European squadron,” I venture to

hope that this question may receive proper consideration. Many German

naval officers have been in United States ports, have experienced American

hospitality,speakEnglish,andhavepleasantrecollectionsoftheir

association with our service and its officers, while relatively few of our

officers have any knowledge of German or anything more than a superficial

(or literary) acquaintance with German officers and the Imperial Navy. As a

former officer in our Navy, I have given this subject considerable serious

consideration, and I am decidedly of the opinion that more intercourse

between American and German naval officers in ports where there is no

outside influence can not but be beneficial.

I have, etc.,
JOHNB.JACKSON.

[Document 161]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,August 5, 1901.

The Empress Frederick, mother of the reigning Emperor, died at Cronberg

about 6 o’clock this afternoon.
WHITE.

[Document 162]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,August 6, 1901.

The funeral services for the late Empress Frederick are to be strictly private,

and a request has been made that no special delegation be sent.
WHITE.

[Document 163]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,August 8, 1901.

No. 1690.]

aSIR: I have the honor to confirm the telegramsent you on the evening of the

a5th instant, as well as thatsent you on the evening of the 6th.

This second message was sent upon the receipt of a note from the foreign

office, stating that the course adopted was in accord with the last wishes of

the late Empress. The funeral services are to be held it Cronberg on Sunday,

August 11, and on August 13 the remains are to be placed in the mausoleum

at Potsdam, near those of the late Emperor Frederick. It is now understood

that the diplomatic corps is not to participate in the services at Potsdam.

I have, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.
aPrinted ante.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 164]
The President to German Emperor.
[Telegram.]

EXECUTIVEMANSION,
Washington,August 6, 1901.

I learn with deep sorrow of the death of Your Majesty’s beloved mother, the

Dowager Empress Queen Frederick. Her noble qualities have endeared her

memory to the American people, in whose name, and in my own, I tender to

Your Majesty heartfelt condolence.
WILLIAMMCKINLEY.

[Document 165]
Count von Quadt to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Manchester-by-the-Sea,August 8, 1901.

MR.SECRETARYOFSTATE: Having been apprised officially of the death of Her

Majesty the Empress and Queen Frederick, which took place on the 5th

instant, I hereby perform the sad duty of bringing this to Your Excellency’s

notice. His Majesty, the Emperor and King, my most gracious master,

together with the entire Royal House, have been plunged into the deepest

grief by this sad event.

Accept, etc.,
A.QUADT.

[Document 166]
Mr. Adee to Count von Quadt.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 13, 1901.

No. 635.]

SIR: Replying to your note of the 8th instant, I have the honor to inform you

that upon the receipt of the sad tidings of the death of Her Majesty, the

Dowager Empress and Queen Frederick, His Majesty’s mother, through the

embassy of the United States, at Berlin, the President immediately sent a

message of sympathy to His Majesty by telegraph.

aA copy of the telegramis inclosed for your consideration.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 167]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,August 14, 1901.

No. 1703.]

SIR: Referring to the embassy’s dispatch No. 1690, of the 8th instant, I have

the honor to report that, after a period of uncertainty, it was ultimately

signified to the ambassadors at this court that their presence would be

welcome at the funeral services of the late Empress Frederick at Potsdam,

and that consequently I was present on that occasion yesterday.

Thepageantandserviceswereveryimpressive,besidestheGerman

Emperor and Empress, the King and Queen of Great Britain taking part in

the whole ceremony.

Immediately before the procession began to move the Emperor signified a

wish to see me, and upon my coming into his presence he spoke quite at

length regarding the message of sympathy which he had received from the

President, expressing his heartfelt appreciation of it and his thanks for it,

and joining to this a personal expression of deep sympathy for a recent

bereavement of my own.

I may add to this that the entire German press, so far as I have observed it,

gave prominence to the President’s message of sympathy, frequently adding

expressions of thorough appreciation of its spirit and whole tenor.

I am, etc.,
A DW

[Document 168]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,September 5, 1901.

No. 1721.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that it has been officially announced that the

GermanEmperorreceivedPrinceTschunTsai-fong,abrotherofthe

Emperor of China, at Potsdam at noon yesterday, and that Prince Tschun

made a speech in which he expressed the regret of the Emperor of China at

the murder of the German minister in Pekin, Baron Clemens von Ketteler,

last year. The German Emperor received from Prince Tschun a letter from

the Emperor of China, and made a reply to the speech. A translation of the

speeches and of the letter is appended hereto, their text having been

published in the official part of last night’s Imperial Gazette (No. 210).

Prince Tschun arrived in Potsdam on September 3 and was lodged in one of

the royal palaces. Yesterday morning, in carriages provided by the royal

stables, but without any escort, he proceeded to the “New Palace,” where,

accompanied by the new Chinese minister as interpreter, he was received by

the Emperor, who was surrounded by several German princes, Baron von

Richthofen, the Imperial secretary of state for foreign affairs, and various

high court, civil, and military officials.

On leaving the palace Prince Tschun was greeted with the military honors

usually shown to an Imperial prince, and a military escort accompanied him

to his residence. It is understood that, expiation having now been made, he

will be shown the usual courtesies as long as he remains the guest of the

Emperor—for a day or two.

The new Chinese minister has not yet been received as such, and diplomatic

relations have not yet been fully resumed, no audience having been granted

the departing minister to present his letters of recall.

I have deemed it advisable to make this report, in view of the fact that the

sending of this “expiatory mission” was the result of the combined action of

the several foreign representatives in Pekin, and because of the attention

which has been given to it by the press generally and of the irresponsible

reports which have been made with regard to the manner in which Prince

Tschun was to have been received, and the reasons for his not having come

through from Basle to Berlin about the 26th ultimo.

I am, sir, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.
[Inclosure.]

[Clipping from the European edition of the New York Herald, Paris,

September 5, 1901, containing a free translation of the letter from the

Emperor of China, Prince Tschun’s speech, and the German Emperor’s

reply.]
Berlin, Wednesday.—The letter from the Emperor of China, handed to the

Emperor William by Prince Tschun, is to the following effect: “The Great

Emperor of the Chinese Empire to His Majesty the Great German Emperor,

greeting.

“Ever since the Empires have been mutually represented by permanent

legations we have stood in uninterrupted friendly relationship toward one

another. These relations became still closer when Prince Henry of Prussia

came to Pekin, for on that occasion we had the privilege of receiving the

Prince frequently and of being able to hold intercourse with him in an

intimate manner. Unfortunately, in the fifth month of last year, the Boxers

rebelliously penetrated into Pekin and the soldiers joined them.

“The result was the murder of Your Majesty’s minister, Baron von Ketteler,

a man who, so long as he occupied his post in Pekin, paid careful attention

to the interests of our countries and to whom we were bound to pay our

special acknowledgments. We regret most deeply that Baron von Ketteler

met so terrible an end among us. The fact that we were not in a position to

take due protective measures was painful to our feeling of responsibility. It

was our feeling of responsibility which prompted us to erect a monument

on the spot as a sign that the crime should not remain unexpiated.

“Further, we have sent to Germany with this letter, the Imperial Prince

Tschun Tsai-fong, at the head of a special mission. Prince Tschun, who is

our own brother, will assure Your Majesty how deeply the events of the past

year have grieved us and how deeply the feeling of penitence and shame

still animate us. Your Majesty sent your troops from a far distance to put

down the Boxer rebellion and restore peace and the welfare of our nation.

We have, therefore, commanded Prince Tschun to express personally to

Your Majesty our thanks for your efforts in promoting peace.

“We cherish the hope that Your Majesty’s indignation has given place to the

old feelings of friendship. That the relations between our Empires may be

of an even more extensive, intimate, and beneficial character than hitherto

is our firm assurance.”

Prince Tschun, in delivering the letter, spoke in the following terms: “By

order of the Great Emperor, my most gracious lord and master, I have the

honor to deliver His Majesty’s letter into Your Majesty’s Imperial hands.

After the rebellious movement in China in the past year, the Imperial court

felt spontaneously no less than on the demand of the powers the obligation

of expressing, by a special mission, its sincere regret at these events, and

especially in the case of which Your Majesty’s excellent minister, Baron

von Ketteler, fell a victim.

“In order to place the sincerity of this regret beyond all doubt His Majesty

the Emperor designated a very near blood relation for the mission. I am in a

position to assure Your Majesty that the Emperor, my most gracious master,

stood aloof from these complications, which brought the great misfortune

upon China and loss and care upon Germany, in the fullest sense of the

words. Nevertheless, in accordance with customs existing for thousands of

years, the Emperor of China has taken the blame for it upon his own sacred

person. I have, therefore, the task of expressing to Your Majesty the most

cordial feelings of the Emperor, my illustrious master, toward Your Majesty.

In handing to you this letter, I am also charged to be the interpreter of this

and the whole of the Imperial family, and to express the wish that Your

Majesty’s house may flourish and enjoy health, happiness, and blessings in

the fullest measure. His Majesty the Emperor of China hopes that the events

of the past year were only a passing shadow, and that after the clouds have

dispersed, the brightness of peace between the two nations of Germany and

China may teach them mutually ever to understand and value one another

better. This is also my most sincere wish.”
THE EMPEROR’S REPLY.
The Emperor then addressed the following reply to Prince Tschun: “This is

not a joyous or festive occasion, or the fulfillment of a simple act of

courtesy, which has brought your imperial highness to me, but a deeply

melancholy and very serious event. My minister at the court of the Emperor

of China, Baron von Ketteler, has been slain in the capital of China by the

murderous weapon of an Imperial Chinese soldier, lifted against him by

superior command, an unheard-of crime, which is branded by international

law and the usage of all nations alike. From the mouth of your imperial

highness I have just received the expression of the deep regret of the

Emperor of China.

“Concerning this event I readily believe that your imperial highness’

imperial brother personally stood aloof from the crime and the subsequent

acts of violence against the inviolable legations and peaceful foreigners. All

the greater is the guilt which falls upon his adviser and his government.

These must not delude themselves into believing that by an expiatory

mission alone they will have made atonement and obtained pardon for their

guilt. This can only be done by their future attitude in conformity with the

prescriptions of international law and the usages of civilized nations. If the

Emperor of China conducts the government of his great Empire henceforth

strictly in the spirit of these prescriptions, then will his hope be fulfilled that

the sad results of the complications of the past year will be overcome, and

that between Germany and China, as formerly, lasting peaceful and friendly

relations will again prevail and conduce to the benefit of two nations and

the whole of human civilization. In the sincere and earnest wish that this

may be so, I bid your imperial highness welcome.”

[Document 169]
The German Emperor to the Secretary of State of the United

States.
[Telegram.]

DANZIG,September 14, 1901.

Deeply affected by the news of the untimely death of President’ McKinley, I

hasten to express the deepest and most heartfelt sympathy of the German

nation. Germany mourns with America for her noble son who lost his life

whilst he was fulfilling his duty to his country and his people.
WILLIAM,I.R.

[Document 170]
Mr. Hay to Mr. White.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

You are charged to express in the name of the President and the sorrowing

people of this country the deepest appreciation of the touching message of

his majesty the German Emperor. The generous share of Germany in our

national affliction manifests the closeness of the ties that exist between the

two peoples.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 171]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,September 25, 1901.

No. 1740.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that the new port of Emden has now been

opened without any great formality. It is announced in last night’s Reichs-

Anzeiger that this port can now accommodate the largest seagoing ships.

The inner harbor (Binnenhafen) has everywhere a depth of more than 6

meters, while the depth of the outer harbor at mean high water is more than

11 meters, so that it can accommodate ships drawing 8.2 meters at all times.

The harbor will be kept open in winter, and the channel of the Ems, from

Emden to the sea, is to be made 10 meters deep. Quays have been built in

theouterharbor,andelectriccranes,coalingchutes,etc.,havebeen

provided. The outer harbor is a free harbor, and provision has been made for

the loading and unloading of goods, and for storage, with comparatively

little supervision by the customs authorities.

I have, etc.,
JOHNB.JACKSON.

[Document 172]
Count von Quadt to Mr. Hay.
IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Washington,September 30, 1901
MR.SECRETARYOFSTATE: I have the honor, in pursuance of instructions received

from my Government, most respectfully to inform your excellency that, in

accordance with the plans approved by his majesty the Emperor and King,

his majesty’s schoolshipMoltkewill be at Baltimore from the 24th to the

30th of January next, and at Annapolis from January 30 to February 5.

His majesty’s schoolshipSteinwill be at San Juan de Puerto Rico from the

3d to the 6th of January next, at Cienfuegos from the 16th to the 18th, and

at Habana from the 22d to the 28th of the aforesaid month.

Accept, etc.,
A.QUADT.

[Document 173]
Mr. Adee to Count von Quadt.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 8, 1901.

No. 565.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 30th

ultimo, informing me of the dates on which his majesty’s schoolships
MoltkeandSteinwill visit certain cities of the United States, Porto Rico,

and Cuba.

With a view to the extension of the usual courtesies to these vessels, I have

made the matter known to the heads of the Treasury, War, and Navy

Departments and to the governors of Maryland and Porto Rico.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 174]
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,October 25, 1901.

No. 1773.]

SIR: As the Department is aware, efforts have repeatedly been made to direct

the flow of German emigration away from North America, the United

States, and Canada, toward the German colonies and South America. It is

claimed that in North America the emigrant is too readily absorbed and that

he loses his political and economic nationality in a very short time, while in

the colonies he remains a German in every sense, and in South America he

still retains, to a considerable extent at least, his German tastes and habits.

In short, the emigrant to North America is lost to Germany entirely, while

those who go to South America, although they may lose their political

nationality, continue to be purchasers in the German markets. It will be

remembered that arguments of this character were used in advocating the

passage of an emigration law in 1897.

Germany is at present suffering from industrial depression, the eventual

result of which can not but be healthy, and the immediate effect of this is

almost certain to be increased emigration in the near future. The condition

is such that the president of the Prussian ministry (Count Bülow) has

thought it wise to instruct the provincial governors to collect information

with regard to the numbers of the unemployed and to suggest measures by

which aid can be given.

The Colonial Society, however, has determined to endeavor to direct the

emigration which it considers inevitable, and to that end it has made a

provisionalarrangementwiththeImperialGovernmentforthe

establishment of an information bureau for emigrants. This bureau is to be

under the supervision of the chancellor of the Empire, although its character

will not be strictly official, and information is to be furnished by it

gratuitouslytointendingemigrants,directlyorthroughagents.The

Government is to bear a part of the expenses connected with this work, and

is to furnish to the bureau such information as may be received from its

representatives abroad as may be of interest to those wishing to make a

home outside the limits of the Empire proper. The avowed object of this

enterprise is “to prevent the dissipation of the energy, nationality, and

capitalwhichGermanemigrantstakeoutoftheEmpire,uselessly

throughout the world, and the economic fertilization of foreign countries,

and to so direct German emigration that it may remain German, nationally

and economically, to the greatest possible extent.”

I have, etc.,
JOHNB.JACKSON.

[Document 175]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Berlin,November 20, 1901.

No. 1791.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that, immediately after my recent return to

Berlin, I included in the usual notification to the foreign office a request for

an audience with the Emperor, in order to make known to him the special

message of good will which the President had personally instructed me to

convey.

As a result, I was invited to dine last evening with their majesties at

Potsdam, audience being previously given me.

Having heard the message from the President expressing his hearty good

feeling toward the Monarch and his Empire, His Majesty responded very

cordially, declaring that he fully reciprocated the feeling the President had

expressed, and referring to the President’s career and character in terms

which showed that he had studied both with care and highly appreciated

them. He also referred to the recent elections in New York City and

elsewhere,asprovingthatthePresident’scourageandintelligent

earnestness had given a strong impulse to men of like character throughout

the country, and among these he especially named, with admiration, Mr.

Seth Low.

In this, as well as in the conversation at table and afterwards, the Emperor

dwelt upon the wonderful progress made by the United States in sundry

great enterprises and industries and especially in shipbuilding, discussing

this and kindred subjects with remarkable thoroughness and knowledge of

detail. He referred to the fact that he had sent suitable persons to the United

States to study our canal systems and internal waterways generally. He also

expressed his pleasure at the honor done the imperial ambassador, Dr. Von

Hollenben, by Harvard University, and said that, in recognition of this

courtesy, he had ordered a collection of casts of the more curious and

interesting sculptures and works of art from various public monuments and

collections within the Empire to be especially prepared and sent to the

Germanic Museum at that institution.

Both at the audience and in the conversation afterwards, the Emperor

showed that he was realty pleased with the message which the President

had sent him, both with its assurances of a political nature and with its more

personal and special details.

I am, etc.,
ANDREWD.WHITE.

[Document 176]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Jackson.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 7, 1901.

No. 1272.]

SIR: At the request of the Secretary of the Navy, dated the 5th instant, you

are instructed to express to the German Government the thanks of the Navy

Department for the unusual courtesy extended to the United States naval

attaché in that marked facilities for visiting the German Torpedo Schoolship

and Depot have been granted him.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 177]
PROMEMORIA.
IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Washington,December 11, 1901.

Against the Venezuelan Government there is a claim pending of the Berlin

Company of Discount (Berliner Disconto Gesellschaft) on account of the

nonperformance of engagements which the Venezuelan Government has

undertaken in connection with the great Venezuelan Railway which has

been built by the said Government. Those obligations amount for the time

being to fully 6,000,000 bolivares (1 bolivar to be counted as 80 pfennige).

The obligations continue to increase, as the interest for the values of the 5

per cent Venezuelan loan of the year 1896, which was emitted to the amount

of 33,000,000 bolivares and which have been transmitted to the company as

a guaranty for the payment of interest of the capital spent in building, has

not been paid regularly since seven years, nor has the payment been made

regularly to the sinking fund.

This behavior of the Venezuelan Government could, perhaps, to a certain

degree be explained and be excused by the bad situation of the finances of

the State; but our further reclamations against Venezuela, which date from

the Venezuelan civil wars of the years 1898 until 1900, have taken during

those last months a more serious character. Through those wars many

German merchants living in Venezuela and many German landowners have

been seriously damaged, as partly compulsory loans have been extorted

fromthem,partlyrequisitesofwarwhichhavebeenfoundintheir

possession, as especially the cattle necessary for the feeding of the troops

have been taken from them without being paid for, partly their houses and

grounds have been ransacked or devastated. The amount of these damages

comes to fully 2,000,000 bolivares. This amount is to be divided between

35 claimants, who are partly poor people. Several of the damaged have lost

nearly all their possessions, and through this their creditors who live in

Germany have suffered likewise. Very likely these reclamations will be

presently put before the Reichstag.

Evidently the Venezuelan Government, if we judge it after its behavior in

the present, is not willing to fulfill its engagements in compensating these

damages. After having first fixed a six-monthly term during which the

Governmentrefusedtodiscussanyclaimsforcompensation,the

Government issued in January last a decree stating that a commission

consisting solely of Venezuelan officials should decide about the claims,

which the damaged would have to bring to their knowledge during three

months. The proceedings as settled by this decree seem in three articles not

to be acceptable. First of all, that all the claims for damage which came

fromthetimebeforethe23dofMay,1899(thatmeansbeforethe

appointment of the present President of the Republic, Castro), should not be

considered, while of course the government of Castro is, as all other

governments, responsible for the deeds of its predecessors. Another article

said that all diplomatic protestations against decisions of the commission

should be excluded and only the appeal to the supreme Venezuelan court of

justiceshouldbeadmitted.Themembersofthiscourtareentirely

dependent on the Government and have frequently been simply dismissed

by the President. Finally, the Government wanted to pay for the claims

which should be recognized by the commission only with bonds of a newly

to be emitted revolution debt, which would be, after the experiences made,

up till present without any value.

The behavior of the Venezuelan Government must therefore be considered

as a frivolous attempt to avoid just obligations. As was to be expected,

several of the few German claims put before the commission have been

simply rejected and others have been reduced in a decidedly malicious way.

So, by example, a German cattle breeder, from whom fully 3,800 head of

cattle, to the value of more than 600,000 bolivares, had been forcibly taken

away, got only 15,000 bolivares adjudicated. But the Government has not

paid for the claims recognized as just by the commission, but has told the

damaged that a bill in their interest would be submitted to the next

Congress.

The German Government has first tried to induce the Government of

Caracas to change their decree in the mentioned three articles. After this

expedienthadbeenrejected,ithasbeenbyorderoftheImperial

Government firmly declared to the Venezuelan Government that we are

forcedunderthepresentcircumstancestorefusealtogetherour

acknowledgment of the decree. Similar declarations have been delivered by

the predominant majority of the other interested powers, especially of the

United States of America, whose reclamations from the Venezuelan civil

wars come to fully 1,000,000 bolivares. The Venezuelan Government

claims against those declarations that it is not able to treat the foreigners in

a different way from the Venezuelan citizens, and that the Government

regarded, therefore, the settlement of the reclamations in question as an

internal affair of the country in which no foreign power could meddle

without injuring the sovereignty of the country. Another attempt to change

themindoftheGovernmenthasbeenlikewiseunsuccessful.The

Government has declared in its reply that it had to repel all diplomatic

interference in this matter and that the claimants, as the term fixed in the

decree had meanwhile passed, had to be exclusively referred to the supreme

Venezuelan court of justice.

Under these circumstances the Imperial Government believes that further

negotiations with Venezuela on the present base are hopeless. The Imperial

Government proposes therefore to submit the reclamations in question,

which have been carefully studied and have been considered as well

founded, directly to the Venezuelan Government and to ask for their

settlement. If the Venezuelan Government continues to decline as before, it

would have to be considered what measures of coercion should be used

against it.

But we consider it of importance to let first of all the Government of the

United States know about our purposes so that we can prove that we have

nothing else in view than to help those of our citizens who have suffered

damages, and we shall first take into consideration only the claims of those

German citizens who have suffered in the civil war.

We declare especially that under no circumstances do we consider in our

proceedings the acquisition or the permanent occupation of Venezuelan

territory. If the Venezuelan Government should force us to the application

of measures of coercion, we should have to consider furthermore if at this

occasion we should ask likewise for a greater security for the fulfillment of

the claims of the Company of Discount of Berlin.

After the posing of an ultimatum, first of all the blockade of the more

importantVenezuelanharbors—thatis,principallytheharborsofLa

Guayra’aandPortoCabello—wouldhavetobeconsideredasan

appropriate measure of coercion, as the levying of duties for import and

export being nearly the only source of income of Venezuela would in this

way be made impossible. Likewise it would be difficult in this way to

provide the country, which depends on the import of corn, with food. If this

measure does not seem efficient, we would have to consider the temporary

occupation on our part of different Venezuelan harbor places and the

levying of duties in those places.

[Document 178]
Mr. Hay to Mr. von Holleben.
WASHINGTON,D.C.,December 16, 1901.

DEAREXCELLENCY: I inclose a memorandum by way of reply to that which you did

me the honor to leave with me on Saturday and am, as ever, etc.,JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
MEMORANDUM.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 16, 1901.

The President in his message of the 3d of December, 1901, used the

following language: “The Monroe doctrine is a declaration that there must

be no territorial aggrandizement by any non-American power at the expense

of any American power on American soil. It is in no wise intended as

hostile to any nation in the Old World.” The President further said: “This

doctrine has nothing to do with the commercial relations of any American

power, save that it in truth allows each of them to form such as it desires. *

* * We do not guarantee any State against punishment if it misconducts

itself, provided that punishment does not take the form of the acquisition of

territory by any non-American power.”

His excellency the German ambassador, on his recent return from Berlin,

conveyed personally to the President the assurance of the German Emperor

that His, Majesty’s Government had no purpose or intention to make even

the smallest acquisition of territory on the South American Continent or the

islands adjacent. This voluntary and friendly declaration was afterwards

repeated to the Secretary of State, and was received by the President and the

people of the United States in the frank and cordial spirit in which it was

offered. In the memorandum of the 11th of December, his excellency the

German ambassador repeats these assurances as follows: “We declare

especially that under no circumstances do we consider in our proceedings

the acquisition or the permanent occupation of Venezuelan territory.”

In the said memorandum of the 11th of December, the German Government

informs that of the United States that it has certain just claims for money

andfordamageswrongfullywithheldfromGermansubjectsbythe

Government of Venezuela, and that it proposes to take certain coercive

measures described in the memorandum to enforce the payment of these

just claims.

The President of the United States, appreciating the courtesy of the German

Government in making him acquainted with the state of affairs referred to,

and not regarding himself as called upon to enter into the consideration of

the claims in question, believes that no measures will be taken in this matter

by the agents of the German Government which are not in accordance with

the well-known purpose, above set forth, of His Majesty the German

Emperor.

[Document 179]
PROMEMORIA.
IMPERIALGERMANEMBASSY,
Washington,December 20, 1901.

In case the German Government should be obliged to use coercion against

Venezuela in connection with the pending claims, it will have to be

considered what kind of measures should be applied.

declaration of war preceding it. The blockade would therefore be a peace

blockade. Such a blockade would touch likewise the ships of neutral

powers, inasmuch as such ships, although a confiscation of them would not

have to be considered, would have to be turned away and prohibited until

the blockade should be raised. In the same manner European States have

proceeded on such occasions, especially England and France.

[Document 180]
Memorandum handed the Secretary of State by the German and

Russian ambassadors December 12, 1901.
[undated]

[Confidential.]

The assassination of President McKinley, together with the anarchistic

crimes and attempts upon the lives of chief magistrates committed in recent

years, have rendered it terribly evident that a struggle against the menace of

anarchy is an urgent necessity for all governments and a duty whose

performance can not be postponed.

It is evident that concerted action on the part of the governments interested

can not be really successful unless the uniform and strict enforcement of the

measures that may be adopted against the anarchists can be secured by an

international understanding. It would be preferable, it seems, to attain that

end by an exchange of views among the governments rather than by

convoking a new conference.

The Imperial Government of Germany and the Imperial Government of

Russia have consequently agreed to propose such common action to the

powers as will tend to the adoption of uniform measures in order to check

the anarchistic movement.

The resolutions of the conference held at Rome in 1898, only a very small

part of which has been put in practice, might serve as a basis for the

projectedunderstanding.Itwouldbedesirablethatthegovernments,

agreeably to the decisions of that conference, should agree to adopt uniform

administrative measures having for their object the establishment of a

rigorous surveillance of the anarchists by the creation of central bureaus in

the various countries, by the exchange of information, and by international

regulations relative to the expulsion of anarchists from all countries of

which they are not subjects. The projected understanding should, so far as

this may be possible, not confine itself to the measures above referred to,

but should comprise various legislative measures tending to strengthen and

complete the provisions of the penal code against the anarchists, against the

combined effects of their common action, and against the subversive press.

It would, furthermore, be well to introduce into legislation a more complete

and precise definition of anarchistic crime in all its aspects.

The governments of Germany and Russia express the hope that the United

StatesGovernmentwillnotrefusetorecognizethenecessityof

energetically resisting the development of the anarchistic movement. The

representatives of the two governments, therefore, beg the United States

Government to inform them as speedily as possible whether it is disposed in

principletocooperatewiththeGermanandRussiangovernmentsin

establishing an exchange of views that may lead to common action based,

either in whole or in part, upon the propositions set forth.

In case of an affirmative reply, the details regarding the enforcing of the

measures in question might be subsequently elaborated.

[Document 181]
Mr. Hay to Mr. von Holleben.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 16, 1901.

DEAREXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inclose a memorandum giving the views of

the President in reference to the memorandum which you kindly left with

me a few days ago.

Yours, faithfully,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure]
MEMORANDUM.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 16, 1901.

In reply to the memorandum handed me by the ambassadors of Germany

and of Russia, I am directed by the President to express his cordial

sympathy with the views and the purposes therein set forth.

ThePresidentinhismessageofthe3dofDecemberearnestly

recommended to the Congress that “in the exercise of its wise discretion it

should take into consideration the coming to this country of anarchists or

persons professing principles hostile to all government and justifying the

murder of those placed in authority.” “Such individuals,” the President said,

“as those who not long ago gathered in open meeting to glorify the murder

of King Humbert of Italy perpetrate a crime, and the law should insure their

rigorous punishment. They and those like them should be kept out of this

country; and if found here they should be promptly deported to the country

whence they came, and far-reaching provision should be made for the

punishment of those who stay. No matter calls more urgently for the wisest

The President further recommended that “The Federal courts should be

given jurisdiction over any man who kills or attempts to kill the President or

any man who by the Constitution or by law is in line of succession for the

Presidency, while the punishment for an unsuccessful attempt should be

proportioned to the enormity of the offense against our institutions.” He

also recommended that anarchy should be declared an offense against the

law of nations through treaties among all civilized powers.

These extracts from the President’s message, it is believed, will assure all

governments of civilized peoples of the President’s earnest desire to adopt

every practicable means to eradicate this deadly growth from our body

politic. The President will be glad to adopt such administrative measures as

are within his constitutional power to cooperate with other governments to

this end.

So far as concerns the legislative action which may be necessary, the large

number of bills which have been introduced in both Houses of Congress

during the present session sufficiently show the trend of public sentiment in

the same direction. The President will take all proper means to urge upon

Congress the adoption of such measures for the suppression of anarchy as

may be found acceptable to the National Legislature and which may enable

the Executive to act in the matter with greater effectiveness in concert with

other powers.

[Document 182]
MEMORANDUM.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Washington,May 26, 1900.

Cases have recently occurred in which British merchant vessels arriving at

Boston from the Philippine Islands bring Filipinos as seamen on board,

properly signed on the articles. These men, on arrival at Boston, ask for

their discharge, as they claim to be United States citizens, and as such they

can be discharged with the sanction of the British consul. But if they are not

considered United States citizens, consular sanction to their discharge

would have to be refused.

The customs authorities at Boston hold that the Filipinos in question are not

entitled to claim American citizenship.

The undersigned would be glad to be made acquainted with the view of the

State Department with regard to this point, which appears to be dealt with

by Article IX of the treaty of peace between the United States and Spain,

signed at Paris December 10, 1898.
PAUNCEFOTE.

[Document 183]
MEMORANDUM.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 19, 1900.

With reference to the request contained in the memorandum of the British

embassy of May 26 last, for an expression of the views of this Government

upon the matter of the citizenship of Filipinos, intended for the guidance of

British consuls at ports of the United States in determination of the question

whether they may or may not discharge Filipinos who, serving as seamen

on British merchant vessels, ask to be discharged at United States ports

before the voyage for which they have signed articles has terminated, the

Attorney-General, to whom the subject has been referred, writes, under date

of July 12, that the question is not to be lightly determined. A man may be a

citizen in one sense of the word, or from certain points of view, or for

certain purposes, yet not in every sense nor for all purposes.

He asks to be informed more definitely what the facts in the cases which

have arisen may be, and in what manner the question of citizenship

presented itself, believing that he would thereafter be better able to pass

upon the subject.

[Document 184]
MEMORANDUM.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Newport, R. I.,August 13, 1900.

With reference to the memorandum of the State Department of July 19,

relative to the question of the citizenship of Filipinos who, serving as

seamen on board British vessels, claim to be discharged at United States

ports before the termination of the voyage for which they have signed

articles,thefollowingmoredefiniteinformationobtainedfromHer

Majesty’s consul-general at Boston is submitted as requested, showing in

greater detail how this question of citizenship has been raised.

The question first arose in May and June, 1899, when three British sailing

vessels arrived at Boston, having, respectively, six, ten, and nine Filipinos

on board, properly and legally shipped as seamen. The ship’s articles in

each case were not ended, nor had the men shipped to be discharged at a

United States port; but on arrival at Boston they all desired to be paid off

there.

Her Majesty’s consul-general at first refused his sanction, as in case of their

becoming destitute it was not clear what Government would be responsible

for their relief and protection.

The seamen themselves claimed to be United States citizens and the masters

of the ships were of the same opinion. The difficulty in this case was got

over by some of the men shipping again at once, while the masters agreed

to become liable for the others in case of their decoming destitute.

The question arose again at Boston last May, when the British ship
Treasurerarrived in port with ten Filipino seamen on board. They also

requested to be paid off, and on consular sanction being refused, they all

deserted.

Itishopedthattheaboveinformationwillsufficeforthepurpose

[Document 185]
MEMORANDUM.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 28, 1901.

With reference to the question asked in two memoranda from the British

embassy, dated May 26 and August 13, 1900, whether Filipinos regularly

shipped on British merchant vessels are regarded by the Government of the

United States as citizens of the United States, so that when the British

vessels upon which they have shipped touch at ports of the United States

the Filipino seamen have the right to demand to be discharged although the

voyage for which they have shipped may not be ended, the Attorney-

General, to whom the question was referred, holds, in his opinion dated

February 19, 1901, that seamen born in the Philippine Islands “are not

citizens of the United States within the meaning of any statutes concerning

seamen or any other statute or law of the United States.”

[Document 186]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
[Confidential.]

AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,November 10, 1900.

No. 424.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that I was recently waited upon by the agent-

general for New South Wales in London, and the agent-general for one of

the other Australian colonies, in reference to the alleged operation of the

United States navigation laws upon Hawaiian international commerce, and

especially as affecting trade between Australasian and American ports in

vessels not wholly owned by Americans and registered in the United States

of America. Their desire was to obtain some relaxation of the strictness of

those laws as affecting such trade.

To my suggestion that the more usual course would be to present the matter

to you through the British embassy at Washington, they said that they were

aware of that, but had obtained permission from the foreign office to

approach me on the subject.

As the matter appeared to be of some importance, and apparently no such

relief as they sought could be obtained except through legislation, I told

them that if they would present the matter in writing I would transmit it

immediatelytoyou,andhadnodoubtthatitwouldreceivedue

consideration.

Accordingly, the agent-general of New South Wales has now addressed to

me a letter on the subject, which I inclose, and shall await your instructions

as to any answer to be made thereto.

I have, etc.,

[Inclosure.]
Mr. Copeland to Mr. Choate.
[Confidential.]

WESTMINSTER CHAMBERS,
9 Victoria Street, Westminster, S. W.,November 7, 1900.

SIR: AttherequestofthegovernmentofNewSouthWales(whose

representativeIaminLondon),andwiththeconcurrenceofthe

governments of the other Australian colonies represented by their several

agents-general,Ihavethehonortoinformallyapproachyouonthe

procedure.

The subject on which I am about to address your excellency has reference

to the provisions of the United States navigation laws, so far as they relate

to Hawaiian international commerce.

Owing to the application of the laws in question, it has become impossible

for any of the mail steamers trading between Australasian and American

portstocarrypassengersandgoodsbetweentheUnitedStatesand

Honolulu, unless such steamers are wholly owned by Americans and

registered in the United States of America.

As that trade has hitherto represented a very valuable portion of the

commerce of this route, Australasian owned shipping is now placed under

very serious disadvantages, and in this connection I may mention that the

newsteamshipMoana,whichwasonlyrecentlyplacedontheSan

Francisco line by the United Steamship Company of New Zealand, will

have to be withdrawn from that service unless some concession is accorded

by your Government with respect to the laws referred to.

Further, those laws are so stringent that produce of the United States, even

when for convenience of carriage is being sent to a foreign port for

transshipment, can not be landed at Honolulu by an alien vessel, and the

effect of this has been that the Australian-Canadian mail steamers have lost

the trade of Tacoma and Seattle, the produce of those places having hitherto

been sent to Vancouver, British Columbia, for shipment to Honolulu.

I may mention that when Hawaii was annexed to the United States it was

anticipated by the Australasian colonies that at any rate an interval of some

years would have to “be allowed to elapse between annexation and the

application of the American navigation laws to the Hawaiian territory.

The whole of the colonies composing the Commonwealth of Australia are

unanimous in their desire that the United States Government may be

induced to adopt such means as may be available to them for relaxing these

restrictions on our international trade. In New South Wales the question has

Government that some action should be taken in the matter as soon as

possible.

As an inducement to your Government to favorably entertain this question,

I may point out that in addition to the commerce between the United States

and the other Australasian colonies (including New Zeland), a large trade is

being rapidly developed between your country and the mother colony of

New South Wales. Last year (1899), 9 American steamers and 60 sailing

vessels from the United States entered the ports of New South Wales,

conveying no less than 87,000 tons of your goods; while, during the same

period (1899), 8 American steamers and 60 sailing vessels left New South

Wales, conveying to your ports 79,798 tons of our goods. As a further

instance of this rapid development it may be noted that the value of our

imports from your country in 1895 amounted to £624,268, whereas for last

year (1899) those imports had swollen to £2,219,319. On the other hand,

the value of our exports to your country, which in 1895 amounted to

£683,606, had increased to £2,392,281 in 1899. So that our total trade with

the United States last year amounted to £4,611,600, having grown to that

sum from £1,307,874 in 1895, during a period of only four years.

I would further urge on your attention the fact that the greater portion, if not

the whole, of the American goods for which New South Wales provided a

of any customs duties, besides being liberally treated with respect to port

charges, etc., and I venture to suggest that such commercial liberality on our

side is entitled to considerate treatment from the Government of the United

States of America.

In conclusion, I beg therefore to ask that your excellency will be so good as

to make representations to the United States Government with a view to

such relaxation being made in the application of their navigation laws as

will permit of passengers and goods being conveyed, as formerly, by

Australasian-owned shipping between American ports and Honolulu, at

least for some years to come.

I have, etc.,
HENRYCOPELAND,
Agent-General for New South Wales.

[Document 187]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 8, 1901.

No. 527.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 424, of November 10 last, I now inclose for your

information a copy of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, giving at

length the reasons why the request of the London agent-general of New

South Wales for such a relaxation of the navigation laws of the United

States as would permit the conveyance of passengers and merchandise

between American ports and Honolulu in Australian-owned shipping can

not be granted.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Gage to Mr. Hay.
T D ,
Washington,January 4, 1901.

S: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of November

22, 1900, inclosing a communication, forwarded confidentially by our

ambassador to Great Britain, from Mr. Henry Copeland, general agent for

New South Wales at London, in which he requests of the United States

“such relaxation being made in the application of their navigation laws as

will permit of passengers and goods being conveyed, as formerly, by

Australasian-owned shipping between American ports and Honolulu, at

In reply thereto I have the honor to state that the act to which Mr. Copeland

refers was passed in pursuance to the traditional policy of this Government

which reserves trade between American ports to American vessels. The

enactment of this legislation was probable from the date of the annexation

of Hawaii, but the interval of nearly two years was allowed to elapse before

that policy was carried into effect by act of Congress. It was assumed that

this interval would be sufficient for such readjustment of shipping relations

as the policy of the United States would require. The desire of the United

StatestopromotefriendlycommercialrelationswiththeBritish

Australasian governments has been shown by the liberal appropriations of

the Congress for the maintenance of an ocean mail service, which has lately

been improved, for the mutual benefit of citizens of the United States and

British Australasian subjects. In the judgment of this Department it is not

feasible to reopen the question as Mr. Copeland suggests.

Respectfully,
L.J.GAGE,Secretary.
[Private and confidential.]
MemorandumpreparedbythepremierofNewZealand.LeftbyLordPauncefoteatthe

Department of State March 1, 1901.
The annexation of Hawaii by the United States and the bringing of that

groupofislandsundertheprovisionoftheirnavigationlaws,thus

preventing British owned vessels from carrying on trade between these

islands and the United States, is calculated to have a serious effect upon the

trade of the colony of New Zealand. For thirty-one years the mails between

England and New Zealand have been carried by steamers subsidized

heavily by the Government of this colony, and until the 24th of October last

one steamer owned by a British company trading here has regularly taken

part in this mail service. The service has now, however, been transferred to

an American owned line of steamers—that of Spreckels Brothers—the

United States Government giving a direct subsidy of £52,000 per annum for

ten years. With this subsidy, added to the fact that none of the steamers of

this colony can trade between Hawaii and the United States, it follows that

the colony is completely excluded from conveying either its own mails or

passengers or cargo to that country; and in addition to this the steamers,

which are being run to the prejudice and exclusion of its own vessels,

operate against British owned steamers trading between Australia and New

Zealand, as upon their trips here they will necessarily carry passengers

across intercolonially, and this will result most prejudicially against the

development of trade by its own steamers, even in its own waters.

Another way in which the altered service will operate against the possible

introduction of an alternate service in this country is this: Prior to the

annexation of Hawaii by the United States, Honolulu was made a coal depot

for steamers trading under the British flag, via Vancouver to these colonies,

and it was the practice of the Canadian mail-ships to land some 500 tons of

coal at a time, which they were allowed to do without port charges at

Honolulu. Since the annexation of the islands, however, this has not been

allowed, and an impost of 3 shillings per ton is levied upon the coal

required for steamers not trading within the prescribed territory at all.

The premier, therefore, begs respectfully to request that his excellency will

refer the matter to the secretary of state for the colonies in order that

representations may be made to the United States Government upon this

important subject, with a view to establishing a modus vivendi with the

United States of a more equitable character than that now existing.

As the matter is one of great importance to this colony, the premier can only

strongly impress upon his excellency’s attention its great urgency. The

subject is at present the basis of a considerable amount of friction, and it is

very difficult to tell how far such feeling as now exists may grow.

[Document 188]
Mr. Hay to Lord Pauncefote.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 20, 1901.

No. 2114.]

EXCELLENCY: Referring to your recent conversation, and to the confidential

memorandum you left with me prepared by the premier of New Zealand,

touching the injurious effect on the trade relations of New Zealand of

excludingBritishownedvesselsfromcarryingontradebetweenthe

Hawaiian Islands and the United States; I have the honor to say that I have

fully conferred with the Secretary of the Treasury on the subject.

A remedy for the difficulties complained of is not within the discretionary

control of the Executive, the matter being regulated by legislation now in

force. The act of April 30, 1900, sections 75, 98, etc., relating to the

Hawaiian Islands, requires that the transportation of cargo from the United

States to Hawaii, or vice versa, shall be subject to the laws governing the

coasting trade of the United States. These laws practically exclude foreign

vessels. British vessels may, however, carry merchandise from the coast of

theUnitedStatestoanyforeigncountryviaHawaii,ormaybring

merchandise to the United States from any foreign country via Hawaii.

General subsidies, mail compensation, etc., are given to British vessels

plying between Canada and Hongkong, India, Ceylon, etc., under the

conditions shown in the report of the Commissioner of Navigation for the

year 1900, page 149, et seq.

The regulation of the trade between the United States and the Hawaiian

Islands, in conformity with the act above referred to, seems to be in

accordancewiththepracticeofothernationsunderanalogous

circumstances.

I have, etc.,

[Document 189]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 7, 1901.

No. 526.]

SIR: In view of representations made to the Department by the American

Presbyterian Kongo Mission of their need of having some one whom they

can consult in matters arising between the mission and the Government of

the Kongo Free State, it is desired to have you make known to the British

Government the gratification which this Government would experience in

learning that the British consul at Boma had been authorized to take care of

American interests in the Kongo Free State until United States consular

representation there is provided for by Congressional action.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 190]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,February 8, 1901.

No. 503.]

SIR: With reference to your instruction No. 526 of the 7th ultimo, I have the

honor to inclose herewith the copy of a note from Lord Lansdowne, in

which it is stated that His Majesty’s Government will have pleasure in

acceding to the wish of our Government that His Majesty’s consul at Boma

may be authorized to take charge of American interests in the Kongo Free

State until such time as consular representatives can be provided for by

action of the Congress of the United States.

I have, etc.,
JOSEPHH.CHOATE.
[Inclosure.]
Lord Lansdowne to Mr. Choate.
FOREIGNOFFICE,February 5, 1901.

Y E :Ihavethehonortoacknowledgethereceiptofyour

excellency’s note of the 22d ultimo, requesting that His Majesty’s consul at

Boma may be authorized to take charge of American interests in the Kongo

Free State until such time as consular representation can be provided for by

the action of the Congress of the United States.

In reply I have to state that His Majesty’s Government have much pleasure

inaccedingtothewishoftheUnitedStatesGovernment,andthat

instructions will be given to Mr. Casement, His Majesty’s consul, in

accordance with your excellency’s request.

[Document 191]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,June 21, 1901.

No. 599.]

SIR: Referring to your instruction No. 526 of January 7, and to my dispatch

No. 503 of February 8 last, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a

note from the Marquis of Lansdowne, suggesting that the Government of

theKongoFreeStatebenotifiedthatMr.Casement,HisBritannic

Majesty’s consul, has been authorized to take charge of American interests

there.

I have, etc.,
JOSEPHH.CHOATE.
[Inclosure.]
Lord Lansdowne to Mr. Choate.
last, I have the honor to inform you that a dispatch has been received from

Mr. Casement, His Majesty’s consul for the Kongo Free State, pointing out

the necessity of notifying the Government of the Kongo Free State of his

authority to take charge of American interests.

I have accordingly to request that your excellency will move the United

States Government to cause the necessary notification to be made. Mr.

Casement has in the meantime been instructed to arrange with the local

authorities for provisional recognition as acting consul for the United

States, and to inform them that the formal notification will follow.

[Document 192]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 9, 1901.

No. 668.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 599 of the 21st ultimo,

inclosing copy of a note from the foreign office suggesting that the

GovernmentoftheKongoFreeStatebenotifiedthatHisBritannic

Majesty’s consul at Boma has been authorized to take charge of American

interests there.

You will inform the foreign office that this has been done.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 193]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,January 14, 1901.

No. 484.]

SIR: In connection with the granting of passports by this embassy, I have the

honor to draw your attention to a class of cases presenting some difficulties

and involving often not a little hardship to the applicants.

I refer to the applications for passports of those children of naturalized

citizens who were minors at the time of the naturalization of their parents,

and who, having been taken to America at an early age, have always

continued to reside there, and have subsequently performed the duties

attaching to full citizenship.

It would seem a hardship to such persons, when otherwise satisfactorily

identified, to make the production of their fathers’ naturalization papers a

prerequisite to obtaining a passport at this embassy, and yet under existing

circumstances I have no option but to refuse unless the papers in question

are forthcoming.

It is constantly claimed by such applicants that this is not required of them

when they apply direct to the Department of State.

There are only three forms of application known to this embassy, viz,

“Native,” “Naturalized,” and that for “Persons claiming citizenship through

the naturalization of husband or parent.” It is therefore upon the last form,

which requires the production of parents’ naturalization papers, that the

applicants referred to must make their sworn statements.

As far as I can discover, there is no instruction of the Department which

would exactly cover these circumstances.

The following recent case will perhaps make the point clearer. Charles

Muchnic, a young man, applied to the embassy some days ago for a

passport. He was the bearer of a passport from the Department of State,

which had just expired, and also produced proper letters of identification.

From his sworn statement it appeared that he had gone to Philadelphia with

his father some twenty years ago, he being at the time but 3 years old, and

that his father was naturalized while he was still a child; that ever since that

time he had resided uninterruptedly in Philadelphia, where he was educated

and subsequently, upon arriving at his majority, voted. He had recently

come abroad as an engineer, representing American interests, and had every

intention of returning to the United States to reside, as soon as he had

accomplished the work he was engaged upon.

A passport was refused him on the sole ground of his inability to produce

his father’s naturalization papers. His passport from the Department was

obtained in Philadelphia, where he is well known, and the production of his

father’s papers was not required.

I would, therefore, respectfully ask for instructions, to guide me in future in

such cases as that of Mr. Muchnic—as to when the production of the

father’s naturalization papers may be waived, or as to how far such a waiver

would be left to the discretion of the embassy.

I have, etc.,
J HC

[Document 194]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 5, 1901.

No. 540.]

SIR: The Department has received your No. 484, of the 14th instant,

concerning the proof required of those applicants for passports whose

parents were naturalized during their minority. You suggest that hardship

oftenarisesfromtherequirementthattheyproducethefather’s

naturalization certificate.

It is freely admitted that this requirement is often difficult to comply with,

but the passport bureau of the Department has frequent evidence that many

people come to the United States in infancy or youth, duly qualify as voters

when they reach their majority, exercise all the rights of citizenship, and yet

have no positive knowledge of their parents’ naturalization, and have fallen

into the error of supposing that prolonged residence and unquestioned

performance of a citizen’s functions have in fact made them citizens. A

person in this category is apt to express surprise and even indignation at

being called upon to produce his father’s naturalization papers, but not

infrequently investigation shows that his father never had any such papers,

and that he has himself been performing the functions of citizenship without

legal right to do so.

The production of the naturalization certificate is not, however, always

necessary. Paragraph 154 of the Instructions to the Diplomatic Officers of

the United States authorizes the acceptance by a diplomatic agent abroad of

a passport issued by this Department as evidence of the citizenship of the

person in whose favor it was issued, if presented before its expiration. In the

case instanced in your dispatch—that of Charles Muchnic, who recently

applied for a passport from you and produced a passport issued by this

Department—there was thus no reason for refusing to issue him a new

passport without demanding the production of his father’s naturalization

certificate, unless his passport had expired. An amendment to this paragraph

has been submitted to the President, and, if it be approved, it will be

permissible to accept an old passport as prima facie evidence that the

applicant’s citizenship was established properly when the old passport was

issued.

ThestatementthattheDepartmentdoesnotexactthecertificateof

naturalization is incorrect. The rule prescribed by the President requires that

it be produced, and in Mr. Muchnic’s case the records show that he was

granted a passport December 21, 1898, No. 1508, upon an application duly

supported by his father’s naturalization certificate issued November 9,

1898, by the court of common pleas at Philadelphia.

It is not intended that secondary proof may not on rare occasions be

accepted in lieu of the naturalization certificate. The question is fully

discussed in the Department’s publication, The American Passport, page

155 et seq. In Mr. Bayard’s instruction to Mr. Vignaud, June 13, 1888,

quoted on page 161, the general nature of the secondary proof acceptable is

set forth. In a few words, it must establish that the father was actually

naturalized before the son reached his majority.

Itmaybeaddedthattheexistingrequirementofproductionofthe

naturalization certificate has prevailed since 1873; and experience has

shown it to be necessary in order to prevent the Department or its agents

from granting passports to those who are not legally citizens of the United

States.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 195]
Lord Pauncefote to Mr. Hay.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Washington,January 22, 1901.

No. 22.]

SIR: I am profoundly grieved to inform you that I have received a cable

message from the Marquis of Lansdowne announcing the demise of the

Queen this evening at 6.30.

It is my melancholy duty to request that you will bring this sad intelligence

to the knowledge of the President and his Cabinet.

I have, etc.,
PAUNCEFOTE,
[Document 196]
The President to the King of England.
[Telegram.]

E M ,
Washington,January 22, 1901.

I have received with profound sorrow the lamentable tidings of the death of

Her Majesty the Queen. Allow me, sir, to offer my sincere sympathy and

that of the American people in your personal bereavement and in the loss

Great Britain has suffered in the death of its venerable and illustrious

sovereign, whose noble life and beneficent influence have promoted the

peace and won the affection of the world.
W MK

[Document 197]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Choate.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 22, 1901.

YouwillexpresstoLordLansdownetheprofoundsorrowofthe

Government and people of the United States at the death of the Queen and

the deep sympathy we feel with the people of the British Empire in their

great affliction.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 198]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Choate.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 23, 1901.

The House of Representatives yesterday afternoon adopted the following

resolution, and thereupon adjourned:

FIFTY-SIXTHCONGRESS,SECONDSESSION,CONGRESS OF THEUNITEDSTATES.

In the House of Representatives, January 22, 1901:
Resolved, That the House of Representatives of the United States

of America has learned with profound sorrow of the death of Her

Majesty Queen Victoria, and sympathises with her people in the

loss of their beloved sovereign.

That the President be requested to communicate this expression of

the sentiment of the House to the Government of Great Britain.

That as a further mark of respect to the memory of Queen Victoria

the House do now adjourn.

Attest:

AMD ,Clerk,

By W JB ,Chief Clerk.
You will communicate the foregoing to the secretary of state for foreign

affairs, requesting that he advise His Majesty of this tribute to the memory

of the Queen. An engrossed copy will be forwarded later for formal

communication.
H

[Document 199]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,January 23, 1901.

No. 490.]

SIR: Her Illustrious Majesty the Queen closed her long and splendid career at

half past 6 o’clock yesterday afternoon at Osborne, in the Isle of Wight.

Although she had been in declining health for some months, it was not

generally known until she was seized with a fatal illness a few days ago.

She died surrounded by her children and grandchildren, including the

Emperor of Germany, whose coining on this pious pilgrimage has made a

deep impression here. She commanded, as no other personage of modern

times has done, the affectionate homage of mankind, and I am glad to see

that the people of the United States are foremost among her admirers

outside the British Empire.

Near midnight I received your instructions to express to Lord Lansdowne

the sympathy of the Government and people of the United States, with

which I have already complied by addressing to his lordship a note (copy

inclosed).

The new King enters upon his reign with the good will not of his own

subjects only, but of all the world. He is at this moment (2 p. m.) holding

his first council, and to-morrow at 10 o’clock he will be proclaimed.

The President’s tender message of sympathy to the King has been highly

appreciated here.

I have, etc.,
J HC
[Inclosure.]

Mr. Choate to Lord Landsdowne.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,January 23, 1901.

MYLORD: I am instructed by the Secretary of State to express to your lordship

the profound sorrow of the people of the United States at the death of Her

Majesty the Queen, and the deep sympathy they feel with the people of the

British Empire in their great affliction.

I have, etc.,
JOSEPHH.CHOATE.

[Document 200]
Mr. Hay to Lord Pauncefote.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 23, 1901.

No. 2055.]

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of

yesterday’s date by which you formally convey to me the sad intelligence of

the death of the Queen.

The President had already telegraphed condolences to His Majesty the King

on receiving the first confirmed intelligence of her late Majesty’s demise,

and I had instructed Mr. Choate to express to Lord Lansdowne the profound

sorrow of the Government and people of the United States and the deep

sympathy we feel for the people of the British Empire in their great

affliction.

As a further proof of the high regard and respect entertained for the Queen

by the people of the United States, I beg to inclose for your information a

acopy of a resolutionadopted on yesterday by the House of Representatives.

The text of this resolution has been cabled in full to Mr. Choate for

communicationtoLordLansdowneinadvanceoftheformal

communication of an engrossed copy.

I have, etc.,
JH
Printed ante.

[Document 201]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 29, 1901.

No. 536.]

SIR: I transmit herewith an engrossed copy of the resolution relating to the

death of Queen Victoria, passed by the Senate on January 22, 1901, which,

in accordance with its terms, you are to deliver to Lord Salisbury. I also

inclose an open copy of the resolution.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]

[Senate Resolution No. 480, Fifty-sixth Congress, second session.]

Mr. Allison submitted the following resolution:
Resolved, That the death of Her Royal and Imperial Majesty, Victoria, of

noble virtues and great renown, is sincerely deplored by the Senate of the

United States of America.
Resolved, ThatthePresidentprotemporeoftheSenatecausetobe

conveyed to the prime minister of Great Britain a suitably engrossed and

duly authenticated copy of the foregoing resolution.

[Document 202]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,February 6, 1901.

No. 496.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that on the 2d instant, Saturday, I attended as

the special representative of the President the funeral of her illustrious

Majesty the late Queen Victoria. By direction of the earl marshal the special

representatives who had been designated by various nations joined the

funeral procession at Windsor and walked together behind the King and the

Royal family and Royal visitors. There were six special ambassadors—two

from Turkey and one each from France, the United States, Spain, and Japan.

At the close of the funeral service at St. George’s Chapel I attended

luncheon given by the King in St. George’s Hall, and after luncheon the

King and Queen received the members of the diplomatic corps. I expressed

to His Majesty the deep sympathy of the President, to which he replied that

he had been very certain of the sympathy of the President and people of the

United States and expressed his gratitude. The President’s wreath which had

been procured by your orders had been sent in his name to Windsor the day

before, and was conspicuously placed and greatly admired.

At my interview with Lord Lansdowne yesterday he stated that he had just

received the commands of his Majesty to assure me of his high appreciation

of the honor done to the late Queen by the President of the United States in

specially authorizing attendance at her funeral by a special ambassador, and

a formal note to that effect is to be sent to me.

I have, etc.,
J HC

[Document 203]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,February 6, 1901.

No. 497.]

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a note received by me

from Lord Lansdowne on January 27, in reply to my note of the 23d,

transmittingacopyoftheresolutionadoptedbytheHouseof

Representatives on the announcement of the deeply lamented death of Her

Majesty the Queen.

I have, etc.,
JOSEPHH.CHOATE.
[Inclosure.]
Lord Lansdowne to Mr. Choate.
FOREIGNOFFICE,January 26, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY: I duly laid before the King, my sovereign, your note of the 23d

instant in which your excellency transmitted a copy of a resolution which

was adopted by the House of Representatives of the United States of

America on the announcement of the deeply lamented death of her late

Majesty Queen Victoria, Empress of India, and I have received the King’s

commands to request your excellency to convey his high appreciation of

this mark of sympathy and of the additional respect shown to the memory

of the late Queen by the immediate adjournment of the House.

I have, etc.,
L

[Document 204]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,February 16, 1901.

No. 511.]

SIR:WithreferencetoyourinstructionNo.536ofthe29thultimo,

transmitting an engrossed copy of the resolution adopted by the United

States Senate, relating to the death of Queen Victoria, I have the honor to

inclose herewith a copy of a note from Lord Lansdowne expressing the

appreciation of the King and his thanks for this mark of respect shown by

the Senate to the memory of the late Queen.

I have, etc.,
JOSEPHH.CHOATE.
[Inclosure.]
Lord Lansdowne to Mr. Choate.
LONDON,February 14, 1901.

YE : The prime minister duly laid before the King the copy of the

resolution of the Senate of the United States of America which your

excellency forwarded in your note to me of the 8th instant.

By command of the King, I am to request your excellency to be so kind as

to express to the President of the Senate His Majesty’s most sincere thanks

for the mark of respect shown by the Senate of the United States to the

memory of her deeply lamented Majesty Queen Victoria, Empress of India.

The terms of the resolution are highly appreciated by His Majesty.

[Document 205]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,January 26, 1901.

No. 492.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that on Wednesday last, the 23d instant,

the King summoned the members of her late Majesty’s privy council, made

to them a declaration announcing his accession, and the name by which, as

King, he is thereafter to be known, and caused them to be sworn of His

Majesty’s privy council.

* * * * * * *

On the morning of the 24th instant His Majesty was duly proclaimed at St.

James’s Palace and in other parts of London, according to the ancient usage,

as Edward the Seventh, King of Great Britain and Ireland, Defender of the

Faith, and Emperor of India.

* * * * * * *

I have, etc.
J HC

[Document 206]
Lord Pauncefote to Mr. Hay.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Washington,February 4, 1901.

No. 44.]

SIR: The governor of the Straits Settlements has made inquiry of His

Majesty’s Government as to whether persons of Chinese race though British

subjects are permitted by the United States authorities to travel in the

Philippine Islands.

It was reported to His Majesty’s Government in September, 1899, in

connection with a complaint from the Chinese minister at Washington as to

the general exclusion of Chinese from the islands, that it had been decided

by the United States Government to ask General Otis for further and more

definite information as to what steps had been taken in the matter. No

information has, however, reached my Government as to the result of this

reference to Manila, and the final decision of the United States Government

as to whether the Chinese exclusion act, though in force in the United

States, was or was not operative in the Philippines, and I am instructed by

the Marquis of Lansdowne to inquire whether you are able to furnish me

with the decision the United States Government may have arrived at on this

subject.

I have, etc.,
P

[Document 207]
Mr. Hill to Lord Pauncefote.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 7, 1901.

No. 2148.]

EXCELLENCY: In your note of February 4 last you asked to be advised, for the

information of the Government of the Straits Settlements, whether Chinese

persons who are British subjects are permitted to travel in the Philippine

Islands.

You also asked to be informed whether a determination has yet been

reached as to whether the Chinese-exclusion laws are or are not held to be

operative in those islands.

Replying to both inquiries, I have the honor to state that the position taken

by the United States War Department, by whom the affairs of the islands are

being administered, is as follows:

1. Chinese persons are to be excluded from the Philippines

“whether subjects of China or any other foreign power.”

2. That such exclusion is a military measure adopted to meet

existing military necessity. Being a military expedient, it is not to

be considered as in any way affecting the permanent policy of the

government of the islands under the conditions of peace.

3. The military order relating to said exclusion did not extend the

Chinese-exclusion acts of the United States Congress to and over

the Philippine Islands as a law of the United States; the provisions

of said acts were adopted as appropriate remedies for the military

necessity, and made operative independently of the statute by

authority resulting from military occupation.

[Document 208]
Lord Pauncefote to Mr. Hay.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Washington,March 26, 1901.

No. 81.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you, by direction of the Marquis of

Lansdowne, that their royal highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall

and York will arrive on the 6th of May at Melbourne, where on the 9th of

that month the first session of the Federal Parliament of Australia will be

opened by His Royal Highness.

The governor-general has requested that it may be made known that should

any ships of war of foreign powers be able conveniently to attend these

festivities they will be very welcome, and everything will be done to show

the officers proper attention.

I have, etc.,
PAUNCEFOTE.

[Document 209]
Mr. Hay to Lord Pauncefote.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE.
Washington,April 5, 1901.

No. 2130.]

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s

note, No. 81, of the 28th ultimo, and to inform you in reply that Rear-

Admiral George C. Remey, commander in chief, United States naval force,

Asiatic Station, will proceed to Melbourne with the flagshipBrooklynupon

the occasion of the visit of their royal hignesses the Duke and Duchess of

Cornwall and York and the opening of the Australian Parliament.

I have, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 210]
Lord Pauncefote to Mr. Hay.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Washington,April 24, 1901.

No. 102.]

SIR: I lost no time in communicating to the Marquis of Lansdowne the

information contained in your note No. 2130, of April 5, and I have now

receivedhislordship’sinstructionstoexpresstotheUnitedStates

Government the pleasure it has given His Majesty’s Government to hear of

the intended visit of an American vessel of war to Melbourne on the

occasion of the visit of their royal highnesses the Duke and Duchess of

Cornwall and York, and the gratification it will also afford to Australia.

I am further instructed to inquire whether the visit of Rear-Admiral George

C. Remy will also be extended to New Zealand, and I venture to hope that

you may be able to j)lace me in a position to reply to this inquiry.

I have, etc.,
PAUNCEFOTE.

[Document 211]
Mr. Hill to Lord Pauncefote.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 9, 1901.

No. 2150.]

EXCELLENCY: In reply to your note No. 102, of the 24th ultimo, I have the honor

to inform you that it is stated in a letter of the 6th instant from the Acting

Secretary of the Navy that that Department has had communication with

Rear-Admiral Remy, and that it is now in a position to say that the U. S. S.
Brooklynwill visit New Zealand after the completion of the ceremonies at

Melbourne.

I have, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 212]
Mr. Hay to Lord Pauncefote.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 26, 1901.

MYDEARLORDPAUNCEFOTE: I transmit herewith a photograph of the tablet which our

Navy Department, with a very high appreciation of his services to American

naval prisoners at Santiago de Cuba during the Spanish-American war, is

about to place upon the house there occupied by the late consul-general of

Great Britain, Frederick W. Ramsden.

In transmitting to your excellency this photograph it gives me great pleasure

to join in the sentiments of grateful appreciation expressed by the Secretary

of the Navy for Mr. Ramsden’s magnanimous and self-sacrificing labors in

behalf of our prisoners in Cuba.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 213]
Lord Pauncefote to Mr. Hay.
BRITISHEMBASSY,
Washington,April 24, 1901.

No. 101.]

SIR: On the receipt of your letter of the 26th of March, I immediately

forwarded to the Marquis of Lansdowne the photograph of the tablet which

the United States Navy Department propose to place upon the house

occupied at Santiago de Cuba by the late Mr. Frederick W. Ramsden, Her

Majesty’s consul at that port, in recognition of his exertions on behalf of the

American naval prisoners during the Spanish-American war.

The Marquis of Lansdowne has now directed me to express to the United

States Government the gratification of His Majesty’s Government at this

testimony to the services of one of His Majesty’s late consular officers.

I have, etc.,
PAUNCEFOTE.

[Document 214]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,April 12, 1901.

No. 542.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a notice which appeared

in the London Gazette of the 9th instant, announcing the appointment of a

commission for investigating the claims to compensation which have been

or may be made by persons the subjects of friendly powers in consequence

of their deportation to Europe by the British military authorities in South

Africa.

I have, etc.,
JOSEPHH.CHOATE.
[Inclosure.—Extract from The London Gazette of Tuesday, April 9, 1901.]

FOREIGNOFFICE,April 8, 1901.

It is hereby notified for public information that the Marquis of Lansdowne,

K. G., His Majesty’s principal secretary of state for foreign affairs, has

appointed a commission for the purpose of investigating the claims to

compensation which have been or may be made by persons the subjects of

various friendly powers in consequence of their deportation to Europe by

the British military authorities in South Africa.

The following gentlemen have been appointed commissioners: Thomas Mil

vain, esq., K. C, chancellor of the County Palatine of Durham; Maj. Gen. J.

Upton Prior; Maj. Gen. the Honorable H. F. Eaton; C. A. Wilkins, esq., late

judge of the high court, Calcutta; R. K. Loveday, esq., formerly a member

of the Volksraad of the late South African Republic.

The commission will consider the various claims which have been already

brought to the notice of His Majesty’s Government, together with such

others as may be presented to them hereafter by or on behalf of the

claimants. They will meet in London and after hearing the cases submitted

to them will proceed to South Africa with a view to continuing their

investigations on the spot, and on their return to London will take any

furtherevidencewhichtheseinvestigationsmayhaveshowntobe

necessary.

Due notice will be given in the London Gazette of the date on which the

commission will open its sittings.

It will be competent for the claimants to appear either in person or by

counsel, and also for their respective Governments to be represented if they

think fit before the commission.

All claims should be filed at the foreign office on or before the 25th instant.

[Document 215]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,October 26, 1901.

(Mr. White reports that Mr. Crane, counsel for the United States before the

claims commission, has just informed him that the British Government

offers £6,000 in full compensation for all claims of American citizens

deported from South Africa up to the present date. Four thousand pounds

was originally proposed by the British Government, but Mr. Crane induced

them to raise the amount to £6,000, and thinks that, considering the nature

of our claims, the offer is very liberal, being 50 per cent better than terms

made with other governments, and strongly urges acceptance. Mr. Crane

would like to be authorized to say, when the commission meets at noon next

Monday, that our claims have been settled. Requests immediate instructions

as to acceptance of the proposal.)
[Document 216]
Mr. Hay to Mr. White.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

D S,
Washington,October 26, 1901.

(Mr. Hay directs Mr. White to authorize Mr. Crane to accept, on behalf of

American claimants, the offer of the British Government of £6,000, in full

settlement.)
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.

AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,October 29, 1901.

No. 694.]

aSIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith the copy of a telegramwhich I

sent you on the 26th instant, after an interview with Mr. R. Newton Crane,

whom, as you are aware, has represented our Government before the

commission appointed by His Majesty’s Government to inquire into the

claims of the subjects of friendly powers who were deported by order of the

military authorities from South Africa.

Mr. Crane called to inform me that he had received from Sir John Ardagh

an intimation to the effect that the British Government would be willing to

pay us £6,000, in full satisfaction of all the claims, to this date, of American

citizens for wrongful arrest, imprisonment, and deportation from South

Africa by the military authorities, and he strongly advised acceptance of the

offer. Mr. Crane added that, from the amounts which he understood had

been accepted by certain other powers, whose claimants are much more

numerous than ours, he was satisfied that this proposal was 50 per cent

better, in proportion, than that made to any other government; and he

expressed a desire to be placed in a position, when the commission met

yesterday, to state that our claims had been settled.

aUpon the receipt of your replyto my telegram on the 26th instant, of which

a copy is inclosed, I wrote Mr. Crane a note, whereof I transmit a copy

herewith, together with that of his reply. From the latter you will perceive

the amounts which have been accepted by Austria, Belgium, Denmark,

Germany, Italy, Russia, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland, in settlement of

the claims of the subjects and citizens of those countries. You will also

observe that a settlement has not yet been effected with France or the

Netherlands.

I had an interview to-day at the foreign office with Lord Lansdowne, who

informed me that His Majesty’s Government is prepared to pay £6,000 to

ours in settlement of the American claims, and I replied that I had, in

accordance with your instructions, authorized Mr. Crane to inform Sir John

Ardagh that our Government is willing to accept the amount in question.

I ought to add that Mr. Crane, when I saw him on the 26th, said that it was

particularly desired that nothing should at present be made public as to the

amount which we had agreed to accept, but merely that it should be known

that our claim had been settled. Before the commission met, however,

another course appears to have been adopted, and the amounts accepted by

the powers whose claims have been settled were made known, at the

request of the chairman, to the commission.

I have, etc.,
HENRYWHITE.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. White to Mr. Crane.
6 WHITEHALLGARDENS,S.W.,
London,October 27, 1901.

MYDEARCRANE: I have heard from Mr. Hay, and you are hereby authorized to

accept the offer of £6,000, which you told me on Saturday has been made

by His Majesty’s Government, in full settlement of all our South African

deportation claims to this date.

Yours, etc.,
HW
[Inclosure 2.]
CT EC,
October 28, 1901.

DEARMR.WHITE: In accordance with the authority contained in your letter of the

27thinstant,IinformedSirJohn Ardagh,therepresentativeofHis

Majesty’sGovernmentbeforetheSouthAfricandeportationclaims

commission, that the United States Government was willing to accept the

sum of £6,000 in full satisfaction of the claims, to this date, of citizens of

the United States for wrongful arrest, imprisonment, and deportation from

South Africa by the military authorities, and a settlement has been arrived at

upon this basis.

At the resumption of the sittings of the commission this morning Sir John

Ardagh announced that all of the foreign Governments, with the exception

of France and the Netherlands, had settled for the claims of their respective

subjects with His Majesty’s Government in a similar manner, and upon the

following terms:

Austria £15,000

Germany 30,000

Belgium 800

Belgium 800

Denmark 250

Russia 4,000

Italy 12,000

Spain 150

Sweden and Norway 1,000

Switzerland 250

The United States 6,000

The settlement, so far as the United States Government is concerned, is, in

myopinion,anextremelyfavorableone,asitwillaffordgenerous

compensation to the claimants whose claims have merit. The sum agreed

upon is also very much larger in proportion than that received by any other

Government. The total amount awarded is £69,550, and the total number of

claimants among whom it is to be divided is 1,100, which gives an average

of £63 4s. 6d. for each claimant. As there were only 15 claims presented by

the American Government, and the sum awarded to the United States is

£6,000, the average is £400 for each claimant, including the good, bad, and

indifferent.Some,youwillremember,areobviouslyentitledtono

compensation, as certain of them were not American citizens, while others

took up arms against the English troops. The settlement averages, roughly, a

gross sum of $2,000 for each American claimant, as against $316 for each

claimant a subject of other Governments.

In the course of a few days I will make a precis of each case and suggest in

what manner the award may equitably be distributed among the claimants.

Sincerely, yours,
R.NEWTONCRANE.
aPrinted ante.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 218]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,November 23, 1901.

No. 712.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith the report of Mr. R. Newton Crane,

upon the merits of the 15 claims submitted by our Government through him

to the South African deportation compensation commission, which is so full

and complete that no additional observations or explanations appear to be

necessary from me. Mr. Crane has been to see life several times of late on

the subject, and has gone over at length the various considerations which

have led to the conclusions at which he has arrived with respect to the

method of distribution of the award; and I entirely concur in the views

expressed in the report.

I may add that Mr. Crane has devoted a great deal of time and attention to

the question of these claims ever since the commission has been sitting, and

the amount which he succeeded in persuading the British representative

upon the commission, Sir John Ardagh, to recommend his Government to

offer us does great credit to Mr. Crane’s tact and skill as a negotiator, as

well as to the desire of His Britannic Majesty’s Government to deal in a

liberal spirit with the claims put forward by our Government.

I would particularly call your attention to Mr. Crane’s observations, under

the heading “General remarks,” upon the misleading computation in the

tabular statement, setting forth the percentage of the awards to the claims of

each country, which appeared in the Times of the 15th instant. Mr. Crane

points out that the proper method of estimating the percentage of the awards

to each country is not the relation that such awards bear to the total amount

claimed by all the subjects or citizens of each power, but the amount

averaged by each claimant. If the latter mode of computation be adopted, it

will be seen how very much more, in proportion to the number of our

claimants, has been awarded to us than to any other power.

I have, etc.,
HENRYWHITE.
[Inclosure.]
REPORTONTHECLAIMSSUBMITTEDBYTHEUNITEDSTATESGOVERNMENTTOTHESOUTHAFRICANDEPORTATIONCOMPENSATION

COMMISSION.
In general.
Altogether 15 claims were presented, the claimants being Alfred J. Giebner,

Seigfried J. Ahrberg, Frank Crus, Francisco Pudjunos, John Anderson,

William Phelps, Dr. A. F. Conroy, Anna Wedekind, Charles Fowles, John

Joseph Maloney, H. M. Marmorstein, Johan Sundt,-------Sharp, ------Lyons,

and ------Nelkin. Of these persons 5 claim to be native-born citizens of the

United States, although no evidence is furnished as to the date or place of

their birth, and 8 claim to be naturalized citizens. Of the other 2, Lyons and

Sharp, nothing is known. Eight were deported on suspicion of being

concerned in the Johannesburg plot to murder Lord Roberts and other

English officers; I was imprisoned at Natal as a Boer spy; I was captured on

the battlefield while serving, as he alleges, with a Red Cross ambulance

corps, attached to the Boer forces; and 3 were compelled to leave the

country for various reasons. Two were, strictly speaking, not forcibly

deported, but appear to have voluntarily left South Africa, and at their own

expense. The entire amount claimed on account of actual losses was

$52,278.29.

The commission heard all of the claims, so far as an ex parte statement of

them could be made, except those of Lyons and Sharp. No claim has been

forwarded from the Department of State on behalf of these last-named

claimants, but it was mentioned to the commission that these persons had

appealed to the United States Government and that their names were

embracedinthelettersaddressedbyhisexcellencytheAmerican

ambassador to Lord Lansdowne on the 24th of October, 1900, when the

claims of American subjects were first brought to the attention of His

Majesty’s Government. Sundt’s claim was presented to the commission by

his solicitors in England, Messrs. Tyrell, Lewis, Lewis & Broadment, and

Sundt was orally examined by the commissioners. His claim was rejected

on the ground that it appeared from his own admission that he had

voluntarily left South Africa, and traveled to England at his own expense,

and therefore his case was one which did not come within the jurisdiction of

the commission. The claimant subsequently appealed to the Department of

State, and upon instructions from the ambassador his claim was again

presented to the English authorities.

The commission announced that they would hear the various claims without

insisting upon any technical formality in the way of proof; that they would

give the representative of His Majesty’s Government, Sir John Ardagh, an

opportunity to explain why each individual had been deported, and that then

the claimants might put in any evidence they could adduce in reply to the

charges made by Sir John Ardagh. This course was entered upon, but after

the claims had been gone through it was intimated by Sir John Ardagh that

his Government desired, irrespective of any action by the commission, to

agree, if possible, with the representatives of the various Governments upon

a lump sum to be received by each of the powers in full satisfaction of the

demandsoftheirrespectiveclaimants,itbeingunderstoodthatHis

Majesty’s Government was not to be concerned as to how the sums so paid

were allocated among the various claimants.

I communicated this proposition to his excellency the ambassador in my

letter of the 29th of August last, and stated that in my opinion, for reasons

therein stated, it was wise to accept it. In due course I received authority to

enterintonegotiationswithSirJohnArdagh,andafternumerous

interviews, extending over some weeks, an offer of £6,000 was made on

behalf of His Majesty’s Government to settle the American claims, and I

was instructed to accept the same. The result was announced at the meeting

of the commission which was held on the 28th of October, 1901, and the

commission therefore ceased to have any further consideration of the

matter.

The settlement, in my opinion, is a very favorable one to the United States,

both in respect to the substance of the claims and the relation they sustained

to those put forward by other Governments. The amount awarded to the

American Government is more than 100 per cent greater than that allowed

to any other Government, whether the amount claimed or the number of

claimants be considered. I trust I may be permitted in this connection to

express my appreciation of the courtesy, sense of fairness, and extreme

indulgenceshownbySirJohnArdaghthroughouttheprotracted

negotiations before the settlement was arrived at. It was extremely difficult

to determine the merits of most of the claims, not only so far as the facts

wereconcerned,butintheapplicationoftheprinciplesofpublic

international law and comity, to assertion of facts which were incapable of

proof and were therefore considerately assumed.

* * * * * * *
General remarks.
Since the foregoing was written a summary of the award was made by His

Majesty’s Government and the percentage of the award to claims has been

published by the Times newspaper of the 15th of November, 1901, as

follows:

Hungary

Norway

As it is not improbable that the award of the British Government in this

instance may be quoted as a precedent in the future, it should be noted that

the above calculation gives a misleading idea of the manner in which the

claims have been settled, as must any calculation based upon the relation

the award made bears to the sums claimed. The amount claimed is too often

not the sum which a claimant honestly thinks is justly due to him for the

loss he has suffered, but it is the sum which his caprice or cupidity fixes as

that which may posssibly be allowed him. In the present instance the

allowances demanded for “moral” damages by other claimants than the

Americans were very small. Among the American claimants themselves

there was a very wide disparity in appraising their losses. Of 3 men in the

circumstances, 1 places his demand, at $5,220; another, at $11,112.50; and

another, at $50,000.

A fairer way of ascertaining what the award amounts to is by computing

what it averages per claimant, practically when, as in this instance, those

who make the claims were of practically the same walk of life and

employment, and deported under like conditions.

The result of such a computation is as follows:

£ £ s. d.

Sweden and
8 1,000 125 0 0

Norway

Department, that some of the claimants have contracted to pay their local

attorneys for presenting their claims 50 per cent of whatever sum may be

awarded to them. In the case of one of the attorneys the fee which he will

receive, if the recommendations which I have made in this report are carried

out, will amount to £750. His services consisted in filing memorials which,

although he has been given ample opportunity to do so, have not been

supported by a single word of proof of the assertions which they contain.

He has been acquainted with the charges made against his clients, but has

either been indifferent to them or unable to meet them. If it had been

necessary for him to embark in protracted litigation in their behalf and to

have devoted time, labor, and skill achieving success for them, such

compensation might not have been excessive. But in this case his labors

have been of no material advantage.

I therefore trust the Government may find some way of letting it be known

that in future such claims do not need the intermediation of attorneys, but

can be presented directly by citizens themselves. As the appeals I have

made to some of these attorneys to furnish me with evidence to meet the

accusation made by the British Government against their clients have met

with no response whatever, I think it is only fair to presume that either they

no longer represent their former clients, or that the latter are not now living.

In either case the Government will be justified in refusing to pay over to the

attorneys such sums as may be allotted to their clients until the latter have

beendirectlycommunicatedwith,andhavehadthecircumstances

explained to them, and have been given an opportunity to confirm or

withdraw any powers of attorney they may have heretofore executed for the

collection of their respective claims.
RN C

TEMPLE,November 16, 1901.

[Document 218a]
[Untitled]
BY THEPRESIDENT OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFAMERICA.
A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas a Supplementary Treaty of Extradition between the United States

of America and Great Britain was concluded and signed by their respective

plenipotentiariesattheCityofWashingtononthethirteenthdayof

December, 1900, the original of which Treaty is word for word as follows:

The President of the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen

of Great Britain and Ireland, being desirous of enlarging the List of Crimes

on account of which Extradition may be granted under the Convention

concluded between the United States and Her Britannic Majesty on the 12th

of July 1889, with a view to the better administration of justice and the

prevention of crime in their respective territories and jurisdictions, have

resolved to conclude a Supplementary Convention for this purpose and

have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries, to wit:

The President of the United States, the Honorable John Hay,

Secretary of State of the United States, and

Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain

andIreland,HisExcellencytheRightHonorableLord

Pauncefote, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honorable Order of

the Bath, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of

St. Michael and St. George, and Her Majesty’s Ambassador

Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the United States;

Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers,

which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed to and

concluded the following Articles: A I.

The following crimes are added to the list of crimes numbered 1 to 10 in the

first Article of the said Convention of July 12, 1889, on account of which

extradition may be granted, that is to say:

11. Obtaining money, valuable securities or other property by

false pretenses.

12. Wilful and unlawful destruction or obstruction of railroads

which endangers human life.

13. Procuring abortion.

ARTICLEII.

The present Convention shall be considered as an integral part of the said

Extradition Convention of July 12, 1889, and the first Article of the last

mentioned Convention shall be read as if the list of crimes therein contained

had originally comprised the additional crimes specified and numbered 11

to 13 in the first Article of the present Convention.

The present Convention shall be ratified and the ratifications shall be

exchanged either at Washington or London as soon as possible.

It shall come into force ten days after its publication in conformity with the

Laws of the High Contracting Parties and it shall continue and terminate in

the same manner as the said Convention of July 12, 1889.

In testimony whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the

present Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at Washington this 13th day of December, 1900.

And whereas, the said Treaty has been duly ratified on both parts, and the

ratificationsofthetwoGovernmentswereexchangedintheCityof

Washington, on the twenty-second day of April, one thousand nine hundred

and one;

Now, therefore, be it known that I, William McKinley, President of the

United States of America, have caused the said Treaty to be made public, to

the end that the same and every article and clause thereof may be observed

and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the

United States to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington this 22nd day of April, in the year of Our

Lord one thousand nine hundred and one, and of the Independence of the

United States the one hundred and twenty-fifth.

[SEAL]WILLIAMMCKINLEY
By the President:

JOHNHAY
Secretary of” State.

[Document 219]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 29, 1901.

No. 644.]

SIR: In a dispatch dated May 5, 1901, Mr. Pickerell, the United States consul

at St. Michaels, Azores, reported to the Department that he had been

requested by the British consul there to act for him during his proposed

absence in England.

In reply the Department cheerfully gave its permission on the understanding

that Mr. Pickerell’s so acting shall be entirely agreeable to the British

Government and to the local authorities at St. Michaels, and that any duties

he might be called upon to perform in this connection shall be as consul of

the United States temporarily in charge of the British consulate, and all

papers to be so signed.

You will communicate this to the British Government.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL.

[Document 220]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,June 22, 1901.

No. 598.]

SIR: With reference to your instruction No. 644, of the 29th ultimo, relating

to the action of Mr. Pickerell, our consul at St. Michaels, Azores, in taking

charge of the British consulate during the proposed absence of the British

consul, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a note from the

foreign office, dated the 19th instant, conveying the thanks of His Majesty’s

Government for the courtesy of the United States Government in the matter.

I have, etc.,
JOSEPHH.CHOATE.
[Inclosure.]
Lord Lansdowne to Mr. Choate.
FOREIGNOFFICE,June 19, 1901.

S: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of

the 13th instant and to inform you that His Majesty’s consul at the Azores

had already reported for the sanction of His Majesty’s Government the

arrangement by which his duties will be performed during his absence by

the consul of the United States.

IhavetorequestyourexcellencytoconveytotheUnitedStates

Government the thanks of His Majesty’s Government for their courtesy in

this matter.

I have, etc.,

LANSDOWNE.

[Document 221]
MEMORANDUM.
[Confidential.]

BRITISHEMBASSY,
Washington,May 31, 1900.

Her Majesty’s embassy has been directed by Her Majesty’s Government to

ascertain from the United States Government what their views are as to

what rights and privileges can be claimed on behalf of British subjects in

Cuba.

It has been assumed by Her Majesty’s consul-general in Habana that, failing

any declaration to the contrary, the rights and immunities hereto enjoyed by

British subjects would be continued as long as the temporary occupation

lasted, but he was informed by the United States military governor that the

only rights which could now be claimed were those under treaties between

the United States and Great Britain.

It appears that Her Majesty’s consul-general, immediately after his arrival,

called on General Brooke, and, in reply to inquiries as to what rights British

subjects would enjoy under the new regime, was informed that the existing

laws would remain in force in all respects until specifically altered or

modified. General Wood now states that from April 11, the date of the

exchange of ratifications of the treaty of Paris, all former treaties and

conventions relating to the island ceased to exist, and, as above mentioned,

the only rights which could now be claimed by British subjects were those

which were secured by treaties concluded between the United States and

Great Britain.

[Document 222]
MEMORANDUM.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 2, 1901.

With reference to the British embassy’s confidential memorandum of May

31, 1900, the United States Government does not regard existing treaties as

embodying rights and immunities of British subjects in Cuba, Cuba’s affairs

having been withdrawn from British treaties with Spain and not having

been embraced by British treaties with the United States, which antedated

intervention.

The rights, immunities, etc., of aliens in Cuba are elaborately prescribed in

the alien law of 1870, which the Attorney-General has recently held to be in

force in Cuba. (Opinion of April 26 to Secretary of War; copy handed

herewith.) That law, of 57 sections, throws open the courts in Cuba to

protect such rights. It is applicable to British subjects.

[Inclosure.]

DEPARTMENT OFJUSTICE,
Washington, D. C.,April 26, 1900.

The SECRETARY OFWAR.
S: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the following request for

an opinion:

“WD ,

“Washington, April 16, 1900.
“ S: I have the honor to present a matter arising in a court of

Cuba which seems to involve an interpretation of the treaty of

peace with Spain.

“On July 2, 1899, one Ramon Martí y Buguet, a native of

Tarragona, Spain, and a Spanish subject, died intestate at Beaz,

Santa Clara, Cuba, leaving an estate. The court of Santa Clara,

having jurisdiction under Spanish law to administer upon estates

of persons dying within its jurisdiction, assumed control of said

estate and proceeded to administer thereon, pursuant to Spanish

law for the administration of estates of deceased natives of Cuba.

“On the 15th of July, 1899, the Spanish consul at Cienfuegos,

having learned of the death of Martí, addressed a letter to the

judge at Santa Clara, requesting that his consulate be permitted to

administerupontheestateofthedeceased,pursuanttothe

provisions of article 44 of the alien law put in force in the island

of Cuba while Spanish dominion prevailed therein.

“The court refused to comply with the request of the Spanish

consul, and the estate was administered upon in accordance with

the laws regulating the administration of estates of deceased

natives of the island.

“The Spanisn minister at this capital calls the attention of the

Government of the United States to this matter and requests this

Government to annul the orders made regarding said estate by the

judge of said court.

“The questions thus presented appear to me to be:

“1. Under the provisions of the treaty of peace between

the United States and Spain (December 10, 1898), did

the court of Santa Clara have exclusive jurisdiction to

administer upon the estate of said Don Ramon Martí,

deceased?

“2. If the said Don Ramon Martí at the time of his death

was a resident of Santa Clara, Cuba, did the Spanish

consul have the right to participate in the administration

of said estate?

“3. If the request of the Spanish consul to be allowed to

participateintheadministrationofsaidestatewas

improperly refused by the court, did the court thereafter

possess jurisdiction to administer upon said estate?

“I have the honor to request that you will favor me with your

opinion upon the matter above presented.

“Very respectfully, yours,

please return with your reply.

“1075 and inclosures 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and press copies.”

The inclosures of your letter show the following order of the judge of Santa

Clara, dated the 25th of July, 1899: “As it appears that Don Ramon Martí

Buguet, a native of Tarragona, died on the 2d instant, in the precinct of

Baez, belonging to this judicial district, without leaving any relatives or

testamentary provisions, this court has ordered the proclamation of the

intestacy.” “As it appears that, on the 15th instant, the Spanish consul at

Cienfuegos addressed a communication to this court, stating that, having

heard that the Spanish subject, Don Ramon Martí, had died intestate, he has

appointed Don Benito Menduiña, under article 44 of the alien law in force,

to draw up the inventory and to carry out all the other proceedings provided

by said law.” “Considering, first, that there is no evidence to show that Don

Ramon Martí had obtained the registration required by article 9 of the treaty

of Paris, concluded between Spain and the United States on the 10th of

December of last year, in order to retain his Spanish nationality, and

(considering) that, until such registration is proved by record, he must be

regardedasanativeofCubaand,consequently,subjectonlyand

exclusively to the provisions of the law of civil procedure and the civil code

now in force.” “Considering, that, even if the reason hereinbefore stated did

not exist, the provisions of the alien law cited by the Spanish consul at

Cienfuegos would still not be applicable, because, under article 11 of the

said treaty, Spaniards residing in the territories over which Spain has ceded

or abandoned her sovereignty, remain subject, in civil and criminal matters,

to the jurisdiction of the country in which they reside, in accordance with

the ordinary laws in force in such territories, and must appear and plead in

the same manner as the citizens of the country in which they reside.” “In

view of the articles of the treaty of Paris, it is declared that the intervention

of the Spanish consul at Cienfuegos in those proceedings can not be

permitted; and it is ordered that he be notified of this decision by a

courteous note.”

An examination of Article IX of the treaty of Paris shows that Spaniards

residing in the ceded or relinquished territories were to have a year within

which to make up their minds whether to preserve—not acquire—Spanish

nationality, and I think there is no doubt that a Spaniard born in the

peninsula who died in Cuba before the expiration of that year was, in the

contemplation of the treaty, a Spanish subject at the time of his death.

Article XI of the treaty relied upon by the judge is, in the English copy, as

follows: “The Spaniards residing in the territories over which Spain by this

treaty cedes or relinquishes her sovereignty shall be subject in matters civil

as well as criminal to the jurisdiction of the courts of the country wherein

they reside pursuant to the ordinary laws governing the same; and they shall

have the right to appear before such courts and to pursue the same course as

citizens of the country to which the courts belong.”

The first part of this article treats of the position of Spanish residents when

proceeded against in court, the latter provides implements for their use. The

former subjects them as defendants to the tribunals, according to the

ordinary laws which may regulate the competency of the tribunals (leyes

comunes que regulen su competencia); the latter places at their disposal,

though aliens, the right to appear before the tribunals (comparenciaen

juicio) according to the same laws of procedure (forma) and carrying on the

same course of pleading and practice (procedimientos) as citizens of the

country.

In so placing at their disposal the free right to appear and proceed like

give them better methods of appearing or proceeding as alien parties or as

Spanish residents in addition to those of citizens. The provision was for

their benefit—they were to be allowed, at least, the same “forma,” and same

“procedimientos” as citizens. On the other hand, there is still less reason to

say that as defendants they could not be subjected to any laws regulating the

jurisdiction of the courts except those concerning cases between citizens of

the country. The first part of Article XI says nothing of citizens of the

country. It says they shall be subject to the tribunals according to the

ordinary,theusual(comunes),lawsconcerningtheircompetencyor

jurisdiction.

What is meant by ordinary or usual? It was usual in every one of the

countriesmentionedtohavelawsconcerningaliens,lawswhich

incidentally affected the competency of the courts. Article IX of the treaty

alludes to these long familiar laws and the possibility of others to be

enacted. Such as these, in my opinion, are not excluded by the word

ordinary (común).

Spanish residents at the time of the making of the treaty were somewhat

uneasy lest they should be persecuted, and desired to be guaranteed that a

proper course of procedure would be followed in criminal and civil actions

against them; but they expected to be aliens, subjects of a foreign sovereign,

and to be treated by the laws as such. They desired to be subjected to the

tribunals only as other aliens might be; to the ordinary tribunals acting

without special authority directed against them.

Article 47 of the alien law, which denied any special fuero to aliens (not, as

translated, “special right or privilege”), operated to confirm a transfer of

aliens (extranjeros) in the provinces, from the old fuero de extranjería and

other special fueros (e. g., of war and marine), to the same courts to which

Spaniards were subject, “according to the cases,” certainly without any

purpose by so doing to make them cease to be aliens or to prevent the

interposition in administrations of their respective consuls; and I think it

was as little the intent of the provisions of Article XI of the treaty to exclude

that interposition. The article forbids the establishment of the old fuero of

aliens and that of a new fuero of Spaniards, but not all laws affecting the

business concerning aliens which may come into the ordinary courts or

fueros “according to the cases.” Such a treaty provision might even be

unconstitutional and void.

The reasons given in 1868 and 1869 for the general abandonment of special

fueros for the ordinary or common fuero were: “In those regions (colonies),

as in Spain, the diversity of fueros paralyzes the march of the administration

of justice by the numerous jurisdictions (competencias) to which it gives

rise, disorganizes the judicial hierarchy, renders impossible the formation of

a correct and enlightened jurisprudence, and is the cause at times of

contradictory judgments, in identical cases, which diminishes respect for

the law and for the tribunals.”

I can not suppose, without’ manifest proof, that the United States were

stipulating to cripple permanently in Porto Rico and the Philippines, and

(by persuasion) in Cuba, the vital power to make and judicially enforce

laws concerning alien inhabitants.

It must be remembered that, so far as Cuba is concerned, this Article XI

does not bear the same relation to the alien law as though the latter were an

act of Congress. The treaty is an agreement between Spain and the United

States; supreme law for and over the latter, but not for and over Cuba. It

obliges us, while acting in that country, to see to it that the Spaniards there

are treated as the Article XI intends; but the alien law, while temporarily

continued and enforced by the power of the United States, is rather the law

of and for another country. It is an old law in Cuba, and is doubtless

intended to be left in Cuba when we and our treaty are gone.

In my opinion, then, there is no reason to say that Article XI of our treaty

prevents article 44 of the alien law of Cuba from being applicable to the

estate of Don Ramon Martí y Buguet.

Both of the conclusions of the court at Santa Clara, therefore, as I think,

proceeded from erroneous views of the treaty of 1898.

Your third question is:

“If the request of the Spanish consul to be allowed to participate in the

administration of said estate was improperly refused by the court, did the

court thereafter possess jurisdiction to administer upon said estate?”

At first view, this seemed to me a question so exclusively of Spanish civil

law, with which the secretary of justice and the courts of Cuba are familiar,

that I was disposed to suggest that it be referred to them for consideration in

the light of the views concerning the treaty hereinbefore set forth. But as I

perceived from the inclosures of your letter that two secretaries of justice

and some local official attorneys in Cuba have had this matter under

consideration, and as I recognized that the international aspect of it might

render it difficult for the question to be determined by the familiar rules of

the Spanish law concerning appeals, proceedings in cassation, decisions

between conflicting jurisdictions, etc., it seemed to me better to attempt to

give a direct answer to your inquiry.

An examination of the original Spanish of the alien law, article 44 (of which

you inclosed a translation), makes it clearer that the first paragraph of that

article aims at the preservation of the property for the benefit of the heirs,

rather than the exercise of the judicial power of Cuba in determining who

may be the heirs or determining any other question concerning the estate.

Who, then, is expected by the alien law to determine such questions—the

consul, the local judge, or both? If the consul is to have any judicial

function in the matter, is he with the local judge to constitute a tribunal

exercising the judicial power of Cuba, is he to exercise the judicial power of

his own country and wholly exclude the local judge from judicial action, or

is the consul to exercise the judicial power of his own country upon certain

questions and to be the administrator as an officer of his own country, and

the judge, with regard to other questions, to step in and exercise the judicial

power of Cuba?

It seems to me that some light may be thrown upon these questions by

articles 42, 43, and 45 of the alien law, articles 42 and 43 speaking (in the

original Spanish) of demands giving rise to a special set of questions, and

article 45 providing that in intestate proceedings the Spanish court shall

have jurisdiction only of those demands. In the translation of the alien law

which you sent me, the word “demands” is omitted from articles 42 and 43,

and your translation of them, and of articles 44 and 45, is as follows:

instituted by or against them for the fulfillment of obligations contracted

within and outside of Spain in favor of Spaniards, or which involve the

ownership or possession of property situated in Spanish territory.

“Article 43. The Spanish tribunals shall also have jurisdiction over and shall

take cognizance of suits between aliens brought before them and which

involve the fulfillment of obligations contracted or to be fulfilled in Spain.

“Article 44. In the case of an alien dying intestate the judicial authority of

the town in which the death occurs shall, together with the nearest consul of

the nation to which the deceased belonged, or with the person appointed by

the consul in his stead, take an inventory of the property and goods and

shall take the necessary steps to have the same placed under custody and at

the disposal of the heirs.

“Should the alien be a resident, and should he die outside of his domicile,

the judge of the latter, to whom notice shall be sent by the judge of the place

where the death occurred, shall fulfill the provisions of the foregoing

paragraph with regard to the property and effects of the deceased existing

there.

“Should there be no consul in the town where the death occurred or in the

domicile, the judicial authority, while awaiting the arrival of the consul,

whom he shall advise immediately, or of his delegate, shall only take the

measures necessary for the custody of the property and of the goods.

“Article 45. In intestate as well as in testamentary successions of aliens, the

Spanish courts shall have cognizance only of the claims and demands

referred to in the foregoing articles.”

Further light, I think, can be thrown upon the questions by an examination

of two treaties, the making of which closely preceded the alien law of 1870,

one of Spain with France (A. D. 1862), and the other of Spain with Italy (A.

D. 1867). I quote three articles, which are substantially the same in both

treaties.

“XVII. In case of the decease of any subject of one of the contracting

parties in the territory of the other, the local authorities must give immediate

notice to the consul-general, consul, vice-consul, or consular agent in whose

district the decease has occurred, and they, on their part, must give the same

notice to the local authorities when the decease comes to their knowledge

first.

“If an Italian in Spain or a Spaniard in Italy should die without making a

will, or without appointing a testamentary executor, or if the legitimate or

testamentaryheirsshouldbeminors,incapableorabsent,orifthe

testamentary executors appointed should be incapable, or should not be

found in the place where the property has been left, the consuls-general,

consuls, and consular agents of the deceased’s nation shall have the right of

proceeding successively to the following operations: “1. To affix seals, ex

officio or at the request of the parties interested, on all the movable property

and papers of the deceased, giving notice of this operation to the competent

local authority, who may be present and affix his own seals also.

“These seals, as well as those of the consular agent, must not be removed

without the consent of the local authority. Nevertheless, if, after a notice

addressed by the consul or vice consul to the local authority, inviting him to

be present at the removal of the double seals, he should not appear within

forty-eight hours from the time of receiving the notice, the said agent may

proceed to the operation by himself.

“2. To draw up the inventory of all the goods and effects of the deceased, in

the presence of the local authority, if he has attended in consequence of the

aforesaid notification.

“The local authority shall put his signature to the reports drawn up in his

presence, and shall have no right to demand fees of any kind for his official

intervention in said matters.

“3. To provide for the sale at public auction of all the movable effects of the

estate which may deteriorate, and of those which may be difficult to

preserve, as well as of the collections or effects for the disposal of which

there may be favorable opportunities.

“4. To deposit in a secure place the effects and securities inventoried; to

keep the amount of the debts and incomes received and the proceeds of the

sales, in the consular house, or to intrust them to some merchant who gives

good security. In both cases he must proceed in concurrence with the local

authority who has taken part in the previous operations, if, after the

summons referred to in the following paragraph, subjects of the country, or

of a third power, should represent themselves as interested in the estate.

“5. To announce the death which has taken place, and to summon, by means

of the newspapers of the place and of the deceased’s country, such persons

as may have claims against the estate, in order that they may send in their

respective claims duly approved within the legal period of each country.

“If creditors of the estate should appear, their debts must be paid in fifteen

days from the completion of the inventory, if there should be ready money

enough for the purpose; and if not, as soon as the funds can be obtained in

the most convenient manner, or within the period fixed by common consent

between the consul and the majority of those interested. If the respective

consuls should refuse payment of one or more of the claims brought in,

alleging the insufficiency of the property of the estate to satisfy them, the

creditors may, if they consider it advantageous to their interests, demand of

the competent authority the power of constituting themselves as a body.

“Such a declaration having been obtained by the legal means established in

each of the two nations respectively, the consuls or vice-consuls must

immediatelyconsigntothejudicialauthorityortothesyndicsof

bankruptcy, as the case may be, all the documents, effects, and securities

belongingtotheestate,andthesaidagentswillremainasthe

representatives of the heirs who are absent, minors or incapable.

“6. To administer and liquidate the estate, either themselves or through a

person appointed on their responsibility, the local authorities having no

power to interfere in those operations, unless subjects of the country, or of a

third power, should have to prove rights upon the estate itself, and that in

such case difficulties should arise chiefly proceeding from some claim

which gives rise to discussion among the parties; the consuls-general,

consuls, vice consuls or consular agents, having no right to decide therein, it

must be brought before the tribunals of the country, whose place it is to

provide for and settle such difficulties.

“The said consular agents will then act as representatives of the estate; that

is,theywillretaintheadministrationandtherightofdefinitively

liquidating the inheritance, as well as that of proceeding to the sale of the

effects in the periods before prescribed, they will take care of the interests

of the heirs, with the power of appointing advocates to maintain their rights

before the tribunals; and it is understood that they must furnish all the

papers and documents necessary to explain the question which is submitted

to their judgment.

“When the sentence has been pronounced, the consuls-general, consuls,

vice-consuls or consular agents must execute it, unless they interpose an

appeal; and they will also continue of full right to carry on the liquidation

which was suspended until judgment had been passed.

“7. To consign the inheritance or the produce thereof to the lawful heirs or

to their agents, but not until the expiration of the term of six months from

the date on which the announcement of the death was published in the

newspapers.

“8.Toconstitute,wheneveritmaybenecessary,aguardianshipor

trusteeship, according to the laws of their own country.

“XVIII. If an Italian die in Spain or a Spaniard in Italy, at a place where

there is no consular agent of his nation, the competent local authority shall

proceed, in accordance with the laws of the country, to make an inventory

of the effects, and to liquidate the property left, under the obligation of

rendering an account, as soon as it is possible, of the results of his

operations, to the respective embassy or legation or to the consulate or vice-

consulate nearest to the place where the property has been left, but from the

instant that the consular agent nearest to the place where the property has

been left makes his appearance, either in person or by means of any

delegate, the intervention of the local authority must be in accordance with

the provision in Article XVII of this convention.

“XIX. The consuls-general, consuls, vice-consuls, and consular agents of

bothnationsshallattendexclusivelytotheinventoriesandother

precautionary measures for the preservation of the hereditary property left

by sailors of their nation, dying ashore or on board the vessels, of their

country, whether during the voyage or in the port of their arrival.”

It is clear that under this treaty system between these three Latin countries

—Spain, Italy, and France—the consul is to exercise an extraterritorial

judicial power and to be the real administrator of the estate, but that

disputes in which the country where the death occurred has some special

interest, as where its own people or the people of a third country, whom it

should protect, are concerned, are to be carved out of his jurisdiction and

settled by the local judicial authority, leaving him to resume his functions

when these special questions have been determined.

Similar treaties had anciently been made with England. Thus, in Warden’s

Consular Establishment, page 252, we read: “In a treaty with Spain, made

in 1667, it was stipulated that the goods and estates of Englishmen, dying

without will in that Kingdom, were to be put into inventory, with their

papers, writings, and books of account by the consul, or other public

minister of the King of Great Britain, and placed in the hands of two or

three merchants named by the said consul or public minister, to be kept for

the proprietors or creditors; and that neither the cruzada, nor any other

judicatory whatsoever, should intermeddle therein; which, also, in the like

case was to be observed in England toward the subjects of the King of

Spain.”

Still further light is shed upon our questions, I think, by the consular system

of Spain, in which her consuls in foreign countries are authorized to

exercise all the powers of courts of first instance, if permitted to do so by

the laws of the country to which they are accredited.

I can not but think, from these and similar considerations, that the privilege

intended to be accorded to foreign consuls by article 44 of the alien law was

not merely to be present and see that the local judicial authority did what

was proper, nor to exercise any part of the judicial power of the country to

which the consul was accredited, but to be the administrator and judge in

It seems-to me, therefore, that to oust the consul altogether, as was done in

the matter of the estate of Don Ramon Martí y Buguet, and proceed without

him, was to proceed without jurisdiction, and I therefore answer your third

question in the negative.

Respectfully,
JOHNW.GRIGGS,
Attorney-General.

[Document 223]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 10, 1901.

No. 669.]

SIR: I inclose herewith, for a compliance with its request, copy of a letter

from the Acting Secretary of the Navy asking that the thanks of the Navy

Department be extended to the lord provost of Edinburgh and the provost of

Leith, Scotland, for the great courtesies with which the officers and men of

theHartfordwere received on visiting Leith in June last.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Hackett to Mr. Hay.
NAVYDEPARTMENT,
Washington,July 6, 1901.

S: I have the honor to request that, if deemed proper by the Department of

State, the thanks of this Department be extended to the lord provost of

Edinburgh and the provost of Leith, Scotland, for the great courtesies with

which the officers and men of theHartfordwere received on visiting Leith

during June last.

Yours, respectfully,
TWH ,Acting Secretary.

[Document 224]
Mr. Choate to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY
London,August 14, 1901.

No. 640.]

aSIR.IincloseapetitionaddressedtomebyCharlesLillywhite,a

naturalized American citizen (British born), asking me to present his claim

set forth in the petition to the British Government, in respect to which I

have the honor to ask your instructions, having myself a strong opinion that

he is entitled to have it presented diplomatically.

You will observe that it is the case of the arrest in New Zealand of the

wrong man for a crime committed in England seven years before, and taken

away from his residence and his work; kept in custody for more than 6

months, under circumstances of very considerable hardship; transported to

England and there discharged, there being clear proof that he was not the

man.

You will also observe that Lillywhite resided in the United States most of

the time for nine years, from 1885 to 1894, during which period, in 1890,

he became an American citizen, and still claims full rights as such. I inclose

copy of a letter just received from Mr. Barratt, his counsel, in answer to my

inquiry whether, in the six years since he left the United States, he had any

ideaofabandoninghisAmericancitizenship—whichappearstobe

satisfactory.

What has thus far occurred in respect to the claim is this: About the 1st of

July, soon after his release, which occurred on the 26th of June, he called on

me to know what he should do. The newspapers had expressed much

sympathy for him, and the home secretary, in answer to a question in the

House of Commons, had intimated that he was waiting to hear from the

claimant. It seemed to me that it was a case which the British Government

would prefer to take care of themselves in a liberal spirit, without any

formal or official intervention—and I told him that I would say so to Lord

Lansdowne unofficial, which I did. He said that he would speak to the home

secretary about it, and I asked him to let me know what steps he would

suggest the claimant should take. After some time I received the inclosed

note of July 23, from Lord Lansdowne—which, as I told him after perusing

it, seemed to treat my inquiry as official rather than unofficial, as I had

regarded it; but he said that in such a matter he thought that made no

difference, and expressed a general disposition to do the fait-thing in the

matter. I have concluded that, if you regard him as entitled to it, the

claimant will be greatly aided by having his case presented officially to the

foreign office under your express authority. You will observe that Lord

Lansdowne says that, “if any application is made direct by Mr. Lillywhite, it

might be addressed to the mayor of Colchester,” but I am of the opinion that

a proceeding so initiated would have but a slim chance. I have not,

however,feltauthorizedtoinitiateofficially,withoutyourexpress

instructions, a diplomatic claim.

You will observe that Lord Lansdowne asks for information as to the

practice in the United States in such cases, but I do not believe that such a

case has ever occurred in the United States. It is not an ordinary case of a

falsearrestandimprisonment. Themanwastornfromhisplaceof

residenceandbroughthalfroundtheglobe,andsubjectedtogreat

hardships, on a mistake of identity; and I think that Lord Lansdowne and

the home secretary both regard it as an unusual case and entitled to

exceptional treatment. And I shall be much surprised if investigation should

not disclose many cases somewhat similar, which have been presented

diplomaticallywithfavorableresults(videcasesinVol.IVMoore’s

International Arbitration Digest).

I therefore inclose the petition for your perusal and instructions; and,

whatever your conclusion may be, I will be obliged if you will return the

petition to me, as I have made no copy; and I suppose that the making of

copies would entail large expense on the claimant.

I have, etc.,

JOSEPHH.CHOATE.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Barratt to Mr. Choate.
1 TEMPLEGARDENS,TEMPLE,E.C.,
August 13, 1901.

DEARMR.CHOATE: I have just seen Mr. Lilly white, and he states that the Labor

Party in New Zealand several times approached him about becoming a

British subject and standing as a labor candidate for the New Zealand

Parliament. He always refused to change his citizenship from American to

British.

He also states that when going into the hospital at Wellington, New

Zealand, in 1900, he gave his proper description as an American, and it so

appeared on the card at the head of his bed in the hospital—that he was well

known amongst his fellows there to have strong American sentiments.

The evidence annexed to the petition shows that he went by the name of

“Yank” amongst his fellow-workmen.

This, I think, meets the suggestion that he may have abandoned his

American citizenship fairly well.

Yours, etc.,
JA B
[Inclosure 2.]
F O,July 23, 1901.

Y E :Onthe28thultimoyourexcellencymadeaverbal

representation relative to the case of Charles Lillywhite, a United States

citizen who was brought to this country from New Zealand on a charge of

murder and who was discharged on the ground of mistaken identity. You

intimated that Lillywhite had a claim to compensation on account of the

mistake made by the British authorities.

I have the honor to inform your excellency that an inquiry has been made

and that the following is a summary of the facts bearing on the matter.

On the 11th of January, 1894, a coroner’s jury at Colchester returned a

verdict of willful murder against one Arthur Blatch. The crime charged was

one of special atrocity, and the evidence against Blatch was considered

conclusive.

It was at first believed that Blatch had gone to Chicago, and an application

was made to the United States authorities for his extradition, but he could

not be traced in that town. In February, 1897, the Colchester police received

news from the police at Wellington, New Zealand, that Blatch had been

seen there, but an endeavor made at the time to arrest him led to no result.

In November of last year, however, the man identified as Blatch was

arrested at Wellington; the warrants issued by the coroner and the mayor of

Colchester in 1894 were sent for execution, together with the evidence

taken in the case, and in due course an order was made for the prisoner’s

return to this country.

On his appearance before the magistrates it was conclusively shown to be a

case of mistaken identity, the defendant being Charles Lillywhite and not

Arthur Blatch; but it should be mentioned that besides the witness on whose

information the prisoner was arrested, 2 police constables specially sent out

from Colchester, and another witness, positively identified the prisoner as

Blatch.

In cases in this country where one man has been arrested in mistake for

another and is discharged by the magistrate, it is not the practice for any

compensation to be given from public funds. His Majesty’s Government,

however, are not aware of any previous case in which a mistake of this kind

has led to the defendant being conveyed for so long a distance. If any

application for compensation is made direct by Mr. Lillywhite, it might be

addressed to the mayor of Colchester; but no opinion can be expressed as to

the manner in which it would be dealt with until the precise nature of the

claim is known.

In considering any such application it would be of advantage to His

Majesty’sGovernmenttoknowwhetheritiscustomaryforany

compensation to be given from Federal funds or from other public sources

to persons arrested by mistake, and generally to be furnished with any

informationastothepracticeintheUnitedStateswithregardto

compensation in analogous cases. I shall be grateful if your excellency can

assist me on these points.

I have to add that Lillywhite’s passage back to New Zealand will be paid to

him if he applies to the home office, Whitehall.

I have, etc.,
LANSDOWNE.
aNot printed.

[Document 225]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Choate.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 27, 1901.

No. 708.]

SIR: Your No. 640, of the 14th instant, transmitting the petition of Charles

Lillywhite, a naturalized citizen of the United States, for compensation

from the British Government for his long and unjust detention on suspicion

ofbeinganotherpersonwhostandschargedwithmurder,hasbeen

received.

You indicate that the home secretary and the Marquis of Lansdowne are

favorably disposed toward “the idea of compensating the petitioner for his

long and unjust imprisonment, and you express the opinion that diplomatic

interposition in favor of Lillywhite would be of great benefit to him.

Under the circumstances, you are instructed to present Mr. Lilly-white’s

petition officially to the principal secretary of state for foreign affairs and to

ask that such compensation be granted petitioner as may be just and

equitable, in accordance with his prayer.

Mr. Lillywhite annexes only an uncertified copy of his certificate of

naturalization to his petition. You will demand to see the original which he

offers to produce if required.

No such case as the one under discussion is known to the Department.

In accordance with your request, the original petition is herewith returned.

I am, etc.,
AA

[Document 226]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,November 25, 1901.

No. 714.]

SIR: Referring to Mr. Choate’s dispatch No. 640, of August 14 last, and to

previous correspondence, with reference to the claim of Charles Lillywhite,

I have the honor to inclose herewith the copy of a note which I have

received from the Marquis of Lansdowne, relative to the above case, stating

that,inviewofthespecialhardshipsimposeduponLillywhite,His

Majesty’s Government are prepared to grant him the sum of £600, by way

of solatium, and also the cost of his return journey to New Zealand.

I have caused the information in question to be communicated to Mr.

Barrett, counsel for Mr. Lillywhite, who is not, I believe, in England at

present.

I have, etc.,
HENRYWHITE.
[Inclosure.]
F O,November 21, 1901.

S: As stated in my note to Mr. Choate of the 1st of October last, I referred

to the secretary of state for the home department his excellency’s note of

September 20, together with the petition and other documents with regard

to the case of Mr. Charles Lillywhite, who was brought to this country from

NewZealandunderthefugitiveoffendersact,1881,foramurder

committed at Colchester in 1894.

I have the honor to inform you that the matter has received most careful

consideration by His Majesty’s Government.

The case appears to be one in which Mr. Lillywhite has most unfortunately

been the victim of an honest mistake on the part of certain witnesses, and

that everything arising out of that mistake has been done in due course of

the law to which he was subject in consequence of his residence in a British

colony. Theoretically therefore there is no more reason in this case for

compensationthaninothercasesinwhichpersonsaresubjectedto

inconvenience or imprisonment in consequence of mistakes of the same

character.

Having regard, however, to all the circumstances, which were, no doubt,

such as to impose special hardship on Mr. Lillywhite, His Majesty’s

Government are prepared to grant him the sum of £600 by way of solatium,

and also the cost of his return journey to New Zealand.

The compensation offered in this exceptional case must not, however, be

regarded as forming any precedent for the grant of compensation to other

defendants should any similar case occur.

I have, etc.,
LANSDOWNE.

[Document 227]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,December 10, 1901.

No. 721.]

SIR: Referring” to my dispatch No. 714, of the 25th ultimo, I have the honor

to inclose herewith the copy of a letter which I have received from Mr.

Barratt, counsel for Mr. Lillywhite, and to inquire whether I am to make

application to His Majesty’s Government for an increase in the amount

which they have agreed to pay him, £600, as therein requested.

I have, etc.,
HENRYWHITE.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Barratt to Mr. White.
1 TEMPLEGARDENS,TEMPLE,E.C.[undated.]

DEARMR.WHITE: Lillywhite says he will take the £600, but desires us to see

whether the Goverment of His British Majesty will not grant him some

increase to help in paying his legal expenses and other disbursements.

He is not ungrateful for the offer made, but has been put to large expenses

during the past year, and must pay his relatives who have spent a good deal

in helping him out of his difficulties.

These expenses will largely deplete the £600 when received. He has lost a

permanent place given him at the time of his arrest. His ankles were broken

by the fall from a scaffold, and this permanent place was given him largely

for that reason. He has had treatment in hospital here for his feet, which at

times are so painful that he has difficulty in walking. Hence he is not in the

position of an ordinary, healthy workingman who can actively get about and

attend to work.

He had hoped that £1,000 might have been granted him, and trusts that His

Majesty’s Government can see the way to add to this offer, for he has to

start life again greatly handicapped.

With many thanks for the trouble taken already by the ambassador and

yourself, I am, etc.,
ARTHURBARRATT.

[Document 228]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

EMBASSY,December 20, 1901.

Referring to my dispatch No. 721, I have received letter from Lilly-white’s

counsel, inclosing one from him accepting the sum offered. Shall I inform

foreign office that we accept the proposed settlement of the claim, ask for

the amount, and hand it over to Lillywhite, who seems anxious for money?
WHITE.

[Document 229]
Mr. White to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
London,December 20, 1901.

No. 726.]

SIR: With reference to my dispatch No. 721, of 10th instant, I inclose copies

of a letter which I have received from Mr. Barratt, counsel for Mr. Charles

Lilrywhite, of the one inclosed therewith from the latter, and of the

acablegramwhichIthereuponsentyou,askingwhetherImight,in

accordance with his wishes, inform His Majesty’s Government that we

accept the amount offered in settlement of his claim and hand it over to

him.

I have, etc.,
HENRYWHITE.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Barratt to Mr. White.
1 TEMPLEGARDENS,TEMPLE, E. C.,December 19, 1901.

DMW: The solicitors for Charles Lillywhite send me the inclosed

copy of a letter from him to them (Messrs. Fladgate & Co.), in which he

accepts the offer of £600 made by the British Government in settlement of

his claim.

He does this in view of the delay consequent upon the consideration of his

application for a further sum contained in my previous letter—which

application he withdraws—and also in view of tne doubts expressed as to

the success of such application.

As he is anxious to close the matter speedily, the solicitors ask me to

request you be kind enough to arrange for the payment of the £600 at as

early a date as possible.

Again thanking you for your courtesy in the matter, Yours, etc.,
J.ARTHURBARRATT.
[Subinclosure.]
Mr. Lillywhite to Mr. Williams.
106 LUDGATEHILL,December 17, 1901.

DEARSIR: Yours of the 16th to hand. In my last letters to you I stated that I

accept the terms that the foreign office offer, the reasons being, now as then,

that I having no base at law leaves them master of the situation. Again I

state in answer to you that being unable to do better I accept their terms,

poor as it is, and I require a copy of the settlement.

Yours, etc.,
CHARLESLILLYWHITE.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 230]
Mr. Hay to Mr. White.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 21, 1901.

Accept proposed settlement and hand amount over to Lillywhite against full

receipt.
HAY.

[Document 231]
Mr. Lowther, Charge d’Affaires, to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

BRITISHEMBASSY,
Newport, R. I.,September 14, 1901.

I am instructed by Lord Lansdowne to express to you the feelings of deep

sorrow and consternation with which His Majesty’s Government have

received the news of President McKinley’s death. They share the feelings of

the Government and people of the United States in face of the great national

calamity which has befallen them. It is a grievous misfortune not only to the

community of which he was the chief officer, but for the whole civilized

world in which his personality filled so conspicuous and distinguished a

place. In England, where the President was regarded with widespread

admiration and good will, his death will occasion universal grief. I am to

add the expression of the respectful sympathy of His Majesty’s Government

with Mrs. McKinley and the members of the President’s family in their

irreparable loss.
LOWTHER.

[Document 232]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Lowther.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

SIR: The pressure of public business attendant upon the death of President

McKinley has delayed until now an acknowledgment of your telegram of

Government and people of the United States and with Mrs. McKinley and

the members of the late President’s family in the loss they have sustained by

that sad event.

I shall be obliged if you will assure Lord Lansdowne that the condolement

of His Majesty’s Government is sincerely and gratefully appreciated by

Mrs. McKinley and the Government and people of the United States, who

have been deeply touched by the innumerable manifestations of sorrow and

sympathy they have received from His Majesty’s subjects in all parts of the

world.

I have, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,Acting Secretary.

[Document 232a]
[Untitled]
IN THESENATE OP THEUNITEDSTATES,
December 19, 1901.
Ordered, That there be published in one Senate document the Clayton-

Bulwer Treaty; the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty, with amendments thereto by the

Senate at the last session of Congress, and the treaty that was ratified on

December sixteenth, nineteen hundred and one, together with amendments

proposed thereto, and the votes and pairs on said amendments, and the vote

by which that treaty was ratified.

Attest:
CHARLESG.BENNETT,Secretary.
CLAYTON-BULWERTREATY OFAPRIL19, 1850.
The United States of America and Her Britannic Majesty, being desirous of

consolidating the relations of amity which so happily subsist between them,

by setting forth and fixing in a convention their views and intentions with

reference to any means of communication by ship canal which may be

constructed between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans by the way of the river

San Juan de Nicaragua and either or both of the lakes of Nicaragua or

Managua, to any port or place on the Pacific Ocean, the President of the

United States has conferred full powers on John M. Clayton, Secretary of

StateoftheUnitedStates,andHerBritannicMajestyontheRight

Honorable Sir Henry Lytton Bulwer, a member of Her Majesty’s most

honorable privy council, knight commander of the most honorable Order of

the Bath, and envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Her

Britannic Majesty to the United States, for the aforesaid purpose; and the

said plenipotentiaries having exchanged their full powers, which were

found to be in proper form, have agreed to the following articles: A I.

The Governments of the United States and Great Britain hereby declare that

neither the one nor the other will ever obtain or maintain for itself any

exclusive control over the said ship canal; agreeing that neither will ever

erect or maintain any fortifications commanding the same or in the vicinity

thereof, or occupy, or fortify, or colonize, or assume, or exercise any

dominion over Nicaragua, Costa Rica, the Mosquito coast, or any part of

Central America; nor will either make use of any protection which either

affords or may afford, or any alliance which either has or may have to or

with any state or people, for the purpose of erecting or maintaining any

such fortifications, or of occupying, fortifying, or colonizing Nicaragua,

Costa Rica, the Mosquito coast, or any part of Central America, or of

assuming or exercising dominion over the same; nor will the United States

or Great Britain take advantage of any intimacy, or use any alliance,

connection,orinfluencethateithermaypossesswithanystateor

government through whose territory the said canal may pass, for the

purpose of acquiring or holding, directly or indirectly, for the citizens or

subjects of the one, any rights or advantages in regard to commerce or

navigation through the said canal which shall not be offered on the same

terms to the citizens or subjects of the other.

ARTICLEII.

Vessels of the United States or Great Britain traversing the said canal shall,

in case of war between the contracting parties, be exempted from blockade,

detention, or capture by either of the belligerents; and this provision shall

extend to such a distance from the two ends of the said canal as may

hereafter be found expedient to establish.

A III.

In order to secure the construction of the said canal, the contracting parties

engage that if any such canal shall be undertaken upon fair and equitable

terms by any parties having the authority of the local government or

governments through whose territory the same may pass, then the persons

employed in making the said canal, and their property used, or to be used,

for that object, shall be protected, from the commencement of the said canal

to its completion, by the Governments of the United States and Great

Britain,fromunjustdetention,confiscation,seizure,oranyviolence

whatsoever.

exercise with any state, states, or governments possessing or claiming to

possess any jurisdiction or right over the territory which the said canal shall

traverse, or which shall be near the waters applicable thereto, in order to

induce such states or governments to facilitate the construction of the said

canal by every means in their power. And furthermore, the United States

and Great Britain agree to use their good offices, wherever or however it

may be most expedient, in order to procure the establishment of two free

ports, one at each end of the said canal.

ARTICLEV.
The contracting parties further engage, that when the said canal shall have

been completed, they will protect it from interruption, seizure, or unjust

confiscation, and that they will guarantee the neutrality thereof, so that the

said canal may forever be open and free, and the capital invested therein

secure. Nevertheless, the Governments of the United States and Great

Britain, in according their protection to the construction of the said canal,

andguaranteeingitsneutralityandsecuritywhencompleted,always

understand that this protection and guarantee are granted conditionally, and

may be withdrawn by both governments, or either government, if both

regulations concerning the traffic thereupon as are contrary to the spirit and

intention of this convention, either by making unfair discriminations in

favor of the commerce of one of the contracting parties over the commerce

of the other, or by imposing oppressive exactions or unreasonable tolls upon

guarantee without first giving six months’ notice to the other.

A VI

The contracting parties in this convention engage to invite every state with

which both or either have friendly intercourse to enter into stipulations with

them similar to those which they have entered into with each other, to the

end that all other states may share in the honor and advantage of having

contributed to a work of such general interest and importance as the canal

herein contemplated. And the contracting parties likewise agree that each

shall enter into treaty stipulations with such of the Central American States

as they may deem advisable, for the purpose of more effectually carrying

out the great design of this convention, namely, that of constructing and

maintaining the said canal as a ship communication between the two oceans

for the benefit of mankind, on equal terms to all, and of protecting the

same; and they also agree, that the good offices of either shall be employed,

when requested by the other, in aiding and assisting the negotiation of such

treaty stipulations; and should any differences arise as to right or property

over the territory through which the said canal shall pass between the states

or governments of Central America, and such differences should in any way

impede or obstruct the execution of the said canal, the Governments of the

United States and Great Britain will use their good offices to settle such

differences in the manner best suited to promote the interests of the said

canal, and to strengthen the bonds of friendship and alliance which exist

between the contracting parties.

ARTICLEVII.

It being desirable that no time should be unnecessarily lost in commencing

and constructing the said canal, the Governments of the United States and

Great Britain determine to give their support and encouragement to such

persons or company as may first offer to commence the same, with the

necessary capital, the consent of the local authorities, and on such principles

as accord with the spirit and intention of this convention; and if any persons

orcompanyshouldalreadyhave,withanyStatethroughwhichthe

proposed ship canal may pass, a contract for the construction of such a

canal as that specified in this convention, to the stipulations of which

contract neither of the contracting parties in this convention have any just

cause to object, and the said persons or company shall moreover have made

preparations, and expended time, money, and trouble, on the faith of such

contract, it is hereby agreed that such persons or company shall have a

priority of claim over every other person, persons, or company to the

protection of the Governments of the United States and Great Britain, and

be allowed a year from the date of the exchange of the ratifications of this

convention for concluding their arrangements, and presenting evidence of

sufficient capital subscribed to accomplish the contemplated undertaking; it

being understood that if, at the expiration of the aforesaid period, such

persons or company be not able to commence and carry out the proposed

enterprise, then the Governments of the United States and Great Britain

shall be free to afford their protection to any other persons or company that

shall be prepared to commence and proceed with the construction of the

canal in question.

ARTICLEVIII.

The Governments of the United States and Great Britain having not only

desired, in entering into this convention, to accomplish a particular object,

but also to establish a general principle,’ they hereby agree to extend their

protection, by treaty stipulations, to any other practicable communications,

whether by canal or railway, across the isthmus which connects North and

South America, and especially to the interoceanic communications, should

the same prove to be practicable, whether by canal or railway, which are

now proposed to be established by the way of Tehuantepec or Panama. In

granting, however, their joint protection to any such canals or railways as

are by this article specified, it is always understood by the United States and

Great Britain that the parties constructing or owning the same shall impose

no other charges or conditions of traffic thereupon than the aforesaid

Governments shall approve of as just and equitable; and that the same

canals or railways, being open to the citizens and subjects of the United

States and Great Britain on equal terms, shall also be open on like terms to

the citizens and subjects of every other State which is willing to grant

thereto such protection as the United States and Great Britain engage to

afford.

A IX.

The ratifications of this convention shall be exchanged at Washington

within six months from this day, or sooner if possible.

In faith whereof we, the respective plenipotentiaries, have signed this

convention and have hereunto affixed our seals.

Done at Washington the nineteenth day of April, anno Domini one thousand

eight hundred and fifty.
JOHNM.CLAYTON.[L. S.]
HENRYLYTTONBULWER.[L. S.]
HAY-PAUNCEFOTETREATY.
MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, TRANSMITTING A CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND GREAT BRITAIN TO

FACILITATE THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SHIP CANAL TO CONNECT THE ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC OCEANS, AND TO REMOVE ANY OBJECTION WHICH MIGHT

ARISE OUT OF THE CONVENTION COMMONLY CALLED THE CLAYTON-BULWER TREATY.
To the Senate:
I transmit herewith, with a view to receive the advice and consent of the

Senate to its ratification, a convention this day signed by the respective

plenipotentiaries of the United States and Great Britain to facilitate the

construction of a ship canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, and

to remove any objection which might arise out of the convention of April

19, 1850, commonly called the Clayton-Bulwer treaty, to the construction

of such canal under the auspices of the Government of the United States.

Washington, D. C., February 5, 1900.
The United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of the United

Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, being desirous to

facilitate the construction of a ship canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific

Oceans, and to that end to remove any objection which may arise out of the

Convention of April 19, 1850, commonly called the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty,

to the construction of such canal under the auspices of the Government of

theUnitedStates,withoutimpairingthe“generalprinciple”of

neutralization established in Article VIII of that Convention, have for that

purpose appointed as their Plenipotentiaries:

The President of the United States, John Hay, Secretary of State

of the United States of America,

AndHerMajestytheQueenofGreatBritainandIreland,

Empress of India, The Right Honble. Lord Pauncefote, G. C. B.,

G.C.M.G.,HerMajesty’s AmbassadorExtraordinaryand

Plenipotentiary to the United States;

Who, having communicated to each other their full powers, which were

found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following

articles: ARTICLEI.

It is agreed that the canal may be constructed under the auspices of the

Government of the United States, either directly at its own cost or by gift or

loan of money to individuals or corporations or through subscription to or

purchase of stock or shares, and that, subject to the provisions of the present

Convention, the said Government shall have and enjoy all the rights

incident to such construction, as well as the exclusive right of providing for

the regulation and management of the canal.

“general principle” of neutralization established in Article VIII of the

Clayton-Bulwer Convention,which convention is hereby superseded, adopt,

as the basis of such neutralization, the following rules, substantially as

embodiedintheconventionbetweenGreatBritainandcertainother

Powers, signed at Constantinople October 29, 1888, for the Free Navigation

of the Suez Maritime Canal, that is to say: 1. The canal shall be free and

open, in time of war as in time of peace, to the vessels of commerce and of

war of all nations, on terms of entire equality, so that there shall be no

discrimination against any nation or its citizens or subjects in respect of the

conditions or charges of traffic, or otherwise.

2. The canal shall never be blockaded, nor shall any right of war be

exercised nor any act of hostility be committed within it.

3. Vessels of war of a belligerent shall not revictual nor take any stores in

the canal except so far as may be strictly necessary; and the transit of such

vessels through the canal shall be effected with the least possible delay, in

accordance with the regulations in force, and with only such intermission as

may result from the necessities of the service.

Prizes shall be in all respects subject to the same rules as vessels of war of

the belligerents.

4. No belligerent shall embark or disembark troops, munitions of war or

warlike materials in the canal except in case of accidental hindrance of the

transit, and in such case the transit shall be resumed with all possible

dispatch.

5. The provisions of this article shall apply to waters adjacent to the canal,

within three marine miles of either end. Vessels of war of a belligerent shall

not remain in such waters longer than twenty-four hours at any one time

except in case of distress, and in such case shall depart as soon as possible;

but a vessel of war of one belligerent shall not depart within twenty-four

hours from the departure of a vessel of war of the other belligerent.
It is agreed, however, that none of the immediately foregoing conditions and

stipulations in sections numbered one, two, three, four, and five of this

articleshallapplytomeasureswhichtheUnitedStatesmayfindit

necessary to take for securing by its own forces the defense of the United

States and the maintenance of public order.
6. The plant, establishments, buildings, and all works necessary to the

construction, maintenance and operation of the canal shall be deemed to be

part thereof, for the purposes of this convention, and in time of war as in

time of peace shall enjoy complete immunity from attack or injury by

belligerents and from acts calculated to impair their usefulness as part of the

canal.

7. No fortifications shall be erected commanding the canal or the waters

adjacent. The United States, however, shall be at liberty to maintain such

military police along the canal as may be necessary to protect it against

lawlessness and disorder.

[ARTICLEIII.]

[The High Contracting Parties will, immediately upon the exchange of the

ratifications of this Convention, bring it to the notice of the other Powers

and invite them to adhere to it.]

ARTICLEIV.

The present convention shall be ratified by the President of the United

States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by Her

Britannic Majesty; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington

or at London within six months from the date hereof, or earlier if possible.

In faith whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed this convention

and thereunto affixed their seals.

Done in duplicate at Washington the fifth day of February in the year of Our

Lord one thousand nine hundred.
JOHNHAY.

P .

[Document 233]
MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, TRANSMITTING A

CONVENTIONBETWEENTHEUNITEDSTATESANDGREATBRITAIN,TO

FACILITAE THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SHIP CANAL TO CONNECT THE ATLANTIC

AND PACIFIC OCEANS, SIGNED AT WASHINGTON, NOVEMBER18, 1901.
DECEMBER4, 1901.—Read; treaty read the first time and referred to the

Committee on Foreign Relations and, together with the message, ordered to

be printed in confidence for the use of the Senate.

DECEMBER9, 1901.—Reported without amendment.

DECEMBER10. 1901.—Injunction of secrecy removed.

DECEMBER16, 1901.—Ratified; injunction of secrecy removed from proposed

amendments and votes thereon, and vote of ratification.

Amendments appear in italics.

Article III was stricken out by Senate.
To the Senate:
I transmit, for the advice and consent of the Senate to its ratification, a

convention signed November 18, 1901, by the respective plenipotentiaries

of the United States and Great Britain to facilitate the construction of a ship

canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans by whatever route may be

considered expedient, and to that end to remove any objection which may

arise out of the convention of April 19, 1850, commonly called the Clayton-

Bulwer treaty, to the construction of such canal under the auspices of the

Government of the United States, without impairing the “general principle”

of neutralization established in Article VIII of that convention.

IalsoincloseareportfromtheSecretaryofState,submittingthe

convention for my consideration.

THEODOREROOSEVELT.
WHITEHOUSE,
Washington,December 4, 1901.

THEPRESIDENT: I submit for your consideration and for transmission to the

Senate, should you deem it proper to do so, with a view to obtaining the

advice and consent of that body to its ratification, a convention signed

November 18, 1901, by the respective plenipotentiaries of the United States

and Great Britain to facilitate the construction of a ship canal to connect the

Atlantic and Pacific oceans by whatever route may be considered expedient,

and to that end to remove any objection which may arise out of the

convention of April 19, 1850, commonly called the Clayton-Bulwer treaty,

to the construction of such canal under the auspices of the Government of

the United States, without impairing the “general principle” of

neutralization established in Article VIII of that convention.

Respectfully submitted.
JOHNHAY.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 2, 1901.

The United States of America and His Majesty Edward the Seventh, of the

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of the British Dominions

beyond the Seas, King, and Emperor of India, being desirous to facilitate

the construction of a ship canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans,

by whatever route may be considered expedient, and to that end to remove

any objection which may arise out of the Convention of the 19th April,

1850, commonly called the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, to the construction of

such canal under the auspices of the Government of the United States,

without impairing the “general principle” of neutralization established in

Article VIII of that Convention, have for that purpose appointed as their

Plenipotentiaries:

The President of the United States, John Hay, Secretary of State

of the United States of America;

And his Majesty Edward the Seventh, of the United Kingdom of

Great Britain and Ireland, and of the British Dominions beyond

the Seas, King, and Emperor of India, the Right Honourable Lord

Pauncefote, G. C. B., G. C. M. G., His Majesty’s Ambassador

Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the United States;

Who, having communicated to each other their full powers, which were

found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following

Articles:

ARTICLEI.

The high contracting parties agree that the present treaty shall supersede the

afore-mentioned convention of the 19th April, 1850.

ARTICLEII.

It is agreed that the canal may be constructed under the auspices of the

Government of the United States either directly at its own cost, or by gift or

loan of money to individuals or corporations, or through subscription to or

purchase of stock or shares, and that, subject to the provisions of the present

treaty, the said Government shall have and enjoy all the rights incident to

such construction, as well as the exclusive right of providing for the

regulation and management of the canal.

ARTICLEIII.

The United States adopts, as the basis of the neutralization of such ship

canal, the following rules, substantially as embodied in the Convention of

Constantinople, signed the 28th October, 1888, for the free navigation of

the Suez Canal, that is to say:

1. The canal shall be free and open to the vessels of commerce

and of war of all nations observing these Rules, on terms of entire

equality, so that there shall be no discrimination against any such

nation, or its citizens or subjects, in respect of the conditions or

charges of traffic or otherwise. Such conditions and charges of

traffic shall be just and equitable.

2. The canal shall never be blockaded, nor shall any right of war

be exercised nor any act of hostility be committed within it. The

United States, however, shall be at liberty to maintain such

military police along the canal as may be necessary to protect it

against lawlessness and disorder.

3. Vessels of war of a belligerent shall not re victual nor take any

stores in the canal except so far as may be strictly necessary; and

the transit of such vessels through the canal shall be effected with

the least possible delay in accordance with the Regulations in

force, and with only such intermission as may result from the

necessities of the service.

Prizes shall be in all respects subject to the same rules as vessels

of war of the belligerents.

4. No belligerent shall embark or disembark troops, munitions of

war, or warlike materials in the canal, except in case of accidental

hindrance of the transit, and in such case the transit shall be

resumed with all possible dispatch.

5. The provisions of this article shall apply to waters adjacent to

the canal, within 3 marine miles of either end. Vessels of war of a

belligerent shall not remain in such waters longer than twenty-

four hours at any one time, except in case of distress, and in such

case shall depart as soon as possible; but a vessel of war of one

belligerent shall not depart within twenty-four hours from the

departure of a vessel of war of the other belligerent.

6. The plant, establishments, buildings, and all works necessary to

the construction, maintenance, and operation of the canal shall be

deemed to be part thereof, for the purposes of this treaty, and in

time of war, as in time of peace, shall enjoy complete immunity

from attack or injury by belligerents, and from acts calculated to

impair their usefulness as part of the canal.

ARTICLEIV.

It is agreed that no change of territorial sovereignty or of international

relations of the country or countries traversed by the before-mentioned

canal shall affect the general principle of neutralization or the obligation of

the high contracting parties under the present treaty.

ARTICLEV.

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States, by

and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Britannic

Majesty; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington or at

London at the earliest possible time within six months from the date hereof.

In faith whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty and

hereunto affixed their seals.

Done in duplicate at Washington, the 18th day of November, in the year of

our Lord one thousand nine hundred and one.
JOHNHAY.[SEAL.]
PAUNCEFOTE.[SEAL.]

[Document 233a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 31, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF GREECE WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

The Greek Government does not, as a general statement, recognize a

change of nationality on the part of a former Greek without the consent of

the King, and a former Greek who has not completed his military service

and who is not exempt therefrom under the military code may be arrested

upon his return to Greece. The practice of the Greek Government is not,

however, uniform, but American citizens of Greek origin are advised to find

out before returning what status they may expect to enjoy. Information

should be sought directly from the Greek Government, and this Department

always refuses to act as intermediary in seeking the information.

There is no treaty on the subject of naturalized citizens between the United

States and Greece.

Passports are not required in Greece, but may be useful in establishing

American citizenship.

[Document 234]
Mr. Francis to Mr. Hay.
TROY,N.Y.,July 13, 1901.

No. 26.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that a careful perusal of the records of the

legation at Athens, supplemented by outside inquiries, convinced me it was

my duty to secure, if possible, the discharge from the Greek army of

Leonidas Economopoulos, a native of Greece, who in 1899 became a

naturalized American citizen.

This particular case had been the subject of extensive correspondence

between my immediate predecessor and the Greek Government for a period

extending over one year and a half; but, owing to the fact that no treaty

covering such cases existed between the United States and Greece, the

earnest, intelligent and persistent efforts of Mr. Hardy had been unavailing

in the premises.

I beg to submit the following correspondence:

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Athens, March 27, 1901.
His Excellency Mr. N T ,
Minister of War.
Mr. M : I beg to call your attention to the fact that an

American citizen is at present serving in the Greek army, and to

request your excellency to give the particulars of the case, which I

respectfully submit, your careful consideration.

Leonidas Economopoulos emigrated from Greece to the United

States in January, 1893, at the age of 15 years, and, in accordance

with the laws of that country, was duly naturalized in 1899. In

September of the same year, receiving a telegram imforming him

of the illness of his father, he hurried to his former home near

Sparta without having previously procured royal assent to his

expatriation from His Majesty the King of Greece. To his mind

theurgencyofthesummonsadmittedofnodelay.He

contemplated an early return to Brooklyn, where he resided.

Shortly after his arrival in Greece, Economopoulos was arrested,

and notwithstanding his declaration of American citizenship and

against his protest, was compelled to enter the Greek army. In

Athens he was assigned to the Fourth Battery, Second Regiment

Field Artillery, and he is still in the Greek service.

While there is no naturalization treaty between Greece and the

United States, it is believed your sense of justice in this particular

case, as well as an act of comity toward the Government I

represent, will induce your excellency to promptly order the

discharge of Mr. Economopoulos in order that he may return to

the country of his adoption where he is in every respect possessed

of full citizenship.

In embracing this opportunity to exchange with you felicitations

on the very friendly relations so happily existing between our

respective Governments, I take occasion, etc.,

C SF
[Translation.]

A ,March 29, 1901.

[No. 21759.]

Kingdom of Greece.
The Ministry of War to his excellency the United States Minister.

SIR: In reply to your private and friendly letter of the 27th of

March, relative to the dismissal from the Greek army of Leonidas

Economopoulos, I have the honor to inform you that although I

have the greatest wish to comply with your excellency’s wish and

to consider this act one of the smallest proofs of my friendly

sentimentstowardtheGovernmentwhichyourepresent,

unfortunately the laws of this country do not permit me to order

thatthenameoftheabove-mentionedEconomopoulosbe

removed from the register of the conscripts and to order his

dismissal from the Greek army, because he did not observe the

formalitiesrequiredbytheGreeklawstoobtainforeign

nationality, as explained in the correspondence that has been

previously exchanged on this subject. If an exception is made in

the case of Economopoulos it must be extended as well to all

Greeks who are residing in foreign countries.

However, as I am inspired with extremely friendly sentiments

toward the Government of the United States, and also toward

your excellency, I shall order the discharge of Economopoulos

from the ranks of the Greek army if I can find any reason

whatsoever (of health or family) permitting me to dismiss him.

I take this occasion, etc.,

N.TZAMADOS,The Minister.
M W,
Athens, June 2(15),1901.

Mr. M : I hasten to inform you that the soldier Economopoulos

has just been discharged from the army. I have done my utmost

since assuming the office of minister of war to expedite a solution

ofthecaseinwhichyourexcellencyhaskindlyinterested

yourself, and I am pleased to know that the desired result has not

been long delayed.

I beg you to accept, etc.,

B. BOUDOURIS,
Minister of War ad interim.
I have the honor to report that Economopoulos was actually discharged

from the military service of Greece June 25, 1901.

I am, etc.,
CHARLESS.FRANCIS.

[Document 235]
Mr. Francis to Mr. Hay.
TROY,N.Y.,July 18, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to report the receipt to-day of the following letter from

Louis (or Leonidas) Economopoulos, the American subject whose discharge

from the Greek army after two years’ service was secured June 25, 1901:

ATHENS,June 25, 1901.
To His Excellency Hon. CHARLESS.FRANCIS,
United States Minister:
SIR: I beg leave to express my profound gratitude for the efforts

and energy displayed by your excellency in obtaining my release

from the Greek army, an act which few nations’ representatives

could accomplish from a country with which there does not exist

any naturalization treaty. How can I be otherwise than a faithful

citizen of my beloved free and glorious adopted country, and for

which in support of its Union and Constitution at any time I shall

cheerfully shed my last drop of blood.

I pray, honorable sir, convey to our Government my everlasting

gratitude.

I have, etc.,

LE
I am, etc.,
C SF

[Document 236]
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

ATHENS,September 15, 1901.

The sad news of the death of the President of the United States, victim of an

odious crime, has caused the Royal Government profound feeling; and

therefore,initsname,Iprayyoutoacceptmysentimentsofkeen

sympathy. Greece joins in the profound sorrow which the people of the

United States of America suffer on this sad occasion.
ROMANOS,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 237]
Mr. Hay to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

Our people and Government in their hour of grief are deeply touched by the

sympathy shown by the Greek Government and nation.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 238]
Mr. Francis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Athens,November 22, 1901.

No. 39.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that during the last few days Athens has been

the scene of mob demonstration which yesterday almost assumed the

proportions of a revolution. Briefly, the reason for this disturbance was the

recent translation and publication in Athens of the Bible in vulgar Greek.

Expressions were employed by the translators, which the Hellenes regard as

unfit to be printed in the Holy Scriptures. The work was inaugurated and

completed with the approval of the Metropolitan, the head of the synod of

the Greek Church in Greece.

The students of the university at Athens and the Greeks generally are

bitterly opposed to any change in the text of their Bible, which, while of

ancient origin and dating back to the Byzantine period, is understood by all

and is written in the purest Greek. * * *

Mass meetings were held in front of the university buildings on the

afternoons of November 19 and 20, at which violent speeches were made in

denunciation of the objectionable biblical translation and of all those

identified with it. Large crowds of excited citizens paraded the streets, and

the signs were ominous of a serious public demonstration.

Yesterday, November 21, was a fête day. The shops and factories were

closed and the streets were thronged with all classes of people. A public

demonstration was announced to take place in the afternoon, in which it

was advertised that the different labor unions would participate. Fearing the

result, the Government ordered out all the military troops in the city, and

800marineswerebroughtto AthensfromtheGreekmen-of-warat

Piraesus. Infantry, cavalry, and large bodies of gendarmes were posted at

different points in the city and a cordon of marines was thrown about the

palace.

This show of military force had the effect of aggravating the situation, and

lateintheafternoontheexpectedcollisiontookplacebetweenthe

authorities and the aroused Athenians. The mob, now numbering over

25,000, proceeded to the ministry of finance and demolished the windows

of the building. Thereupon, shots were fired upon the crowd by police

officers and employees of the ministry. The rioters responded with pistols

and stones, and were only dispersed after a cavalry charge and several

carbine volleys. A few minutes later another mob demonstration was made

in front of the residence of the premier, Mr. Theotaky, and again the troops

and gendarmes made use of their rifles to clear the streets.

The casualties were as follows: Eight killed and upward of 60 wounded.

The dead bodies and 32 of the wounded were carried to the municipal

hospital. Probably as many more were wounded, but escaped identification,

as they were conveyed by friends to their respective homes. That the

casualties were not greater may be explained by the fact that the soldiers

were unquestionably in sympathy with the sentiments of the rioters, and did

not direct their fire upon the crowds, the effective shooting being done by

the police or gendarmes.

After a conference had been held during the night between King George

and the members of the ministry and prominent citizens, the resignation of

the Metropolitan, the titular head of the church in Greece, was accepted at 4

o’clock this morning (November 22). By royal decree, signed at the same

hour, the director of police and the prefect of police were both removed and

their positions filled by new appointees. The Government printing office

issued an edition of the Official Gazette at 6 o’clock a. m. containing the

above announcements.

The burial of the victims of yesterday’s conflict took place this afternoon.

Many thousands of people followed the single funeral procession to the

cemetery, every shop in Athens was closed, and on all sides profound regret

and grief were expressed at the outcome of yesterday’s tragedy.

I have, etc.,
CHARLESS.FRANCIS.

[Document 239]
Mr. Francis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Athens,December 9, 1901.

No. 45.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that yesterday priests read from every pulpit

in AthensadecreeoftheHolySynodwhichprohibits,onpainof

excommunication, the sale or reading of any translation of the Bible.

This action was evidently taken by the religious authorities in order to

completely restore public confidence that no attempt to publish a vulgar

version of the Holy Scriptures will be tolerated by the Greek Church. It will

be recalled that this question precipitated a conflict in the streets of Athens

on November 21 ultimo between a mob of over 25,000 students and

workmen and citizens and the Government troops, in which 8 persons were

killed and over 60 wounded.

Several years ago Her Majesty Queen Olga, actuated by the best of motives,

published at her own expense a translation of the Bible in common use

(which is in the Greek of the Byzantine period) into the modern language of

Greece. It was not sold, but distributed free among the hospitals and other

charitable institutions of this city. While the gracious act of Her Majesty did

not meet with public favor, it has never been alleged that the translator of

that particular version of the Bible employed any language which could be

construed as vulgar. However, in view of the action of the Holy Synod as

above stated, this indirect authoritative reflection by the Church of Greece

on the act of Queen Olga is likely to produce disagreeable complications.

I am, etc.,
C SF

Guatemala and Honduras
Contents

[Document 240]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Hunter.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 27, 1900.

No. 299.]

SIR: I inclose herewith copy of a dispatch from the consul-general at

Guatemala City, together with its inclosures, relating to the claim of

Siegfried Koenigsberger for certain moneys confiscated by the Guatemalan

customs authorities, and for the annoyance and losses attendant upon the

action complained of. As nearly as the Department can gather the facts in

the case it appears: That said Koenigsberger and his brother arrived at San

José de Guatemala from Guatemala City on December 7, 1899, holding

checks for two valises which arrived with them as baggage; that said valises

were alleged to contain $2,300 in silver; that Koenigsberger was called to

the office of the commandante of the port at about 9 o’clock in the evening,

and upon identifying the valises was commanded to open them, which he

refused to do, claiming that it was after business hours for the custom-

house, and further that as he still held the checks the valises were in the

hands of the railroad company; that on the following morning he was called

again to the office of the commandante and ordered to open the valises, and

upon his refusal he and his brother were imprisoned for about two hours,

when their release was secured by the United States consul; that they were

again summoned by the commandante, and in the presence of the consul

opened the valises, when, on counting the money, they discovered a

shortageof$508;whichamounthadbeenremoved“withouttheir

knowledge or consent;” that the remainder, $1,792, was taken by the

commandante and deposited in the mint, subject to the order of the minister

offinance;thatonthefollowingday,whiletheywerereturningto

Guatemala City, they were arrested by the chief of police of Escuintla and

there detained for twenty-four hours, then ordered back to San José, still

under arrest; but that on the way they received a telegram signed by the

president of the Republic which secured their release.

It further appears that a presidential decree had been issued, prohibiting the

exportation of silver, but that said decree “has been practically a dead letter,

inasmuch as thousands of dollars weekly has been exported by Government

permission.”

From the facts as above related it would appear that for the money ($508)

abstracted while in possession of and in course of transportation by the

railroad company the remedy, if any, is against said company in the courts.

With regard to the remainder of the money, $1,792, which it is inferred was

confiscated in virtue of a law prohibiting the exportation of silver from the

country, it is the opinion of the Department that it was Koenigsberger’s

duty, when requested to do so, to submit the valises to the customs

authorities for the purpose of examining them to ascertain whether they

contained silver intended to be smuggled out of the country. The fact that

the Messrs. Koenigsberger had applied for permission to embark and were

about to leave the country and that the valises stood at the wharf would

appear to justify the inference of the officials that they were about to take

the valises, with their contents, from the country in violation of law.

The consul-general reports that you are of opinion that the money was

unlawfully seized and should be returned to its owners. If you find that the

seizure and detention of the money are unlawful, you will bring the matter

to the attention of the Guatemalan Government and request the prompt

return of the money.

It is also stated in the consul-general’s report that the law against the

exportationofsilverdoesnotauthorizeimprisonment,butonly

confiscation, as a penalty for smuggling. If this statement is accurate you

may report to the Department whether the Messrs. Koenigsberger have an

adequate remedy in damages before the local tribunals for such unlawful

arrest I am, etc.
JH
[Inclosure.]

CONSULATE-GENERAL OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Guatemala,September 14, 1900.

No. 83.]

aSIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s No. 42of

July 30, 1900, inclosing copy of a memorial of Siegfried Koenigsberger

preferring a claim against the Government of Guatemala for $2,300 pesos

silver alleged to have been confiscated by the Guatemalan Government, and

$5,000 United States gold for damages said to have been sustained for loss

of the use of the money and annoyance and inconvenience suffered from

false imprisonment, and instructing me to make an investigation and report.

Knowledge of this case first came to me through Minister Hunter, who

handed me the metal checks for valises left in his care by Siegfried

Koenigsberger, saying at the same time that this money must be returned to

the Koenigsbergers as the seizure was unlawful. This was the day before the

minister left this capital for the United States on leave. I was under the

impression that Minister Hunter had made some representation to the

Guatemalan Government, and therefore did not consult the Government

during my short season as chargé d’affaires.

I beg to inclose letters from our former consular agent at San José de

Guatemala as well as from former employees of the railroad and Agencia

Maritima, etc., at San José.

A presidential decree was promulgated prohibiting the exportation of silver,

which decree has been practically a dead letter, inasmuch as thousands of

dollars weekly has been exported by Government permission. I am not

aware of any penalty attached to the decree other than the confiscation of

the silver. The arrest of the Koenigsbergers was fully unwarranted and in no

sense according to the provision of the decree in question. I am not

informed as to the reasons the authorities advance for their arrest. That they

were arrested and confined in jail in Escuintla and there detained for

twenty-four hours can not be disputed. The two valises in question were

checked in Guatemala in a manner indicating that they were to be taken on

board the steamer, as is usual with all baggage checked to the pier, and yet

decree against the exportation of silver, and knowing full well the vigilance

of the customs authorities in this regard, would attempt to carry out in two

valises $2,300 in silver, which in no event could pass the officials, the

weight readily indicating the contents.

I have, etc.,
JAMESC.MCNALLY,
Consul-General.
[Subinclosure 1.]
Mr. Vair to Mr. McNally.
UNITEDSTATESCONSULARAGENCY,
San José,August 27, 1900.

No. 22.]

SIR: In reply to your No. 20, I will say the only reference I find to the

Koenigsberger case in this office is the following unnumbered letter of

January 24, 1900:

“UNITEDSTATESCONSUL-GENERAL,Guatemala:
“In reply to your favor of the 19th of January regarding the

seizure of valises belonging to Koenigsberger, the facts, as far as I

have been able to obtain them, are as follows: The valises were

checked from Guatemala to the port, and on the arrival of the

baggage on the outer end of the pier the valises with the checks

still attached were taken by the comandante. My first information

of the affair was on the following morning, when I received a

request from Koenigsberger to call on him at the comandancia,

where he was detained. I secured his release on my promise to

produce him when wanted.

“About noon of the same day I was requested by the comandante

to be present at the opening of the valises. The owners were also

there, and in order to prevent the locks from being broken opened

them under protest.

“UPTONLORENTZ,

“Consular Agent.”

As the people in the railroad and on the pier have been changed, I can get

no further information there. The factor of the company says that the

Koenigsbergers were not on the pier to embark when the baggage was

seized. They had applied for their permission to embark, but had not

actually received it. I believe the Government claim that as evidence that

they were about to embark.

I am, etc.,
ROGERR.VAIR,Consular Agent.
[Subinclosure 2.]
Mr. Swan to Mr. McNally
GUATEMALA,September 3, 1900.

SIR: In December, 1899, I was agent for the Guatemala Central Railroad

Company, being in charge of the station at San José. On the 8th of

DecemberagentlemannamedKoenigsbergerpresentedtwobaggage

checks, claiming his baggage, which was checked at Guatemala the day

before. The numbers on the checks indicated that the baggage had been

checked direct to the end of the pier, and I told Mr. Koenigsberger that he

would find his baggage on the pier. He then left, but returned in about an

hour saying that his baggage was not on the pier; that he had been informed

that it had been seized by the comandante, and that as it was in the care of

the railroad company and he held their checks, he wanted me to get his

baggage. I told him that while it was true that the railroad company had

checked his baggage, it had not been checked to San José station, but to the

end of the pier, and had been delivered to the Agenda Maritima direct by the

train baggagemaster without even passing through my hands, and that I

could do nothing at all; he would have to present his checks to that

company, who had received the baggage from the railroad company. He did

this, but could not recover his baggage, as it had been seized by officials of

the GovernmentF.S.SWAN.
[Subinclosure 3.]
Mr. Myer to Mr. McNally.
GUATEMALACITY,September 3, 1900.
SIR: I saw and talked with the Koenigsberger brothers on the train from San

José de Guatemala to Escuintla on or about the 7th day of December, 1899.

They related to me the circumstances of their arrest, and said they intended

putting the matter in the hands of the American minister immediately upon

their arrival in Guatemala.

I left the train at Escuintla, and before leaving the station I saw them taken

off the train by policemen and conducted to jail. I afterwards saw them in

jail at Escuintla, and at their earnest request endeavored to help them out of

their predicament, but failed to do them any good. They were in jail from

about 11.30 o’clock a. m., December 9 or 10, until 11.30 o’clock the next

day. I saw them at the train the next day under police guard. They told me

they were to be taken back to San José de Guatemala, but before the train

left the station at Escuintla, they were taken off and conducted away by

policemen.

I did not know them prior to their trouble and have never talked to them

since.
JBM
[Subinclosure 4.]
G ,August 31, 1900.

DS: In compliance with your request that I write you what I know of the

7, 1899, I give the following as my part in the affair: On the night in

question I was on the pier assisting in the embarking of passengers and

baggage for the steamer which was to sail that night, when the chief of the

police at San José came to me with an aide and demanded the delivery of

two valises, bearing railroad strap-checks, and which I happened to know

belonged to the Messrs. Koenigsberger. I refused the delivery, saying that

the agencia company was responsible for baggage bearing checks, and that

we could only deliver on presentation of corresponding checks, but added

that if an order to deliver from the comandante of the port relieving us from

all responsibility was presented to the factor of the Agencia Maritima

Nacional Limitada, he would in all probability order the packages to be

delivered to the comandante.

The police representative left to secure the order, and I reported the matter

to the factor. Later I was told by the factor that the comandante had

arranged the matter, and that the baggage had been delivered to him.

Very truly, yours,
STUARTBELLOWS,
Former employee of the Agencia Maritima Nacional Limitada.
[Subinclosure 5.]
Mr. Lorentz to Mr. McNally.
G C,August 22, 1900.

S: Referring to your request directed to me personally yesterday for a

statement of my recollections of the facts in the case relating to the silver

coin taken from the Koenigsberger brothers at the port of San José de

GuatemalainDecember,1899,bytheauthoritiesoftheGuatemalan

Government, I beg to submit below my recollections of the case.

The morning following the seizure of the silver coin I was sent for by the

Koenigsbergerbrothers,whoweredetainedasprisonersatthe

comandancia, asking me to come and see them and endeavor to secure their

release, which” I succeeded in doing by application to the comandante of

the port, Don Salvador R. Cabrera.

After the release of the elder Mr. Koenigsberger, who exhibited papers

comandante of the port on the evening previous, and that said valises were

his property; that they contained silver coin amounting to something over

$2,000 in silver coinage of the republics of Peru, Chili, and Guatemala. He

further stated that these valises containing said coin were checked by the

Guatemala Central Railway Company, said checks being in their possession

and duplicates on valises. That the seizure was made directly from that

company, he not having surrendered the duplicate checks, and furthermore

that he had not endeavored or at any time attempted to export said coin, and

requested that the valises should be delivered to himself. Notwithstanding

said personal request, the comandante of the port took the two valises into

his possession and retained the same until the following morning, and also,

he stated, the comandante still retained the same.

Some time after the release of Koenigsberger I received a written request

from the comandante to call at his office at noon relative to the case. This I

did, Mr. Koenigsberger and his brother and some eight or ten persons more

being present, most of whom were employees of the Government of the

port of San José, such as secretaries and clerks. The comandante then had

brought the two valises to the office and told Mr. Koenigsberger to open

proceeded to open them with his keys.

My remembrance now is that the Government officials proceeded to take all

the articles out of the two valises, collecting all the coined silver, which

amountedtosomethingover$1,800,whichwasplaceduponthe

comandante’s desk and there counted. After this he remained in possession

of the silver, returning the valises and other articles taken from them to Mr.

Koenigsberger. This coin was retained by the comandante against the

protest of both Mr. Koenigsberger and myself, and presumably on the

grounds that it had been the intention of Mr. Koenigsberger to export the

silver, though this last was denied by Mr. Koenigsberger.

The next day I had occasion to go to Guatemala City. On the same train

were Siegfried Koenigsberger and his brother. When the train arrived at

Escuintla the authorities entered the train and arrested both, taking them to

the jail at Escuintla. On arriving in the city I immediately notified the

United States minister, W. Godfrey Hunter.

I am, etc.,
UPTONLORENTZ,
Late United States Consular Agent at San José de Guatemala.
aNot printed.

[Document 241]
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Hay.
GUATEMALA ANDHONDURAS,
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Guatemala,March 16, 1901.

No. 519.]

SIR: Referring to Department’s instructions No. 299, of November 27, 1900,

with inclosures as stated, relating to the claim of Siegfried Koenigsberger

for certain moneys confiscated by the Guatemala customs authorities and

for the annoyance and loss attendant upon the action complained of, I have

the honor to submit the following report: It appears that Gustave and

Siegfried Koenigsberger, who are brothers, the former a German subject

and the latter a naturalized American citizen, have been for the past ten

years engaged as partners in the broker business in this city.

On the morning of December 7, 1899, these men left here on the Guatemala

Central Railroad for the port of San José, on the Pacific coast of this

Republic, having checked their two valises as baggage through to the pier

of said port. On their arrival there in the afternoon they applied for

permission to embark on the steamer leaving that evening for Salvador, and

having identified their valises, which stood at the end of the pier ready for

embarkation,inaccordancewithinstructionsgivenwhensamewere

checked in Guatemala City, they were requested by the customs authorities

to open them, in order to ascertain whether they contained silver intended to

be smuggled from the country. As they refused to comply with this request,

they were taken ashore with their valises and detained in the office of the

comandante, where, next morning, December 8, 1899, in the presence of

the Messrs. Koenigsberger and our consular agent, Mr. Upton Lorentz, the

valises were opened under protest and found to contain $1,792 in silver

coins of Guatemala, Peru, and Chile, there being a shortage, according to

the claims of the Messrs. Koenigsberger, of $508, as they affirmed that the

valises had contained $2,300. The amount found, $1,792, however, was

confiscated by the authorities, and an investigation ordered with the view of

instituting criminal proceedings against the Koenigsberger brothers, who

that morning were released under promise of our consular agent to produce

them when needed.

On being released the Messrs. Koenigsberger, without permission from the

local authorities, took the first train for Guatemala City, in company with

Mr. Lorentz, but were intercepted at Escuintla, where they were arrested

and detained twenty-four hours and then ordered back to the port. This

order was about to be put into execution when, just as they reached the

railroad station en route for the port, they were liberated by virtue of a

telegraphicorderfromthePresident,whichIhadsecuredonthe

representations of our consular agent, who had arrived in this city the

previous evening.

A few days after these occurrences the Messrs. Koenigsberger came to this

legation to thank me for their prompt release and to complain of the alleged

unlawful seizure of their silver at the railroad depot, exhibiting at the same

time two metal checks of the Guatemala Central Railroad as proof that the

two valises had been seized while in the care of the said railroad.

In response to their request I brought the matter to the attention of the

minister of foreign affairs, who promised an investigation and report at an

early date; but before receiving his promised note I left my post for the

United States on leave, and among the matters of unfinished business which

I left in the hands of Mr. McNally, chargé d’affaires, was this case.

On my return I found that nothing had been done in the matter, and the

Messrs. Koenigsberger again having asked my aid in securing the return of

their silver, I took the matter up anew, and on investigation discovered for

the first time that one of the brothers, Gustave, was a German subject and

that he had laid the case before the German minister, who, on hearing the

facts, refused to take any action in the matter.

About the same time also Mr. P. Dalgliesh, a British subject, had a sum of

$13,000 confiscated, which he was attempting to smuggle out in the same

way, and had laid his case before the British minister, who also refused to

uphold him in the matter.

By way of further comparison of similar cases, I should say that the case of

$3,000 taken from a Chinaman at Champerico was different, in that the

money was seized at the railroad depot before same had been transferred to

the pier, and that for this reason I was able to secure its return, as the

grounds for suspicion were much less. In the present case, on the contrary, I

found upon investigation that the valises had reached the end of the pier,

where nothing is ever taken except such things as are intended to go aboard

the steamer. I should perhaps explain here that the pier at San José is not in

the hands of the railroad company, but is a separate corporation, and is a

structure some 900 feet long, extending out from the beach into the deep

water of the ocean beyond the breakers, and from the extreme end of which

all passengers, baggage, and freight must be transferred to steamers by

means of small launches. Anything, therefore, which is sent out to the end

of the pier is presumably for exportation, and in the present case this

presumption is so strong that no other view can be reasonably taken of it

except that it was the intention of the Messrs. Koenigsberger to smuggle out

the silver contained in their valises.

While the general merits of this case will be apparent from the foregoing

narrative, I beg to mention in a specific way the following points:

1. The belief that it was the intention of the Koenigsbergers to

smuggle out of the country the $2,300 which they affirm to have

carried in their valises is greatly strengthened by their confession

of their full intention to embark, by their having checked their

baggage to the point of the pier, which is only done when such

baggage is intended to go aboard, and by their refusal to exhibit

the contents of their baggage when requested to do so.

2. That the action of the authorities in the confiscation of the

silver and arrest of the Koenigsberger brothers was entirely within

thescopeofthelaw,aswillbeseenfromthelawitself,

translations of extracts from which are hereto attached, marked

“1,” “2,” “3,” and “4.”

3. The assertion that the law relative to the exportation of silver

was a dead letter is, I think, fully controverted by the fact of the

and circumstances, as well as those of Mr. Dalgliesh and the

Chinaman referred to.

In view of the foregoing, I am of the opinion that Siegfried Koenigsberger

has no ground of complaint, that he is not entitled to recover the silver

confiscated, and that he may consider himself fortunate in having escaped

penal proceedings, to which he was liable.

I have, etc.,
W.GODFREYHUNTER.
[Inclosure 1—Translation.]
DECREE NUMBER553.
José María Reyna Barrios, general of division and President of the Republic

of Guatemala— Whereas in consequence of economic difficulties the

decrees of May and December last were given out, authorizing the banks to

stop the redemption of their notes in the former case and limiting their issue

in the latter; Whereas the problem remaining unsolved which compelled the

Governmenttotakemeasuresinterferingwiththeestablishedrules

regarding exchange, it is incumbent upon the Government to prevent further

evils; Whereas the really serious obstacle the country has met with has not

its origin in natural causes nor in others that affect our essential wealth, but

inthelackofcurrencyorcirculatingmedium; Whereasthegradual

redemption of notes being reestablished, on account of the high price of

exchange there is an evident tendency to export silver; and although this

may be of immediate profit to exporters of said metal, it will bring upon the

country an indigence of incalculable results;

Whereas the banks, which must redeem their notes in exchange for their

available funds in specie, and find it difficult at present to realize their

assets, must necessarily protect themselves against possible difficulties, it is

reasonable that they should hold their fiduciary paper in reserve without

engaging in new business, thus giving rise to the danger that to the scarcity

of the notes now being used as a medium of exchange will be added the

lack of the silver that may have been exported: Therefore, by virtue of the

powers with which I am invested, and in the duty of looking after the

general interests and welfare of the public, I hereby decree:

Article 1. From this date the exportation of coined silver is

prohibited.

Article 2. The violation of the provision of the foregoing article

shall be punished as contraband.

Article 3. Let the present decree be reported to the National

Assembly at its next session.

Done at the Executive Palace, at Guatemala this 27th day of January, 1898.
JOSÉMARÍAREYNABARRIOS.
The secretary of state for the department of finance and public credit.
FRANCISCOC.CASTAÑEDA.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]

GOVERNMENTPALACE,
MINISTRY OFFINANCE ANDPUBLICCREDIT,
Guatemala,October 17, 1898.

Whereas, that by decree No. 553 the exportation of coined silver was

prohibited, but that said law made no mention of silver in bars and ore; That

according to reports made, with the view of evading said law, foundries for

melting silver have been established to export it in bars and ore; Therefore

the constitutional President of the Republic decrees: That under the same

penalties which are established in decree No. 553 against those who may try

to export coined silver, the exportation of silver in bars or ore is hereby

prohibited.

Let it be notified
ESTRADAC.
The secretary of state for the department of finance and public credit.
RAFAELSALAZAR.
[Inclosure 3.—Translation.]
SECTION69,PAGE20,OF THE PENAL CODE OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA, YEAR1889.
SEC. 69. To perpetrators of a frustrated crime and to accomplices of a

consummated one two-thirds shall be inflicted of the penalty assigned to

perpetrators of a consummated crime.

[Inclosure 4.—Translation.]
LAWS OF GUATEMALA, VOLUME12—DECREE497OF FEBRUARY27, 1894—CUSTOM-HOUSE PROCEDURE—SECTION243,PAGE
819.
SEC. 443. Besides the common penalty of confiscation the persons guilty of

contraband or defraudation shall be subject to the following penalties:

When the value of the effects seized or of those that by the procedure may

seem to have been the cause of the crime is over $10 and does not exceed

$20, the penalty shall be two months’ imprisonment.

In similar cases, if the value is over $20 and does not reach $500, with four

months’ imprisonment; from $500 to $2,000 the penalty shall be one year’s

imprisonment; from $2,000 to $6,000, with two year’s imprisonment; and

exceeding this last sum, with three years’ imprisonment.

[Document 242]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Hunter.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 9, 1901.

No. 333.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 519, of the 16th

ultimo, containing a report of your investigation of the claim of Siegfried

Koenigsberger against Guatemala for certain moneys belonging to him and

his brother confiscated by the Guatemalan customs authorities, and for the

annoyance and loss attendant upon the action complained of.

You express the opinion that Koenigsberger has no ground of complaint,

that he is not entiled to recover the silver confiscated, and that he may

consider himself fortunate in having escaped penal proceedings to which he

was liable.

The Department concurs in your conclusion. Accordingly a letter has been

addressedtoMr.Koenigsbergerthisday,informinghimthataftera

thorough investigation of the case by both the diplomatic and consular

representatives of this Government in Guatemala the Department is of the

opinion that the confiscation of the silver, and his arrest by the Guatemalan

authorities were in accordance with the Guatemalan law, and that he has no

just ground for complaint.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 243]
The President of Gautemala to the President of the United States.
[Telegram.]

GUATEMALA,September 14, 1901.

The Government and people of Guatemala profoundly deplore the death of

the illustrious President McKinley, and cordially and sincerely share the

Government grieve and make their own the sorrow which the noble

American people suffer.
MANUELESTRADAC.

[Document 244]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Hunter.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1901.

In name of Mrs. McKinley, President Roosevelt, and American Government

and people, please express through proper channel to President Estrada

sincere estimation of his messages of personal sympathy and of the fraternal

sentiment of Guatemala in this hour of affliction.
HAY.

[Document 245]
Mr. Bailey to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Guatqrnola,September 18, 1901.
The Government of Honduras sends expressions of sympathy.
BAILEY.

[Document 246]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Bailey.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 9, 1901.

aSIR: I confirm your telegramof the 18th ultimo.

You will express to the Government of Honduras the grateful appreciation

of the Government and people of the United States for its message of

sympathy at the death of President McKinley, explaining at the same time

that pressure of public business incident to that sad event has prevented an

earlier acknowledgment.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.
aPrinted ante.

Haiti
Contents

[Document 247]
Protocol of cm agreement between the Secretary of State of the

United States of America and the Envoy Extraordinary and

MinisterPlenipotentiaryoftheRepublicofHaiti,signedat

Washington, October 18, 1899.
Washington, October 18, 1899

Protocol of an agreement between the United States and Haiti, for the

arbitration of the question of the liability and amount of damages to be

awarded John D. Metzger and Company, signed at Washington, October 18,

1899.

Protocol of an agreement between the Secretary of State of the United

States and the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the

Republic of Haiti, for submission to an arbitration of the question of

liability and amount of damages to be awarded in favor of John D. Metzger

and Company, American citizens, against the Republic of Haiti, signed at

Washington.

The United States of America and the Republic of Haiti, through their

representatives, John Hay, Secretary of State of the United States of

America,andJ.N.Léger,EnvoyExtraordinaryandMinister

Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Haiti, have agreed upon and signed the

following protocol:— Whereas, the said John D. Metzger and Company,

citizensoftheUnitedStatesof America,haveclaimed,throughthe

Government of the United States, from the Government of Haiti, indemnity

on account of the seizure and sale of their goods at Port-au-Prince for the

non-payment of certain license taxes; and on account of the alleged failure

to furnish them an adequate supply of water for the operation of their mill at

Port-au-Prince; and on account of the alleged liability of Haiti on account of

a quantity of lumber alleged to have been sold by them for a Relief

Committee on the occasion of devastation by fire at Jacmel, it is agreed

between the two Governments:— I.

That the question of the liability of the Republic of Haiti to pay an

indemnity in each of said cases, and, if so found by the arbitrator, the

further question of the amount of the said indemnity to be awarded, shall be

referred to the Honorable William R. Day, sometime Secretary of State of

the United States, and now Judge of the Circuit Court thereof, who is

hereby appointed as arbitrator to hear said causes, and to determine the

questions of said liability and the amount of said indemnity, if any is found

by said arbitrator to be justly due.

II.

The Government of the United States will lay before the arbitrator the

claimants’ evidence and all correspondence, either between the Haitien

Government and the United States Minister at Port-au-Prince, or between

the Department of State and the Haitien Minister at Washington, and the

despatcheswiththeirenclosuresfromthesaidMinister,reporting

documentary or other evidence to the Department of State in relation to said

claims.

Reciprocally,theHaitienGovernmentshallhavethesamerightsof

presentation of evidence in its own behalf as are above stipulated for the

Government of the United States.

Each Government will furnish to the other a duplicate of the evidence and

correspondence at the same time they are by them respectively laid before

the arbitrator.

If, in the opinion of the arbitrator, it shall be deemed desirable, in the

interests of justice, to take further evidence, he shall communicate to both

parties his opinion, and shall indicate the questions of fact on which the

same shall be taken. Likewise, either Government, on notice to the other,

may apply to him for that purpose. Each Government shall, in case the

arbitrator orders the taking, name an agent to take such evidence, in its own

behalf, who shall each have the right to be present at the taking thereof, and

to cross-examine the witnesses and take copies of documentary evidence

offered by the other. All questions of procedure shall be left to the

determination of the arbitrator. Each Government agrees to abide by such

determination, and in default thereof, the said arbitrator may proceed in

such manner and at such times as he may determine, in order to close the

proofs and make final award.

III.

The Government of Haiti agrees to pay any amount or amounts which may

be awarded by the arbitrator, if he finds that it is liable therefore.

IV.

The evidence is to be submitted to the arbitrator and finally closed on or

before the 1st day of March, 1900, and his decision is to be rendered within

four months thereafter.

V.

Each Government shall furnish to the arbitrator an argument or brief not

later than the 1st day of April, 1900, a copy of which each party shall

furnish to the other at the same time as to the arbitrator, and the claimant

and the Commune of Port-au-Prince may also file briefs in the cause on the

same terms; but the arbitrator need not for such purpose delay his decision.

VI.

The Government of Haiti shall pay the indemnity awarded by the arbitrator,

if any, as soon as the Legislative Assembly of Haiti shall authorize the

payment; but the time thus allowed shall in no case exceed six months from

the day the decision is pronounced, unless an extension of time of its

payment should be granted by the Government of the United States.

VII.

Reasonable compensation to the arbitrator for all his services and expenses,

and the other expenses of said arbitration, are to be paid in equal moieties

by the said Governments.

Any award given by the arbitrator shall be final and conclusive. Done in

duplicate in English and in French, at Washington, this 18th day of October,

1899.
JOHNHAY,

J.N.LÉGER.

[Document 248]
Award of the arbitrator in the matter of the claims of John D.

Metzger & Co. against the Republic of Haiti.
In pursuance of a protocol signed at Washington October 18, 1899, and a

supplemental protocol signed June 30, 1900, between the Hon. John Hay,

Secretary of State of the United States, and the Hon. J. N. Léger, envoy

extraordinaryandministerplenipotentiaryoftheRepublicofHaiti,

representing their respective Governments, for submission to arbitration of

the questions of the liability and amount of damages, if any, to be awarded

in favor of John D. Metzger & Co. against the Republic of Haiti, I have

investigatedtheclaimsofsaidJohnD.Metzger&Co.uponthe

correspondence and testimony submitted in pursuance of said protocols and

do now submit the following findings and award: John D. Metzger & Co.,

through the State Department at Washington, presented against the Republic

ofHaitithreeseparateclaimswhicharethesubject-matterofthe

arbitration, claiming indemnity on account of the alleged liability of the

Republic of Haiti for a quantity of lumber alleged to have been sold by

them to the relief committee on the occasion of the devastation by fire of

the city of Jacmel; also on account of the alleged failure to furnish them an

adequate, supply of water for the operation of their mill at Port au Prince;

also on account of the seizure and sale of their goods at Port au Prince for

nonpayment of license taxes. I shall now proceed to consider these cases in

the order named.
This claim arises from an undertaking on the part of the firm of John D.

Metzger & Co. to furnish lumber for the inhabitants of the city of Jacmel.

This city was devastated by fire in the fall of 1896, a large part thereof

being destroyed. A relief committee was assembled on the 20th day of

November, 1896, to consider methods of relief, in view of the fact that the

Government of Haiti had indicated its purpose to allow the sum of $20,000

for the relief of the people. Prior to the assembling of this relief committee

the firm of Metzger & Co. had proposed to furnish lumber to be distributed

amongtheneedypeopleofJacmeltotheamountoftheproposed

appropriation. The relief committee, composed of eight citizens, took action

uponthisproposal,asisevidencedinthefollowingminuteor

memorandum:

To-day, Monday, November 23, 1896, the ninety-third year of

independence, have been assembled, upon convocation of the

Government’s delegate of the arrondissements of Saltron and

Jacmel under date of the 20th of this month, at the hotel of the

delegation the citizens, first, D. Bellande, mayor; second, P.

Nicholas, deputy; third, St. Paul, deputy; fourth, S. Berrouet,

deputy;fifth,I.C.Giordany,militarycommander;sixth,E.

Bellande, dean civil court; seventh, A. Charmant, former deputy;

eighth, D. Hilaire, attorney at law, all members of the relief

committee formed in this city for the purpose of affording aid to

the victims of the fires of September 19 and October 3 last, for

the purpose of taking cognizance of a letter addressed to said

committee by Mr. Bernard Craft, procurator of the firm of John

D. Metzger & Co., established in this city, who offers his services

to the population, in case the committee should wish to invest the

$20,000 (gourdes) appropriated (“votées”) by the Government in

favor of the homeless (“sinistres”) of Jacmel, in building material.

Upon lecture of said letter the members of the relief committee

have spoken, one after the other, of the importance and the

advisability of the proposition of Mr. Craft, and have finally

adopted the offer made to them to import from the United States

building material for him to hold at the disposition of the relief

committee at the rate of 35 gourdes per thousand and to the extent

of $20,000, which the Government has allowed (“accordés”) the

population to their relief, and which building materials must be

held in yard (“depot”) to the disposal of said committee.

By virtue of all that precedes, this decision shall be submitted to

the sanction of the Government, praying the same to give its

sanction thereto, and to arrange with the house of John D.

Metzger & Co., for the mode of payment.

Done in Jacmel the day, month, and year above written, and have

signed.

(Signed)

CHARMANT.
I.C.GIORDANY.

E.BELLANDE.

M.P.NICHOLAS.

It thus appears that the relief committee provisionally accepted the offer of

Metzger & Co. to furnish material to be held at the disposition of the relief

committee, to be furnished at the rate of 35 gourdes per thousand to the

amount of $20,000. This arrangement was not entered into, however, for the

purpose of binding the committee either personally or as a committee. It

was to be the basis of a contract with the Government, to which the minute

recites the “decision” shall be submitted for its sanction and to arrange with

the house of Metzger & Co. for the mode of payment. Metzger & Co.,

recognizing this purpose in the action of the committee, on the 7th of

December, 1896, submitted to the secretary of state of the department of the

interior of Haiti a copy of the foregoing minute soliciting the Government’s

sanctionofthetransactionandanunderstandingaboutthemodeof

payment. This communication is as follows:

P P,December 7, 1896.

TOGENERALBUTEAU FILS,
Secretary of State of the Department of the Interior, Port au

Prince.

MR.SECRETARY OFSTATE: We have the honor to inform you that we have

concluded an agreement with the relief committee of the city of

Jacmel to furnish them for $20,000 (gourdes) building material at

35 gourdes per thousand feet.

According to the “procès verbal,” copy of which is herewith

annexed, we are to obtain the Government’s sanction of this

transactionandhaveanunderstandingaboutthemodeof

payment.

We are ready to commence our delivery immediately and to finish

them within fifteen days from the day of the first delivery.

In soliciting an early reply as to your decision, especially so on

account of a disturbance that again seizes upon exchange,

We remain, Mr. Secretary of State, your most obedient servants,

(Signed)

JOHND.METZGER& Co.

It will be observed that in this communication the secretary is advised that

Metzger & Co. are ready to commence deliveries immediately and to finish

them in fifteen days from the first delivery. No written answer to this

communication is in evidence in the case. On the 4th of January, 1897,

Metzger & Co. addressed the following communication to the President of

the Republic and the council of secretaries of state:

P P,January 4, 1897.
To the President of the Republic of Haiti in Council of the

PRESIDENT,MESSIEURS LESSECRÉTAIRES D’ETAT: We have concluded with the relief

committee of Jacmel a bargain to deliver them for $20,000

(gourdes) building material, which sum the council of ministers

had appropriated to the victims of the fires of that city.

The council having sanctioned the transaction above referred to,

the material has been ordered, and has arrived. We wish to make

delivery without delay, that we may be reimbursed for our heavy

outlays and escape the perils to which these goods are exposed,

they being subject to destruction by fire and exposed in every

respect.

We therefore have the honor to pray you that you will please put

the money in question at our disposal, so we may commence our

deliveries.

Accept, President, Messieurs les Secrétaires d’Etat, our most

respectful salutations.

(Signed)

JOHND.METZGER.
The council, it is recited in this communication, have sanctioned the

transaction with the relief committee. The material has been ordered and

has arrived. Metzger & Co. express their desire to make delivery without

delay and ask that the money, $20,000, be placed at their disposal so that

deliveries might begin. To this letter an answer was returned by the

secretary of state of finance and commerce of date January 13, 1897, as

follows:

D S F C ,
Port au Prince, January 13, 1897.

MDMM : I have received your letter, to which I have

hardly time to answer, leaving as I do for Cape Haitien by the

French boat, to return in about eight days.

As I already told you, the council of ministers has authorized me

to try and see whether I could find $5,000 for you. It would be

impossible for me to pay you $10,000, as I do not even see my

way clear to pay half that amount.

I regret, believe me, that your embarrassments coincide with

those of the State; so much so that with my best will I can not be

agreeable to you.

Please be assured of my personal best sentiments toward you.

Your devoted,

(Signed)

A.FIRMIN.
In this letter it will be observed there is no denial of Metzger & Co.’s

statement that the council of ministers had sanctioned the arrangement with

the Jacmel relief committee; but the secretary suggests his inability to raise

more than $5,000 for Metzger & Co. This letter may be taken fairly as an

admission that the council of ministers had approved of the arrangement

made by the relief committee, which was only to be binding on the

Government when thus authenticated by it.

In the affidavit of John D. Metzger, filed with the claim in the State

Department, it is said “that the Government of Haiti has become a guarantor

and principal in the transaction related in the ‘process verbal’ of the Jacmel

relief committee, dated November 23, 1896, by indorsing and accepting the

same purely and simply, and that the minister of the interior then in office

had given the deponent verbal notice of such acceptance or indorsement,

and that the notice was corroborated by the then minister of finance, Mr. C.

Fouchard, to the deponent. What then was the arrangement thus adopted by

the council? It was that $20,000 worth of lumber at a fixed price should be

delivered for the relief of the inhabitants of Jacmel.

It does not appear that the part of the “process verbal” which required the

mode of payment for lumber furnished to be determined between Metzger

& Co. and the Government had been the subject of negotiation and

settlement.Itwasnotstatedinthepreliminaryarrangementthatthe

material was to be paid for in cash upon delivery. The provision that the

mode of payment should be determined between the Government and

Metzger & Co. is strongly indicative of the intention to obtain terms of

payment of a different character. In any event and for whatever reason the

“process verbal” reserved to the Government the right to negotiate with

Metzger & Co. terms of payment which should be mutually satisfactory.

There is nothing in the testimony or correspondence to indicate that this

importantelementoftheproposedcontracthadbeenthesubjectof

negotiation and settlement between the parties. When the matter was taken

up an arrangement was effected by which $5,000 worth of building material

was to be delivered to the relief committee upon the payment of $5,000.

The committee, however, declined to receive the building material unless

officially advised so to do by the Government, as appears in its note of

February 6, 1897, to Metzger & Co. This instruction seems to have been

refused by the department of the interior, and on the 10th day of February,

1897,Metzger&Co.addressedthefollowingcommunicationtothe

secretary of state of finance and commerce:

PORT AUPRINCE,February 10, 1897.
To the SECRETARY OFSTATE OFFINANCE ANDCOMMERCE,Port au Prince.
Mr. SECRETARY OFSTATE: We announce to you with regret that our efforts

(demarches) near your colleague of the department of the interior

haveremainedfruitless,herefusingtogiveustheletter

demanded by the relief committee of Jacmel under the plea that

there is an understanding between you and ourselves that we

should deliver for $20,000 of material before we could collect

$5,000.

As you well know, this is a profound mistake, no affair of credit

having been agreed upon between us. Our agreement was that we

should deliver for $5,000 lumber against $5,000 cash down and

that we were to enter upon arrangements for the balance.

Requesting you kindly to enter into communication with your

colleague of the interior, and regulate the conditions taken, we

are, Mr. Secretary of State,

Yours, etc.,

JOHND.METZGER.
In this letter we find the first evidence that the matter of the mode of

payment had been the subject of consideration and determination between

the Government and Metzger & Co. In this letter Metzer & Co. say: “Our

agreement was that we should deliver $5,000 worth of lumber against

$5,000 cash down and we were to enter into agreement for the balance.” To

this letter no reply appears to have been made and it may fairly be taken as

stating the arrangement so far as definitely concluded. There is the distinct

admission on the part of Metzger & Co. that arrangements are still to be

made as to the mode of payment for the balance of the lumber. As we have

seen, Metzger & Co. have advised the Jacmel relief committee of their

willingness to furnish $5,000 worth of lumber for $5,000 in cash, which

proposition the relief committee declined to accept without the sanction of

the Government. It is apparent from the testimony and documents in

evidence that the difference which arose between Metzger & Co. and the

Government as to the terms and mode of payment was never reconciled and

no further definite agreement was concluded between the parties interested.

It is to be gathered from the documents and correspondence that Metzger &

Co., owing to their distrust arising from the unsettled condition of affairs in

Haiti, deemed it imprudent to furnish the lumber except for cash, and the

Government’s declination to receive the same except upon credit led to an

irreconcilable difference upon this branch of the proposed contract, upon

which the minds of the parties never met on a common basis.

In reaching this conclusion I have not overlooked the fact that when

demand for payment from the officials of the Government of Haiti was

made, the answer of the Government based the denial of liability upon other

grounds than lack of agreement with Metzger & Co. as to the mode of

payment. Upon October 6, 1897, Metzger & Co. wrote to the Government

officials asking payment for the amount of lumber tendered the Jacmel

state of the department of the interior, calling for documentary proof

showing that the lumber had been placed to the account of the Government.

A letter is in evidence, dated June 30, 1898, from Hon. T. August, then

secretary of state of the interior, in which the receipt of the letter of Metzger

& Co. of the 6th instant, inclosing copy of the minute of the relief

committee, and from the minister of the interior, above referred to, is

acknowledged. In this letter Mr. August states that the council decided that

the claim can not be considered, nothing having been furnished to the

population of Jacmel. It must be borne in mind, as shown in the statement

of Metger & Co., filed in the State Department, that four changes of

ministers intervened during the time which Metzger & Co. were pressing

theirclaimforsettlement.Thesedenialsofliability,underthe

circumstances, I deem consistent with the other proof, which shows that the

council of ministers had approved of the arrangement with the relief

committee, which left open the manner in which the $20,000 was to be

paid. But no agreement was reached further than herein indicated upon this

subject. Upon consideration of all of the documents in evidence submitted I

have reached the conclusion that the Government did definitely agree and

bind itself through its proper officers to take $5,000 worth of lumber; that

Metzger & Co. tendered delivery of this material; that the Government

refused to pay said sum, and that the relief committee declined to receive

the same without instructions and sanction of the Government. Therefore

there was a breach of contract entitling Metzger & Co. to $5,000 in

consideration of that much worth of lumber. As the result of this default

Metzger & Co. were compelled to dispose of said lumber at a great

sacrifice. Owing to the conditions of affairs in Jacmel it was almost

impossible to sell the lumber there. I find the loss of Metzger & Co.

because of this contract to be the difference between the price agreed upon

and the price obtainable in the market at the time and place of delivery,

namely, $3,000, which sum, in my opinion, is justly due from the Republic

of Haiti to Metzger & Co.

As to the objection interposed by complainant to certain testimony offered

by the government of Haiti, to wit, pieces numbered 14 to 27, inclusive,

which bear date as of October, 1898, I have concluded to consider said

testimony for whatever weight I consider it justly entitled. In my opinion it

is not decisive of the real issues in the case, as it tends to show that the

relief committee did not make any contract binding upon the committee.

The real question to be determined is, How far did the government of Haiti

make itself liable under the circumstances shown? I have, therefore, given

this testimony due consideration and declined to exclude it as requested by

counsel for the claimant.
WATER CLAIM.
Metzger & Co., having established a business as dealers in lumber and

erectedaplaningmillinconnectiontherewith,inthefallof1897,

discovered that the supply of water furnished by the hydraulic service at

Port au Prince was inadequate, and they were not able to obtain water

enough for their mill. The mill had theretofore been supplied with a three-

quarter inch pipe. Metzger & Co. made application for a 1-inch pipe. This

application was entertained by the local authorities, and an agreement was

reached with Metzger & Co. by which their firm was to pay for obtaining

the pipe and the cost of laying same. The work was estimated to cost

$81.75.ThisestimatewasacceptedbyMr.Metzgerandindorsed

“Approved. Good for $81.75.” It is claimed that Metzger & Co. refused to

pay this sum. I find, however, from the testimony submitted, that the mayor

of the commune in a report to the minister of foreign affairs of Haiti, stated

that he had agreed to make compensation for the $81.75 on a sum of $218

on a debt due Metzger & Co. from the commune, which the mayor alleges

Metzger & Co. refused to do. This claim, however, is inconsistent with the

acceptance of the bill indorsed by Metzger & Co., with approval as above

quoted, and with the fact that the commune was embarrassed in the

payment of its debts, and Metzger & Co. are likely to have been entirely

willing to obtain part of their claim from the commune in this way. The

testimony is clear that Metzger & Co. badly needed the water, without

which they could not run their mill, the lack of it greatly interfering with

their business and practically bringing it to a standstill. It is inconceivable

that they would not permit a credit of such a small sum upon their claim to

enable them to obtain the much-needed water supply. I am of opinion that

this arrangement for the furnishing of water was entered into between

Metzger & Co. and the local authorities and should have been carried out in

good faith. It appears that this work was begun but was stopped by the

communal magistrate, who informed Metzger & Co. that unless they paid

certain license taxes a 1-inch pipe could not be laid, but a one-half inch

pipe, which had already proved inadequate, would be supplied. Metzger &

Co. claimed that the license taxes could not be paid by reason of certain

orders of the local courts undertaking to subject the same to payment of

creditors of the commune. I do not deem it important in this connection to

enter upon the merits of that controversy. I am satisfied that the payment of

license taxes had nothing to do with the furnishing of a water supply to

Metzger & Co. This demand was probably an afterthought, improperly

introducedintotheaffair,andcouldhavenoeffectinreleasingthe

authorities from their contract. It also appears that it was claimed that

Metzger & Co. were in arrears for water rent. This is contradicted by

receipts in evidence in the case. No such claim was made when the contract

was entered into with Metzger & Co. for a 1–inch pipe. If such a claim

could have been made, it should have been insisted upon at the time. As to

the alleged offers to carry out the agreement, it does not appear that upon

the occasion of Mr. Metheun’s visit to Metzger & Co.’s works in 1898 he

offered to carry out the agreement, which had in fact been made, but only to

repair the insufficient service, already in at Metzger & Co.’s expense.

Reference is made in the brief fried in behalf of the Republic of Haiti to a

private letter of one Hilaire, an attorney, to the mayor of the commune.

Hilaire is said to have been the attorney of Metzger & Co. It is of date of

June 17, and he says “they (Metzger & Co.) refused to accept the mode of

paymentproposedbyyou(Mathon)basedasyousayonthe

compensation.” No doubt this referred to the offer of Metheun to repair the

pipes at Metzger & Co.’s expense. It was not a tender or promise to furnish

a 1-inch pipe or such a promise as would put an end to liability under the

contract. As I have already found, Metzger & Co. practically agreed to pay

the cost by crediting the sum of $81.75 on the amount of $218 due from the

commune. It only remained for the latter to lay the pipes as agreed. On

October 10, 1898, Mr. Hay advised the American charge of affairs at Port

au Prince that in an interview with the solicitor of the State Department the

Haitian minister had said that the commune would furnish the water pipe

for Metzger & Co. provided they consent that the cost thereof be credited

on the amount of $218 due Metzger & Co. by the commune. The Secretary

advised that Metzger & Co. give their consent and offer in writing to pay

for the cost in the manner proposed, at the same time not waiving any claim

they might have because of the refusal theretofore to furnish them with an

adequate supply of water. Mr. Powell, the American minister, took up the

matter on that line and reported, on January 17, 1899, that the council of

ministers had agreed to adjust the matter, leaving Metzger & Co. in a

position to claim damages for any failure of the water supply theretofore. It

appears from the diplomatic correspondence that the attention of the Haitian

minister at Washington having been called to the claim of Metzger and Co.,

as to the inadequate water supply for the mill, the minister at once gave

assurances that Metzger & Co.’s grievances in that behalf should be

adjusted on an equitable basis. On the 3d of June, 1898, Mr. Léger, the

minister of Haiti at Washington, in answer to a note from the Secretary of

State of the United States advising the minister that the minister of the

United States at Port au Prince reported Metzer & Co.’s mill still deprived

of water, said, in his note:

In reply, I must not fail to confirm what I had the honor to state to

you in an interview of the 2d instant. According to the agreement

reached with the solicitor of the Department, I informed my

Government of Mr. Metzger’s grievances, and the secretary of

state of foreign relations recently wrote to me that the matter had

been settled within twenty-four hours.

Afterwards the attention of the minister of Haiti at Washington being called

to this agreement, he assured the State Department that it had been attended

to for some time. An investigation shows that the honorable minister was

laboring under a misapprehension in this regard. A visit was made to the

Metzger establishment by the mayor of the commune, who reported that

water was furnished to the satisfaction of Mr. Metzger. Doubtless this report

misled the minister. An investigation made by Minister Powell shows that

therewasverylittlewaterandthesupplyatthattimewasentirely

inadequate. Until January, 1899, no successful attempt was made to carry

out the contract. I am of opinion that this arrangement agreeing to settle

Metzger & Co.’s grievances, promptly accepted by the secretary of state for

foreign relations of Haiti, followed by the assurance of the secretary,

conveyed by the minister to the State Department at Washington, that the

matter had been settled within twenty-four hours, constituted a diplomatic

agreement between the two countries which, upon settled principles of

international law, should have been carried into effect. It is claimed, on the

part of the Government of Haiti, that this correspondence amounted only to

an agreement on the part of Haiti to use its good offices with the commune

of Port au Prince. I am of opinion that it amounted to much more than that.

Whenthegrievancewascalledtotheattentionoftheministerat

Washington, and through him reported to the secretary, no claim was made

that the commune alone was responsible, and no attempt was made to limit

the authority or responsibility of the Government. On the contrary, the

minister and secretary promptly assumed responsibility for the grievance

and assured the Government at Washington that it had been rectified. It can

not be that good faith is less obligatory upon nations than upon individuals

in carrying out agreements. It is now strenuously urged that the Government

of Haiti had no authority over the commune of Port au Prince, and must, in

its relations with the commune, have limited its interference to friendly

advice and suggestions. I do not understand that the limitations upon

official authority, undisclosed at the time to the other government, prevent

the enforcement of diplomatic agreements. The question came before the

Chilian claims commission created by the convention of August 7, 1892,

between the United States and Chile, in which a claim was made upon a

contract entered into by the United States minister in Chile, in making

which the Government of the United States claimed the minister had no

authority and denied responsibility, claiming further that the agreement was

in violation of the statutes of the United States, and that the plaintiff had a

remedy in the United States courts. The commission decided unanimously

that it was immaterial whether the minister had exceeded his authority or

not, as he had made the promise as the representative of the United States in

the name of his Government, which, according to the rules of responsibility

of governments for acts performed by their agents in foreign countries, can

not be repudiated. In the present case there is no claim that the minister was

unauthorized to make the diplomatic representations stated. On the contrary,

he was only carrying into effect the instructions of his Government. The

International Arbitration, volume 4, pages 3569–3571. Nor is there any

more avail in the argument that the remedy of Metzger & Co. is to be

sought in the courts of Haiti against the commune. Even had Metzger & Co.

such a right, this would not affect the right to arbitrate the claim as has been

done in this case. By the terms of the protocol the arbitrator is competent to

take jurisdiction of the claim so far as the liability of the Government of

Haiti is concerned (4 Moore International Arbitrations, p. 3571). This view

of the case renders it unnecessary to determine whether, as is claimed in

argument, the communal authorities are merely the agents of Haiti or

whether, as contended by the minister of Haiti, the Government of Haiti had

entirely made over the waterworks to Port au Prince, which alone received

the revenues and managed its affairs. A diplomatic arrangement fairly and

honorably entered into should, in my judgment, be carried into effect. I

have already stated what, in my opinion, were the rights of Metzger & Co.

under the arrangements made with the commune to supply them with water.

This is the arrangement which should have been carried into effect. It

shouldhavebeencarriedoutbytheGovernmentofHaitiuponthe

responsibility assumed by it. Because of the failure to give them an

adequate supply of water Metzger & Co’s, mill was compelled to remain

idle, partially for a time and afterwards to entirely suspend operations.

Much of the claim for alleged damages on behalf of complainant can not be

allowed. Theitemsshowingremoteandspeculativedamagesdonot

directly result from the breach of the agreement. The claimants are entitled

to compensation for loss of the use of the mill in whole or in part during the

time in which they were unable to operate it by reason of the failure to

furnish water and its impaired usefulness when an inadequate supply was

furnished to them. I am of opinion that damages fairly recoverable in a case

of this kind will be compensated by the payment to Metzger & Co. by the

Government of Haiti of the sum of $15,000.
J. D. Metzger & Co., prior to January 6, 1897, having established a business

in the manufacture of doors, sashes, etc., in a planing mill owned by them

in Port au Prince, were engaged in carrying on the business, with certain

workmen in their employ. On that date several writs were left at the mill for

five workmen to appear before a justice of the peace at Port au Prince to

pay a year’s license, also certain fines and costs for nonpayment thereof.

The amount of the sentences thus imposed vary in amount as to the

different workmen, from $86 to $97. These workmen were summoned to

appear June 1, 1897. The proceedings against them were on the ground that

they were foreigners employed as engineers or clerks. No attention seems to

have been paid to these proceedings. On the 16th of June the substitutes of

the justice of the peace, a “huissier,” and others appeared upon the premises

of Metzger & Co., claiming judgment by default against the workmen. On

June 23 the parties again appeared demanding payment of the assessments

aforesaid. The same being refused, the goods of Metzger & Co. were seized

on the 23d, 24th, and 25th days of June, 1897, and taken from the premises,

and, after outcry, an auction being proclaimed and a bell sounded by the

crier, goods to the amount and value of $1,200 were sold, although a much

less sum was realized therefor, and certain receipts were left at the factory

for the license fees, fines, and costs levied upon the workmen, to wit:

Sampson$118

Hubert 108

McCormick 108

Thompson108

Spain 216

Lee 216

These license taxes were levied under the law of the Republic of Haiti,

passed October 24, 1876.

Article 9 provides that “foreigners who shall be permitted to exercise any

other industry except commerce, shall pay a tax double of the amount

exacted of Haitians exercising the same industry.”

Article 11 provides that “foreigners employed as clerks or under any other

title in the service of merchants, traders, manufacturers, or artisans, either

natives or foreigners, shall be subject to the tax specified by tariff.”

“The one who employs them in his service shall be responsible for the

payment of the license.”

Article 17 provides that “the dues for licenses shall be collected at the office

of the receiver of the commune.”

Article 18 provides that “the license should be taken out each year from the

1st of October to the 15th of November at the latest.”

“All persons subject to a patent, who shall not have taken out within five

days after the delay fixed, their licenses shall be, on the denunciation of the

communal receiver, condemned by the justice of the peace to a fine of 50

cents for each day’s delay, with 10 per cent of the amount of the license that

they should have taken.”

“The fine, as well as the amount of the license and the expenses, shall be,

forty-eight hours after the condemnation, if the fine shall not have been

paid, seized by office of the justice of the peace on the merchandise,

products, furniture, or whatsoever effects belonging to the delinquent.”

“The objects seized shall be under brief delay sold at public auction up to

the amount of the sum to be collected, without prejudice to article 36 of the

penal code touching arrestation.”

Article 34 provides that “the justice of the peace and the public minister are

bound under penalty of removal from office to pursue without delay any

infraction of the present law, that they may have discovered or that may

have been denounced to them.”

Article 35 provides that “all fines pronounced either by the justices of the

peace or the correctional court, for an infraction of the present law, belongs

one-half to the one who shall have discovered or denounced the violation

and the other half to the communal funds.”

Metzger & Co. strongly protested against this seizure and sale of their

property, claiming that the practice had not been to impose fines for

nonpayment of licenses; that none of the summonses, writs, or judgments

had been recorded, rendering the proceedings null and void; that the

seizures are unlawful, being the result of proceedings to which Metzger &

Co. were not parties; that articles 11 and 18 of the law of October 24, 1876,

have only been applied to foreign clerks. It does not appear that in the early

stages of the claim Metzger & Co. predicated a right of recovery upon the

ground of infraction of their rights secured to them by the treaty between

the Republic of Haiti and the United States. At least as early as August 31,

1897,Mr.Powell,theAmericanministeratPortauPrince,ina

communication to the secretary of state of foreign affairs of Haiti, distinctly

claimed that the requirements of law were not applicable to all citizens alike

as under the treaty between the two countries they should be, and that they

could not be enforced. In the diplomatic presentation of the matter, in an

interview between the honorable minister of Haiti at Washington and the

solicitor of the State Department, the claim was made that the attempt to

collect taxes from Metzger & Co.’s workmen was a violation of the treaty

rights secured to American citizens under the existing treaty. This position

does not seem to have been controverted by the representative of Haiti, but

he contended that the redress of Metzger & Co. for their alleged wrongs and

grievances could be had in the legal tribunals of Haiti. The American

Government, in view of the disposition of the Haitian minister and the

pledge on the part of his Government to observe the rights of American

citizens under the treaty, on the 9th day of June sent an instruction to its

minister at Port au Prince as follows:

The Government agrees no longer to insist upon the settlement of

said claims against the Haitian Government (referring to the

license taxes) which, on its part, pledges itself to see that the

rights which the treaty grants to American citizens in Haiti be

strictly observed. This approval is, however, subordinate to Mr.

Metzger’s right to demand indemnity for the illegal seizure and

sale of his goods, and does not exclude the right of diplomatic

intervention in case of a denial of justice.

On October 1, 1898, the Secretary of State of the United States, in an

extended note summarizing the position of his Government upon various

matters, among other things, said:

IftheagreementthenmadeforredressofMr.Metzger’s

grievance over the water supply had been promptly and faithfully

performed,theGovernmentmighthavehadnooccasionto

intervene diplomatically in regard to the indemnity confessedly

due Mr. Metzger for the illegal seizure and sale of his goods; for

the Haitian Government has admitted the illegality of the license

taxes, as being in violation of the treaty, and there can, therefore,

be no question of the right of Mr. Metzger to such indemnity.

On October 5 the minister of Haiti at Washington replied to this note, and

while he maintained the understanding that the remedy of Metzger & Co.

should first be exhausted in the local tribunals of Haiti before diplomatic

intervention could be considered, he did not deny nor in anywise controvert

the statement above quoted from the note of October 1 of the American

Secretary of State. Thus the diplomatic correspondence seems to establish

the fact that the claim of Metzger & Co. presented conditions which

brought it within the provisions of the treaty in existence between the two

nations. The stipulations of this treaty, so far as relevant to the present case,

in articles 5 and 6 thereof, provide:

Article 5. The citizens of each of the high contracting parties

residing or established in the territory of the other shall be exempt

from all compulsory military duty by sea or by land, and from all

forced loans or military exactions or requisitions; nor shall they

be compelled to pay any contributions whatsoever higher or other

than those that are or may be paid by native citizens.

Article 6. The citizens of each of the contracting parties shall be

permitted to enter, sojourn, settle, and reside in all parts of the

territories of the other, engage in business, hire and occupy

warehouses, provided they submit to the laws, as well general as

special, relative to the rights of traveling, residing, or trading.

It will be seen that by article 5 it is expressly provided that the citizens of

the high contracting parties residing or established in the other’s territory

shall not be compelled to pay any contribution whatever higher or other

than those which are or may be paid by native citizens. By the sections of

the law passed October 24, 1876, above quoted, it is expressly provided that

the license tax imposed upon foreigners shall be double that imposed upon

native workmen. This law contains no exception in favor of American

citizens residing in Haiti whose rights are thus carefully conserved by the

treaty between the two countries. This law, so far as it affects American

citizens, is in direct violation of the stipulations of the treaty. In practice it is

Haiti. By direct enactment of law the solemn obligations of the treaty are

ignoredanddiscriminatingburdensimposeduponforeignerswithout

exception. When this condition of affairs was diplomatically called to the

attention of the authorities of the Republic of Haiti, it is to the credit of that

Government that it promptly conceded that American citizens had rights

under the treaty which deserve protection and which the Government of

Haiti undertook to see were duly guarded, leaving Metzger & Co. to pursue

their remedy for the infraction of their rights already sustained. Regarding

this state of facts as established by the diplomatic understanding of the two

governments, we have a case in which, notwithstanding the provisions of

the treaty placing American citizens upon the same plane in this regard as

natives, a tax is levied upon them of double the amount of that imposed

upon natives, and when not paid the employers of such workmen are

subject to a summary seizure and sale of their goods. It is strongly urged in

the able argument submitted by the minister of Haiti that the remedy of the

claimants should be sought in the local courts of Haiti, and that such

remedy is exclusive. Numerous precedents are cited to the proposition that

governments will not intervene diplomatically when such remedy is given.

As a general proposition, it is settled international law that a government

will not intervene in claims against foreign governments when redress may

be had in the courts of that country. If there has been a substantial denial of

justice, or a gross miscarriage thereof, sanctioned and approved by the

opposing government, a nation will then intervene. The arbitrator in this

case, however, is given jurisdiction of the differences between the two

governments by the terms of the arbitral agreement, giving him jurisdiction

and authority to determine certain differences. It is expressly provided in

the protocol:

That the question of the liability of the Republic of Haiti to pay an

indemnity in each of said cases, and if so found by the arbitrator,

the further question of the amount of the said indemnity to be

awarded shall be referred to the Hon. William R. Day, sometime

Secretary of State of the United States, and now judge of the

circuit court thereof, who is hereby appointed to hear said causes

and to determine the questions of said liability and the amount of

said indemnity, if any is found by said arbitrator to be justly due.

From this agreement the authority of the arbitrator is derived. I can not

perceive that the competency of the arbitrator can be limited, because of the

fact that Metzger & Co. might have sought judicial remedies in the courts

of Haiti. This fact may have weight in the determination of the Government

when its attention is called to claims against other governments and may be

sufficient reason for declining diplomatic intervention until an attempt has

been made to obtain judicial redress in the courts of the country where the

claimant is domiciled. The fact that such remedy is afforded may be good

ground for withholding consent from an offer to arbitrate differences. I am

at a loss to perceive how it can afford a valid objection to the arbitrator

exercising powers conferred in the protocol of arbitration. The arbitrator is

not called upon to decide the question elaborately argued by the honorable

representative of Haiti, that under the constitution and laws of Haiti the

commune of Port au Prince is alone responsible for the unlawful collection

of the license taxes. The question submitted is, Is the Republic of Haiti

liable upon this claim; and if so, to what amount? I do not deem it necessary

to inquire as to whether the proceedings of the officials were strictly in

accordance with local laws. The law which they were attempting to enforce

was a law of the Republic of Haiti in violation of the treaty between the two

nations. It need hardly be stated that the obligations of a treaty are as

international decisions to need amplification here. I find that the law

authorizing double taxation upon foreigners, so far as it relates to American

citizens, was in violation of treaty rights, and that the seizure and sale of

Metzger & Co.’s goods under the facts established or conceded in this case

was under a law sought to be enforced in violation of treaty rights. About

$1,200 worth of their goods was seized and sold under the circumstances

hereinbefore detailed. I am of opinion that the Republic of Haiti, in

compensation for the goods and reparation for their seizure and sale in the

manner herein found, should pay to the claimants, John D. Metzger & Co.,

the sum of $5,000.
In view of the conclusions reached under the several claims submitted to

the arbitrator, I do hereby find and award that the Government of Haiti pay

to the claimants, John D. Metzger & Co.:

For sale of lumber at Jacmel $3,000

For the failure to furnish water to the mill 15,000

For the illegal seizure and sale of their goods 5,000

In all, $23,000, payable in the gold coin of the United States or its

equivalent, within the time provided in the protocol.

Done in duplicate at the city of Canton, Ohio, United States of America,

this 27th day of September, A. D. 1900, as witness my hand on said day and

date.
WILLIAMR.DAY,
Arbitrator.

[Document 249]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Battiste.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1900.

No. 432.]

SIR: I inclose copy of a letter from the Acting Secretary of the Treasury

requesting that you will ascertain from the Haitian Government whether, in

view of the new Franco-Haitian commercial treaty, it is their intention to

impose higher or other tonnage dues upon American vessels carrying

merchandise of French origin to Haiti than upon French vessels carrying the

same.

You will invite their attention in this connection to article 10 of the treaty of

November 3, 1864, between the United States and Haiti y guaranteeing the

most-favored-nation treatment to American shipping.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
T D
O S ,
Washington,September 12, 1900.

S:IhavethehonortoinviteyourattentiontotheFranco-Haitian

commercial treaty published in No. 831, Advance Sheets Consular Reports,

September12,1900.Thesecondarticleofthattreatycontainsthe

following: “The same reduction of the surtaxes of 50 per cent and 33⅓

percent shall be accorded in that which concerns the tonnage dues paid by

French sailing vessels and on the merchandise debarked from French

steamers, on condition that the said merchandise be of French origin. This

origin shall be verified, etc.”

I have the honor to request that our minister to Haiti be instructed, if you

perceive no objection thereto, to bring this article of the treaty to the

attention of the Haitian Government, together with article 10 of the treaty of

November 3, 1864, between the United States and Haiti, by which it is

provided that no higher or other duties upon tonnage or cargo of vessels of

the United States shall be levied or collected than shall be levied or

collected on vessels of the most favored nation.

This Department desires to ascertain whether it is the purpose of the Haitian

Government to impose higher or other tonnage dues upon American vessels

carrying merchandise of French origin to Haiti than upon French vessels

carrying the same.

Respectfully,
O.L.SPAULDING,Acting Secretary.

[Document 250]
Mr. Battiste to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Port au Prince, Haiti,October 10, 1900.

No. 822.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of dispatch No. 432, of

September 17 last, transmitting copy of letter of the Assistant Secretary of

the Treasury, requesting information relative to intention of the Haitian

Government in regard to dues to be paid by American vessels carrying

merchandise of French origin to Haiti, and also instructing me to invite the

attention of this Government in this connection to article 10, of the treaty of

November 3, 1864, between the United States and Haiti guaranteeing the

most-favored-nation treatment to American shipping.

Herewith inclosed I beg to transmit the reply of this Government, with a

translation, to my dispatch fulfilling such instructions.

I am, etc.,
ALEXANDERBATTISTE,In charge.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
Port au Prince,October 6, 1900.

Mr. C A : By your dispatch of the 27th of the month of September

last you request me to inform you whether, in consequence of the new

commercial agreement made between Haiti and France, the Government of

theRepublichastheintentionofimposingonAmericanvessels

transporting to our ports merchandise of French origin higher tonnage dues

than those paid by French vessels loaded with merchandise from the same

province.

In reply to this communication I have the honor to announce to you that the

minister plenipotentiary of Haiti at Washington will soon be charged to

discuss the matter with the Department of State.

You kindly, in concluding, called my attention to Article X of the treaty of

November 3, 1864, which provides that there shall not be collected on the

tonnage or the cargo of vessels of the United States higher or other dues

than those imposed on vessels of the most favored nation.

In the first place, I would beg you to observe that the clearly determined

reciprocity character of the new Haitian-French agreement withdraws it

fromtheinfluenceofthe“most-favored-nationclause.” Then,tothe

provisions of Article X of the treaty of 1864, that you invoke, I would ask

of you permission to oppose the very precise stipulations of Article II of the

same diplomatic document, reading thus: “The Republic of Haiti and the

United States of America desiring, etc., * * * have agreed that any favor,

exemption, privilege, and immunity whatever, in matters of commerce or of

navigation, which either of them has granted or may hereafter grant, to the

citizens or subjects of any other government, nation, or state, shall extend,

inidentityofcasesandcircumstances,tothecitizensoftheother

contracting party; gratuitously, if the concession in favor of that other

government, nation, or state shall have been gratuitous, or in return for an

equivalent compensation, if the concession shall have been conditional.”

Now, you are certainly not ignorant that if certain tariff concessions have

been agreed in favor of French merchandise it was on the express condition

that our principal products would profit of the lowest duties on their

entrance in French ports.

Besides, do you think, Mr. Chargé d’Affaires, that notwithstanding all its

kindly dispositions toward the Republic of Haiti, the Federal Government

could agree to waive the restrictive clause set forth in the second paragraph

of Article II and ever agree, without compensation, not to levy “on the

importation into the United States of any article the growth, production, or

manufacture of Haiti or her fisheries; and no higher or other duties shall be

imposed on the importation into Haiti of any article the growth, produce, or

manufacture of the United States or her fisheries than are or shall be

payable on the like articles the growth, produce, or manufacture of any

other foreign country or its fisheries,” with which the United States would

be bound by a reciprocity treaty. (Article XIII of the treaty of 1864.) I think

it superfluous, in giving these considerations to the equitable appreciation

of your legation, to insist on the provisions so clearly explicative, and take

the occasion to renew to you, Mr. Chargé d’Affaires, the assurances of my

very distinguished consideration.
B.ST.VICTOR,
Secretary of State for Foreign Relations.

[Document 251]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Powell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 8, 1901.

No. 452.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 822, of October 10, last, relative to the alleged

right of the Haitian Government to impose higher duties on United States

vessels carrying French goods than on French vessels, I have to say that you

may advise the Government of Haiti that this Government is of opinion that

Article X of the convention of 1864 between the United States and Haiti is

quite independent of Article XI and creates absolute rights, which this

Government can not fail to insist upon. Should, therefore, any higher

charges be collected on American tonnage than that of any other country

they will be reclaimed.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 252]
Mr. Powell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Port au Prince, Haiti,February 18, 1901.

No. 883.]

Department’s instruction.

I remain, etc.,
W.F.POWELL.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Powell to Mr. St. Victor.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Port au Prince, Haiti,February 18, 1901.

No. 416.]

S: I have the honor to call your attention to the instructions from my

Government as to right of your Government to impose higher charges on

American tonnage than is imposed by your Government on French tonnage.

My Government is of the opinion that Article X of the convention of 1864

between the United States and Haiti is quite independent of Article XI and

creates absolute rights, which my Government can not fail to insist upon.

Should, therefore, any higher charges be collected on American tonnage

than that ol any other country they will be reclaimed.

Accept, etc.,
W.F.POWELL.

[Document 253]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Powell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 1, 1901.

No. 458.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 883, of the 18th ultimo,

and approve your note to the Haitian foreign office in regard to the

imposition of higher duties on American than on French tonnage. You will

continue to press the matter.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 254]
Mr. Powell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Port au Prince, Haiti,January 26, 1901.

No. 860.]

SIR: A gentleman by the name of Julienne Guilloid called and requested to

be registered on the books of the legation as an American citizen. He not

being able to furnish sufficient evidence that such was the case, I have

refused, but stated to him that I would call the attention of the honorable

Secretary of State to his request.

The evidence that he produced to support his request for registration is a

paper issued to his father forty-one years ago by the State of Louisiana,

bearing the name of Julienne, a mulatto, and stating that “the bearer was a

resident of that State.” Attached thereto was the seal of the State and the

signature of the governor, John Whitcliff. In addition to this another paper

was produced, bearing the signature of one of the United States consular

agents, calling upon this Government to give the bearer protection and the

right to move from place to place in the Republic of Haiti as an American

citizen. Later there appears an indorsement upon this paper of a similar

character, signed by the Hon. J. W. Thompson, at the time the United States

minister resident and consul-general here.

I would be glad to send copies of such papers, but Mr. Guilloid refused to

leave them without his father’s consent. After a further investigation I find

that this gentleman has no intention of returning to the United States, nor

has he returned within the time he left, forty-one years ago, during the

whole of which time he has been a resident of St. Marc, Haiti (I have

reference to the father). The son, who is the applicant for registration, is 23

years of age, has never been to the States at any period of his life, nor was

he registered on the books of the legation or the consulate at the time of his

birth. As I have stated, I have refused to register him, believing that his

father had lost his citizenship, and that the son had not made this request at

the time he reached his majority. I do not desire to do injustice to him, and

therefore request of the Department to inform me if the action taken by me

was correct.

I have, etc.,
W.F.POWELL.

[Document 255]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Powell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 20, 1901.

No. 455.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 860, of the 26th ultimo,

reporting that Mr. Julienne Guilloid had applied to you for registration as an

American citizen. He was born in Haiti, has never been in the United States,

is 23 years old, and expresses no intention of coming to this country. He

claims through his father, who left the United States forty-one years ago,

has never returned, and whose only evidence of American citizenship is a

paper under the seal of the State of Louisiana, and signed by the governor

thereof, in which he is styled a resident of the State of Louisiana.

In view of the presumption that the father of the applicant has practically

abandoned his United States citizenship, if he ever possessed it, and of the

further fact that the applicant expresses no intention of ever coming to the

United States to reside, the Department considers that your action is correct

in declining to register him as a citizen of the United States.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 256]
Mr. Léger to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OF THEREPUBLIC OFHAITI,
Washington,September 14, 1901.

MR.SECRETARY OFSTATE: Permit me to lament with you the sorrowful loss which the

people of the United States have just experienced in the person of its

regretted President.

The cowardly attempt of which he dies the victim has, in exciting the

indignation of my country, redoubled the Sympathy which has been felt

there for Mr. McKinley. I should be obliged to you to extend to the

Government as well as to the people of the United States the sincere

condolences of my Government and of the Republic of Haiti.

I avail myself, etc.,
J.N.LÉGER.

[Document 257]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Léger.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

SIR: The pressure of public business attendant upon the death of President

McKinley has delayed until now an acknowledgment of your note of the

15th instant conveying an expression of the sympathy of the Government

and people of Haiti with the Government and people of the United States in

the loss they have sustained by that sad event.

IshallbeobligedifyouwillassureyourGovernmentthattheir

condolement is gratefully appreciated by the Government and people of the

United States, who are deeply touched by the innumerable manifestations of

sympathy which they have received from all parts of the world.

At the same time I beg to thank you for the expression of condolence made

on your own behalf.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 257a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 18, 1901.
NOTICE TO CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF ITALY WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet it is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Italian subjects between the ages of 20 and 39 years are liable for the

performance of military duty under Italian law, except in the case of an only

son, or where two brothers are so nearly of the same age that both would be

serving at the same time, in which event only one is drafted, or when there

are two sons of a widow, when only one is taken.

Naturalization of an Italian subject in a foreign country without consent of

the Italian Government is no bar to liability to military service.

A former Italian subject may visit Italy without fear of molestation when he

is under the age of 20 years; but between the ages of 20 and 39 he is liable

to arrest and forced military service, if he has not previously reported for

such service. After the age of 39 he may be arrested and imprisoned (but

will not be compelled to do military duty) unless he has been pardoned. He

may petition the Italian Government for pardon, but this Department will

not act as the intermediary in presenting his petition.

There is no treaty between the United States and Italy defining the status of

former Italian subjects who have become American citizens.

The Italian law does not require the production of passports by foreign

travelers, but they are frequently called upon to establish their identity, and

are accordingly recommended to provide themselves with passports. They

are often useful in preventing an interference with departure from Italy.

[Document 258]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington,July 15, 1901.

Urgent.]

MR.SECRETARY OFSTATE:As I had the honor to tell you a short time ago, two Italians

were attacked on the 11th (?) instant and killed by an armed mob, while a

third was wounded, under circumstances which constituted a lynching. The

names of the victims were Giovanni and Vincenzo Serio, and that of the

wounded man is Salvatore Liberto, all of them being natives of Cefalu,

Sicily. The crime was committed at Erwin, Miss.

The serious nature of this case will not escape the attention of the United

States Government, and, deeply deploring what has occurred, I beg your

excellency to be pleased to instruct the proper authorities to the end that an

official investigation of this matter may be held at once, if possible, and that

the guilty parties may be arrested and punished according to law.

I have, at the same time, the honor to make a warm appeal to the good will

and the sentiments of justice and humanity of the Federal Government, and

I trust that efficient steps will be taken without delay in the county where

the crime was committed with a view to securing to our countrymen the

protection to which they are entitled by the treaties in force between Italy

and the United States.

Permit me to rely upon the support which you have been pleased to promise

me in this unfortunate matter, and I beg you, Mr. Secretary of State, to

accept the assurance of my highest consideration.
C

[Document 259]
Mr. Hay to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 17, 1901.

No. 687.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 15th

instant reporting the lynching of two Italians named Giovanni and Vincenzo

Serio, and the wounding of a third, named Salvatore Liberto, by an armed

mob at Erwin, Miss.

In reply I have the honor to say that the case has been at once referred to the

governor of Mississippi for appropriate action.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 260]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Iddings.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 20, 1901.

(Mr. Hill directs that the Italian minister for foreign affairs be informed that

an investigation of the alleged lynching at Erwin of persons born in Italy is

being made by the governor of Mississippi, and that all legal steps to secure

justicewhichmaybewarrantedbythefactswillbetakenbythis

Government.)
[Document 261]
Mr. Hill to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 20, 1901.

No. 688.]

SIR: Referring to your note of the 15th instant, in regard to the reported

lynching at Erwin, Miss., by an armed mob, of two Italians and wounding

ofathird,IhavethehonortosaythattheDepartmentatonce

communicated with the governor of Mississippi and has received from him

assurance that the matter will receive his immediate attention, and that he

will make a report in regard to it.

In order to assure the Government of His Majesty the King of Italy that no

proper course of action will be neglected by this Government, I have to-day

transmitted a telegramto the embassy at Rome to inform the minister of

foreign affairs that the governor of Mississippi is investigating the alleged

lynching of persons born in Italy, and that this Government will take all

legal steps to secure justice which the facts may warrant.

I desire to repeat the expression of the regret, already orally stated, which

the President entertains at the unfortunate occurrence.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 262]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hill.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington,July 21, 1901.

MR.ACTINGSECRETARY OFSTATE: Your excellency did me the honor to inform me, by

your note of the 20th instant, No. 688, relative to the lynching of two

Italians at Erwin, Miss., and to the wounding of a third, that the Department

of State has communicated with the governor of Mississippi, and has

received from him the assurance that the matter will receive his immediate

attention, and that he will make a report in regard to it.

You add that, with a view to assuring the Government of His Majesty the

KingofItalythatnothingwillbeneglectedbytheUnitedStates

Government, you sent, on the 20th instant aforesaid, a telegram to the

embassy at Rome, instructing it to inform the minister of foreign affairs that

the governor of Mississippi is investigating the alleged lynching of persons

born in Italy, and that the Federal Government will take all legal steps to

secure such justice as the facts may warrant.

Finally, your excellency has been pleased to repeat to me the expression

already communicated to me orally, of the regret of the President of the

United States on account of the unfortunate occurrence.

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the said communication and

to thank you for it.

Be pleased to accept, etc.,
C

[Document 263]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hill.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington, D. C.,July 22, 1901.

MR.ACTINGSECRETARY OFSTATE: A copy of the record of the inquest conducted by W.

E. Hunt, sheriff of Greenville, Miss., and embodying the verdict of the jury

in the matter of the lynching at Erwin, has just reached me from the royal

consulate at New Orleans.

I deem it expedient to communicate to your excellency a copy of that

strange document which for the sentiments therein expressed and the

manner in which it is worded, deserves, in my opinion, the attention of the

Federal Government.

It is scarcely necessary for me to point out the deplorable effects on the

people of Washington County, Miss., and the painful impression in all parts

that may be wrought by principles such as those that are recognized by a

judicial officer and a commission composed of “six good and lawful men”

as put in the report of inquest under consideration.

At the present time—that is to say, twelve days after the lynching—I am

without advice that its perpetrators have been arrested, and since it is

established by experience in the preceding cases of the same nature that the

guilty never were punished, I permit myself to ask your excellency whether

it may not be feasible for the Federal Government to send “detectives” to

the spot on its own account for the detection of the lynchers. Such a step

might facilitate the attainment of the object in view; it would also evidence

the interest the Government of the United States takes in the triumph of the

cause of justice and humanity. That such is the most earnest desire of the

Federal Government has been over and again declared by your excellency

and his excellency, Mr. Hay.

This absolute necessity of insuring a regular operation of the laws and the

punishment of the guilty is also a matter of supreme interest to the

Government of the King, my August Sovereign—as I have had many

occasions to state it.

A telegram, received by me last night, from the minister for foreign affairs

again repeats this sentiment and brings me evidence of the Sensation of

grief produced by this fifth lynching.

Awaiting the communication that your excellency may be pleased to make

in the matter, I renew, etc.,CARIGNANI.
[Inclosure.]

W.E.HUNT,sheriff and tax collector of Washington County, Greenville, Miss.

STATE OFMISSISSIPPI,County of Washington.
It having been duly reported to the undersigned justice of the peace of said

county that Vincin Cerio and Joe Cerio had, on the night of the 10th of July,

1901, been assassinated by a mob of men unknown, the said justice then

proceeded to the dwelling house of one Frank Cassio at Erwin Station,

Miss., where the dead bodies of the said above-named parties were found,

and proceeded to impanel a jury of six good and lawful men to act, inquest

jurorsonsaidbodies. Afteradueexaminationofallevidenceand

examination of the bodies, returned the following verdict: We, the jury,

sitting as an inquest upon the bodies of Vincin Cerio and Joe Cerio, do find

that the said Vincin Cerio and Joe Cerio came to their death by the act of

God, in that they died from gunshot wounds at the hands of unknown

parties to this jury.

Witness our hands this 11th day of July, 1901.

T.W.WRENCHER.

G.W.BENNETT.

JERRYHOWE.
The above is a true copy of the proceedings of the inquest of Vincin Cerio

and Joe Cerio held by me on the 11th day of July, 1901.

Witness my hand this 11th day of July, 1901.
J.M.BASKET,J. P.
STATE OFMISSISSIPPI,Washington County.
I, T. H. Hood, clerk of the chancery court in and for said county, do hereby

certify that the foregoing one-half of this sheet contains a true and correct

copy of the verdict of the jury of inquest upon the bodies of Vincin and Joe

Cerio as the the same was certified to this office, by J. M. Basket, justice of

the peace, of said county, by whose authority said inquest was held.

Given under my hand and official seal this 16th day of July, A. D. 1901.
T.H.HOOD,Clerk.
Per copia conforme,

NEWORLEANS,18 Luglio, 1901.

[]CP,Il Reggente.

[Document 264]
Mr. Iddings to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
Rome, Italy,July 23, 1901.

No. 62.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt on Sunday, July 21, of the

afollowing telegram(of July 20).

Pursuant to this instruction, I sought an interview with the minister of

foreign affairs which was fixed for, this morning, and in the conversation

which has just ended I expressed to M. Prinetti the assurances of the

Government at Washington as declared in your telegram. I also left with

him a memorandum on the subject reading as follows:

The governor of Mississippi is investigating the alleged lynching

at Erwin, Miss., of persons born in Italy. The United States

Government will take all legal steps which the facts may warrant

to secure justice against the guilty persons.

The minister did not express any opinion in regard to the information and

assurance which I gave to him. He even omitted to thank me for the

communication, but the omission was, of course, unintentional. He did

express, however, an earnest hope that in this the fifth case of lynching (as

he said) of Italian subjects in the United States within a few years the guilty

persons might be punished, especially since they were known. It seemed

singular to him that Congress had not acted upon the President’s recent

suggestionstopasssomelawwhichwouldauthorizetheFederal

Government to intervene in some way in the proceedings of justice in the

individual States of the Union when occasion requires; but he feared that

Congress would do nothing. I agreed with him in hoping that the President’s

suggestions might be acted upon, and explained to him, as has been

explained to previous ministers, the difficulty, often on account of local

feeling, which exists in certain parts of the United States, as well as in Italy

(in Sicily, for instance), of always obtaining exact justice in cases of certain

crimes. M. Prinetti contented himself in reply by reaffirming his hope that

this last “of a series of lynchings” would be adequately punished.

I may add that we are entirely in ignorance in the embassy of the details of

this incident at Erwin. The Italian papers give no particulars, simply saying

that another case of lynching has occurred, and as yet the American

newspapers which might inform us have not come.

I am, etc.,
LEWISMORRISIDDINGS
aPrinted ante.

[Document 265]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hill.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington,July 24, 1901.

MR.ACTINGSECRETARY OFSTATE: With a view to facilitating the search for the authors

of the lynching at Erwin, Miss., I deem it my duty to communicate to your

excellency some important data collected by the New Orleans consulate

upon the spot, by means of persons in whom it has confidence.

Vincenzo Serio, one of the victims, eight months ago had a dispute in

regard to a horse of his that was found on the property of an American

citizen. The latter, and other citizens of Glen Allen, armed with guns,

attempted to murder Serio, whom they left wounded, but who succeeded in

escaping to Greenville. Lately, having returned for the purpose of rejoining

his father, Giovanni Serio (the other victim), at Glen Allen, the citizens

ordered him to leave the village within thirty days. He paid no attention to

this order, and during the night of the 10th to the 11th instant the citizens

went to the house with the intention of killing him and anyone whom they

might find sleeping there.

At Glen Allen no secret was made of the preparations for the lynching.

Vincenzo Giglio and Giuseppe Butera, two Italians who got wind of it,

attempted three times to telephone to Serio a warning of the danger with

which he was threatened, but on each of the three occasions they were

denied the use of the telephone. At Erwin, Glenville, and Glen Allen

everyone is afraid to speak, but knows that the citizens of Glen Allen are the

organizers and authors of the lynching.

The importance of these particulars, which have been forwarded to us by

ourconsulateatNewOrleans,cannotescapetheattentionofyour

excellency. By their means the Mississippi authorities, if, as may be

expected of a civilized country, they have really the cause of justice at heart,

will be able beyond doubt to trace the authors of the brutal crime.

Be pleased to accept, Mr. Acting Secretary, the assurances of my highest

consideration.
CARIGNANI.

[Document 266]
Mr. Hill to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 25, 1901.

No. 691.]

SIR: Referring to the Department’s note of the 20th instant, I have the honor

to inclose for your information copy of a letter from the governor of

Mississippi showing the action taken by the State authorities for the purpose

of discovering the persons engaged in the killing at Erwin of two persons of

Italian origin and the wounding of a third.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,Acting Secretary.
Governor Longino to Mr. Hay.
EXECUTIVEDEPARTMENT,
Jackson, Miss.,July 20, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of the 17th

instant inclosing letter from the Italian chargé d’affaires ad interim on the

subject of the reported lynching of two Italians named Giovanni and

Vincenzo Serio, and of the wounding of Salvatore Liberto, by a mob at

Erwin, Miss., and asking to be advised whether the persons named were

Italian subjects or had been naturalized American citizens. Replying I beg

to say that immediately upon the receipt of advice of the killing a telegram

was sent out from this department to the sheriff of the county in which it

occurred; as follows:

“J M,July 11, 1901.
“Capt. WEH,Sheriff, Greenville, Miss.

“Governor absent. Italian consul, Vicksburg, asks for protection

of Italian subjects at Erwin station from mob. Please give matter

your prompt and effective attention.

“J.J.COMAN,Private Secretary."

On the second day after the unfortunate occurrence I went in person to

Washington County, where I learned from the sheriff that promptly on

receipt of said telegram he visited Erwin, the scene of the homicide, where

he made every endeavor to find out the names of the guilty parties and to

obtain such facts as would justify their arrest, but that he was unable to

obtain any reliable proof to establish the identity of those concerned in the

murder.

It appears that the deed was done under the cover of darkness by unknown

men, who quickly and quietly disappeared, leaving no trace of their identity

which the sheriff could obtain. I beg to say further that immediately after

the said interview with the sheriff I had a conversation with the judge of the

criminal court of the district, who expressed his purpose to exercise the full

power of his court under the law, so far as possible, for the apprehension

and punishment of all concerned in the crime. I feel warranted in the

assertion that both the judge and the court officials will do their full duty in

the premises, and assure you that all concerned shall receive my unqualified

cooperation in the efforts to enforce the law and to have full justice

administered in the premises. My private advice is that none of the Italians

named were naturalized American citizens, but of this I am not sure and

will make official inquiry thereof and report later. I am pleased to say also

that the citizens of Washington County, where the murders occurred,

deplore and condemn in unmeasured zeal the action of the guilty parties, as

will appear by the following official copy of resolutions passed by a

citizens’ meetingheldinthecityofGreenville,thecountysiteof

Washington County:

“G M,July 16, 1901.
“ 16, 1901.

“As taxpayers of the State of Mississippi, interested in the good

government thereof; as business men of Greenville, interested in

the commercial advancement of our community; as citizens of the

county of Washington, proud of the good repute that it has

enjoyed,wedeploreanddenouncethecowardlymidnight

assassination of two helpless Italians that recently occurred on

Lake Washington, in this county, as being subversive of the

principles of good government, a deadly blow to the commercial

success of any community which will condone, acquiesce in, or

tolerate such crime, a wanton insult and stigma to a county noted

foritslaw-abidingandhonorablecitizenship;anddeeply

impressed with the conviction that not to punish is to condone

such crime, and that the stain can only be effectively wiped out by

the punishment of the criminals, we respectfully request our

governor to order a special session of the circuit court of this

county, so that if possible those perpetrating this murder may be

discovered and brought to justice; and that the governor be

requested to offer a suitable reward for the arrest and conviction

of the guilty parties.

“W.A.EVERMAN,Chairman.
“L.PINKSMITH,Secretary.”

I have the honor to further advise that a reward of $100 has been offered by

me officially for the arrest and conviction of each of those guilty of the said

murders,andthatthereisagenerallawoftheStatewhichfurther

authorizes the payment by the county, wherein murders occur, the sum of

$100 for making the arrests.

I beg to assure you, and through you the Italian Government, that every

proper effort will be exercised by me in the attempt to obtain the conviction

and punishment of the guilty parties in this case.

Respectfully,
AHL ,Governor.

[Document 267]
Mr. Hill to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 27, 1901.

No. 693.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 24th

instant transmitting statements received by the Italian consul at Erwin,

Miss.

A copy of your note has been forwarded to the governor of Mississippi for

the information of the State authorities.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,Acting Secretary.

[Document 268]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hill.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington, D. C.,July 27, 1901.

MR.ACTINGSECRETARYOFSTATE: I have the honor to transmit herewith to your

excellency, the duly authenticated copies of the three certificates proving

that Giovanni and Vincenzo Serio, the victims of the lynching at Erwin,

Miss., in the night of the 10th to the 11th instant, and Salvatore Liberto,

who was wounded in the occurrence, did not acquire American citizenship

and remained Italian citizens.

I also inclose the statement of the clerk of the court of Washington County,

Miss., in corroboration of the evidence afforded by the certificates.

Be pleased, etc.,
CARIGNANI.
[Inclosure 1.]

STATE OFMISSISSIPPI,Washington County, ss:I, Wm. R. Gildart, clerk of the circuit

court of Washington County, Miss., do hereby certify that the following

named persons, to wit, Giovanni Serio and Vincenzo Serio have never

registered or voted in Washington County, Miss. Given under my hand and

official seal of office this 22d day of July, A. D. 1901.

WRG ,
Registrar and Circuit Clerk of Washington County, Miss.
I, the undersigned, acting consul of Italy in this city, do hereby certify that

the above is a true and correct copy of the original which is in this office.

New Orleans, July 24, 1901.

C.PAPINI,
Acting Consul of Italy.
Seen in the chancellery of the royal embassy of Italy to the United States

for the authentication of the signature, above affixed, of Mr. Carlo Papini,

acting royal consul of Italy at New Orleans.

Washington, July 27, 1901.
CARIGNANI,
The Chargé d’Affaires of His Majesty.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]

On this 22d day of July, 1901, in Greenville (Mississippi), Washington

County, before me, H. H. O. Bannon, a justice of the peace of Washington

County, Miss., personally appeared J. V. Roselli, son of the late Domenico,

a native of Saponara (Potenza), by occupation a real estate broker, 44 years

of age, now resident of Greenville, Miss.; Antonio Conginsta, son of the

late Giovanni, a native of Siderno (Reggio Calabria), by occupation a

wholesale merchant, 44 years of age, now residing at Greenville, Miss.;

Luigi Nepote, son of the late Giuseppe, a native of Corio (Torino), by trade

a tailor, 49 years of age, now residing at Greenville, Miss.; who, having

been sworn by me to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, and warned of

the importance of the oath and of the consequences of any inaccurate

statement on their part, and thereupon interrogated severally and jointly,

have declared: That they were well acquainted with Vincenzo Serio, son of

the late Giovanni, native of Cefalu (Palermo), by trade a peddler, 29 years

of age (about 29), a resident of Erwin (Miss.) for about a month, who was

lynched in the night of the 10th to the 11th of July instant, about midnight,

at Erwin, Miss., and that to their certain knowledge the said Vincenzo Serio

(illiterate and impecunious) has never assumed American citizenship.

All of which has been set forth in the present instrument which, having

been previously read to the deponents, who confirm it, was signed by them

all and by myself.

J.V.ROSELLI.

STATE OFMISSISSIPPI,Washington County:Personally appeared before H. H. O.

Bannon, a justice of the peace in and for said county and State within

named, J. V. Roselli, Antonio Conguista, Luigi Nepote, who, being by me

first duly sworn, state on oath that the foregoing affidavit is true and

correct.

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 22d day of July, 1901.

H.H.O.BANNON,J. P.

I, the undersigned, acting consul of Italy in this city, do hereby certify that

the foregoing is a true and correct copy of the original in this office.

New Orleans, July 24, 1901.

C.PAPINI,
Acting Consul of Italy.
Seen in the chancellery of the royal embassy of Italy to the United States,

for the authentication of the signature above affixed, of Mr. Carlo Papini,

acting royal consul of Italy at New Orleans.

Washington, July 27, 1901.
C ,
The Chargé d’Affaires of His Majesty.
[Inclosure 3.—Translation.]

On this 22d day of July, 1901, in Greenville (Mississippi), Washington

County, before me, H. H. O. Bannon, a justice of the peace of Washington

County, Miss., personally appeared J. V. Roselli, son of the late Domenico,

a native of Saponara (Potenza), by occupation a real estate broker, 44 years

of age, now resident of Greenville, Miss.; Antonio Conguista, son of the

late Giovanni, a native of Siderno (Reggio Calabria), by occupation a

wholesale merchant, 44 years of age, now residing at Greenville, Miss.;

Luigi Nepote, son of the late Guiseppe, a native of Corio (Torino), by trade

a tailor, 49 years of age, now residing at Greenville, Miss.; who, having

been sworn by me to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, and warned of

the importance of the oath and of the consequences of any inaccurate

statement on their part, and thereupon, interrogated severally and jointly,

have declared: That they were well acquainted with Giovanni Serio, son of

the late -----, native of Cefalu, Palermo, by trade a peddler, about 55 years

of age; a resident of Erwin, Miss., for about a month, who was lynched in

the night of the 10th to the 11th of July instant, about midnight, at Erwin,

Miss., and that to their certain knowledge the said Giovanni Serio (illiterate

and impecunious) has never assumed American citizenship.

All of which has been set forth in the present instrument, which, having

been previously read to the deponents who confirm it, was signed by them

all and by myself.

J.V.ROSELLI.

S M ,Washington County:Personally appeared before me, H. H. O.

Bannon, a justice of the peace of said county and State, J. V. Roselli,

Antonio Conguista, Luigi Nepote, who being by me first duly sworn, state

on oath that the foregoing affidavit is true and correct. Sworn to and

subscribed before me this 22d day of July, 1901.

HHOB ,J. P.

I, the undersigned, acting consul of Italy in this city, do hereby certify that

the above is a true and correct copy of the original in this office.

New Orleans, July 24, 1901.

C.PAPINI,Acting Consul of Italy.
Seen in the chancellery of the royal embassy of Italy to the United States

for the authentication of the signature above affixed of Mr. Carlo Papini,

acting royal consul of Italy at New Orleans.

Washington, July 27, 1901.
CARIGNANI,
The Chargé d’Affaires of His Majesty.
[Inclosure 4.]

On the 22d day of July, 1901, in Greenville (Mississippi), Washington

County, before me, H. H. O. Bannon, a justice of the peace of Washington

County, Miss., personally appeared J. V. Roselli, son of the late Domenico,

a native of Saponara (Potenza), by occupation a real-estate broker, 44 years

of age, now resident of Greenville, Miss.; Antonio Conguista, son of the

late Giovanni, a native of Siderno (Reggio Calabria), by occupation a

wholesale merchant, 44 years of age, now residing at Greenville, Miss.;

Luigi Nepote, son of the late Giuseppe, a native of Corio (Torino), by trade

a tailor, 49 years of age, now residing at Greenville, Miss., who having been

sworn by me to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, and warned of the

importance of the oath and of the consequence of any inaccurate statement

ontheirpart,andthereuponinterrogatedseverallyandjointly,have

declared: That they were well acquainted with Salvatore Liberto, son of the

late Vincenzo Liberto, native of Cefalu (Palermo), by trade a peddler, 19

years of age, residing at Erwin, Miss., illiterate and impecunious, who is

present at the writing of this instrument and lying in bed by reason of

serious injuries received during the night from the 10th to the 11th of July

instant, about midnight, at Erwin, Miss., in the same occurrence in which

Giovanni and Vincenzo Serio were lynched, and that to their certain

knowledgethesaidSalvatoreLibertohasneverassumedAmerican

citizenship, the law itself not permitting it owing to his being under age.

All of which has been set forth in the present instrument, which, having

been previously read to the deponents, who confirm it, was signed by them

all and by myself.

J.V.ROSELLI.

STATE OFMISSISSIPPI,Washington County:Personally appeared before me, H. H. O.

Bannon, a justice of the peace in and for said county and State, the within

named J. V. Roselli, Antonio Conguista, Luigi Nepote, who, being by me

first duly sworn, state on oath that the foregoing affidavit is true and

correct. Sworn to and subscribed before me this 22d day of July, 1901.

H.H.O.BANNON,J. P.

I, the undersigned, acting consul of Italy in this city, do hereby certify that

the above is a true and correct copy of the original, which is in this office.

New Orleans, July 24, 1901.

CP,Acting Consul of Italy.
Seen in the chancellery of the royal embassy of Italy to the United States

for the authentication of the signature above affirmed of Mr. Carlo Papini,

acting royal consul of Italy at New Orleans.

Washington, July 27, 1901.
C ,
The Chargé d’Affaires of His Majesty.

[Document 269]
Mr. Adee to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 30, 1901.

No. 694.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 22d

instant in further reference to the murder of Italians at Erwin, Miss.

You communicate a copy of the record of the inquest embodying the

finding of the jury in this regrettable affair, and state that on account of the

strange wording of the document you deem it expedient to bring it to the

attention of the Department.

While the finding of the coroner’s jury is perhaps, as you state, somewhat

unusual in phraseology, it is in effect the finding customary in such cases

when the evidence at the inquest does not disclose to the jury the authors of

the homicide. The effect of the finding is to devolve upon the judicial

authorities of the State further investigation of the case with a view to

discovering and punishing the perpetrators of the crime. It leaves the way

open for the usual course of justice in endeavoring to ascertain the “parties

unknown.”

Not being advised up to the time of writing that the perpetrators of the

crime had been arrested, you inquire whether it might not facilitate the

cause of justice if the Federal Government should send a “detective” to the

spot for the “detection of the lynchers.”

A suggestion to substantially the same effect was made by Baron Fava

pending the consideration of the Tallulah incident in 1899. Baron Fava, in a

telegram dated September 21 of that year, expressed the hope that the

special agent appointed by the Department would “discover and denounce

the criminals.” I replied, on the same date, that “in the actual status of the

matter and in the absence of Federal jurisdiction over an offense committed

in a State,” the agent sent to Tallulah could not assert any part in the local

administration of justice, but was sent merely to collect information for the

Department’s consideration and such action as might be in order.

* * * * * * *

The governor of Mississippi has assured me of his purpose to enforce the

laws by all means within his power, and I am informed that the universally

expressed sentiment of the community where the murders occurred deplores

the crime and shows a determination to aid in the discovery and punishment

of the perpetrators.

Be pleased, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 270]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hill.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington, D. C.,July 30, 1901.

MR.ACTINGSECRETARY OFSTATE: I have the honor to acknowledge the reception of and

to express my thanks for the copy of the investigation made by the governor

ofMississippiconcerningthelynchingatErwinandcourteously

communicated to me with note No. 691 of the 25th instant.

As I had occasion to tell you yesterday and now permit myself again to

observe, the statements made in the investigation do not afford evidence

that the Mississippi authorities have brought into play all the means at their

disposal for detecting the perpetrators of that cruel crime.

It grieves me to note that thus far, many days after the crime, it does not

appear that there has been made, nor even instituted, a judicial inquiry, the

first step to be taken immediately upon the commission of an offense of any

character. Nothing in that direction has been been done by the State’s

attorney or any other authority, with the exception of the first jury convened

by the local sheriff and the result of which was so much unlooked for that I

deemed it my duty to send you a copy of the document in my note of the

22d instant.

On the other hand, the embassy has been able to conduct an investigation of

its own, and in compliance with the wish you expressed yesterday, I have

the honor to transmit its result as an addition to that furnished with my note

of the 24th.

1. The deposition of the Italians Vincenzo Giglio and Giuseppe

Butera to the effect that they were denied, three times at least, the

use of the telephone on the day preceding the lynching, when they

wanted to tell Vincenzo Serio (one of the victims) about the

organized conspiracy and the peril he was in, according to the

advice they had from one Liberto, a brother of the wounded man,

who had it himself from one Dr. Hanna or Hollow, is fully

corroborated. The latter is said to have warned young Liberto not

to go to Erwin that night, because the Italians were to be killed.

2. The name of the person with whom Vincenzo Serio had the

quarrel about the horse (see my note of the 24th instant) appears

to be Mr. G. B. Allen, residing at Glen Allen, manager of a large

“plantation.”Thisman,accordingtomanywhohavebeen

interrogated on the spot, must, beyond a doubt, have been the

organizer and instigator of the crime. Save that horse incident,

there is no other known cause for which the lynching could have

been brought about.

3. On the evening before the crime, it is asserted there was

noticed an unusual stir in Erwin and some Italians who inquired

what was the reason, were told that a church meeting was to be

held.

Theseadvicesaffordasufficientbasisforanearnestandefficient

investigation. Since it was possible for the embassy and the consular

officers of New Orleans and Vicksburg to secure them with the limited

means at their disposal, it will have to be admitted that the Mississippi

authorities have not thus far done to detect the guilty that which is

demanded by the principles of humanity and justice which the Governments

of Italy and of the United States have equally at heart.

The honest agitation created in the country by the fell deed, and which is

confirmed even by the governor’s investigation, ought to stimulate the

authorities to energetic action, if only as satisfaction to public opinion.

Besides examining the persons hereinbefore named and the employee at the

railroad station of Erwin, which is quite close to the scene of the crime, it

seems that there might be at hand sufficient presumption of Mr. G. B.

Allen’s guilt, for whose arrest it is to be regretted that a warrant should not

have been already issued. The point of capital interest is also that the

witnesses be put in a position to give their testimony freely and that

provisions be made for their safety. It is to be inferred from the difficulties

met by our agents in their investigation that strong intimidation is brought

to bear on the spot; the wounded man himself has declared that he knew

little or nothing.

Be pleased, etc.,
CARIGNANI.

[Document 271]
Mr. Iddings to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

AMERICANEMBASSY,
Rome,July 31, 1901.

(Mr. Iddings acknowledges receipt of Department’s telegram of July 29,

and reports that he communicated its contents to the Italian minister for

foreign affairs, who received it politely but expressed some doubt that

justice could be obtained. The Department’s attitude in regard to detectives

is evidently disappointing to the Italian ministry for foreign affairs. Their

desire is that the Department employ private detectives and, should they

discover persons whom they consider guilty, that the Department say to the

Mississippi authorities: “These are probably the guilty men. Prosecute

them.”)
[Document 272]
Mr. Iddings to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
Rome, Italy,July 31, 1901.

No. 70.]

S: I have the honor to confirm my telegramof July 27, and your replyof

the 29th, received on the morning of the 30th.

Later in the day, by appointment, I took with me to the foreign office the

contents of your instruction in the form of a note. The minister was absent,

having been called to the King; but I saw the secretary-general, M.

Malvano. He received the communication, read it, and then, remarking that

what he said, of course, was not official, expressed disappointment that the

State Department would not pursue private detective investigations itself, so

that if the Mississippi authorities did not do their full duty, the Federal

Government would be prepared to urge them to do so with effect. He

thought that hesitation to take such a course was open to suspicion of lack

of interest. I referred him again to the correspondence with Baron Fava, as

explaining the attitude and powers of the State Department, reassuring him

of the desire of the Federal Government to see that complete justice was

adone to the guilty persons. I am sending you to-day a cablewhich

expresses M. Malvano’s views, because, while he does not speak with

authority, his opinions probably are representative of the real feeling in the

foreign office. They are undoubtedly very sore, there, declaring that it is

extraordinary that for five cases of lynching no one suffers.

LATER.—I have this morning seen the minister for foreign affairs, who

thanked me for the assurances of the note of yesterday. While hoping that

justice would be done, he said he might confess that he doubted the

expressed intentions of the authorities of the State of Mississippi, in view of

past experiences. And he read a dispatch from the Italian chargé d’affaires

atWashington,sayingthat,accordingtohisbestinformation,the

investigations of the local and State authorities in this matter were feeble. I

explained that police investigations were not made manifest until something

had been accomplished, and again called his attention to the assurances in

your cabled instruction, that the governor of Mississippi was resolved to

execute justice if possible, and that the sentiment of the local community

sustained him in his purpose.

I have, etc.,
LM I
Not printed.
Not printed.
Not printed.

[Document 273]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Adee.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington, D. C.,August 9, 1901.

MR.ACTINGSECRETARY OFSTATE: I deemed it expedient, for the purpose of facilitating

the measures taken to find the principals of the lynching at Erwin, Miss., to

sum up, in my notes of July 24 and 30, the result of the investigations

conducted on the spot by the direction of the royal consulate at New

Orleans.Dr.Hillassuredmethatthesenoteshadbeenpromptly

communicated to the governor of Mississippi. These notes, by reason of the

important data they contain, place the local authorities in a position to

detect the murderers.

Being still without a reply, I beg your most illustrious lordship to be good

enough courteously to call upon the governor for information concerning

the outcome of the action taken by him.

As you will understand, every delay in the execution of such action makes

it more difficult to attain the end desired by the Government of the King

and that of the United States.

Be pleased, etc.,
C

[Document 274]
Mr. Adee to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 12, 1901.

No. 700.]

authorities relating to the killing of two Italians and the wounding of a third

at Erwin, Miss.

This information has been communicated to the governor of Mississippi.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 275]
Mr. Hay to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 16, 1901.

No. 701.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 9th

instant, requesting the Department to ask the governor of Mississippi for

information concerning the outcome of the action of the State authorities in

view of the data transmitted in your notes of the 24th and 30th ultimo, in

regard to the killing of the Italians at Erwin, Miss.

In reply, I have the honor to say that a communication addressed by the

Department to the governor on the 13th instant recalls the matter to his

attention.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 276]
Mr. Hay to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 20, 1901.

No. 702.]

SIR: Referring to your note of the 30th ultimo in regard to the killing of two

Italians at Erwin, Miss., I have the honor to state that I have received a

letter from the governor of Mississippi, in which he states that he has

communicated to the district attorney the information contained in your

note.

The governor adds that a special term of the circuit court has been called by

JudgeLarkin,toconveneinGreenvilleonthesecondMondayof

September, to investigate the crime.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 277]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington,November 14, 1901.

EXCELLENCY: Inasmuch as the grand jury of the circuit court of the district of

Mississippi, called in the case on the 9th of last month, has also adjourned

after five sittings, with a statement that, owing to the manifest reticence of

intimidated or suborned witnesses, it had been unable to gather sufficient

evidence against the guilty in the Erwin outrage, the Government of the

King has been once more constrained to adhere to its conviction that the

State judiciary of the Union is not in a position to insure for aliens, at all

times and under all circumstances, the protection to which they are entitled

by treaty. In view of the fact that in this instance previous investigations

had, even before judicial proceedings had been developed, already secured

not a few data concerning those who could be presumed to be principals or

accessories in the crime, and that it was in every way ascertained that two

persons at least—Dr. Hanna and the telephone operator of Glen Allen—had

previous knowledge of the misdeed, it is obvious that if the grand jury did

not overcome the conspiracy of silence or reach a final conclusion, it, too,

did not know how to free itself from baneful surrounding influences and

resolutely do its duty.

In this condition of things the Government of the King has sent me express

instructions to enter the most energetic protest against what is, all at once, a

denial of justice, a flagrant violation of contractual conventions, and a grave

offense to every human and civil sentiment.

The Federal Government itself admitted after the preceding lynching that in

this respect the judiciary organization of the country is deficient, and that

the defect calls for a prompt remedy, since it is thereby placed in the

irksome position of being unable to keep faith with the treaties that bear its

signature. The illustrious President recently carried off by a tragic death had

earnestly recommended in one of his messages that provisions be made

therefor,butthebillsintroducedinbothHousesofCongressatthe

suggestion of the President did not come to the test of a vote.

Until the desired reform shall have become an accomplished fact the

Government of the King not only will have grounds of complaint for

violation of the treaties to its injury, but will not cease to denounce the

systematic impunity enjoyed by crime, and to hold the Federal Government

responsible therefor.

Italy has always cherished the warmest friendship for the United States, and

felt the most profound liking, and admiration for the institutions of the

Union, but the Italian Government can not conceal that its long standing

and constant sentiments are subjected to a very severe ordeal when it sees

its own people fall repeatedly and with impunity victims to such barbarous

assaults.

Be pleased, etc.,
CARIGNANI.

[Document 278]
Mr. Meyer to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
Rome, Italy,December 23, 1901.

No. 122.]

SIR: I beg leave to inclose herewith, with translation, an extract from the

Roman newspaper, The Tribuna, of December 21 last. It gives some

account of a question, put in the Italian Senate, to the minister of foreign

affairs in regard to the present relations of Italy and the United States, as

affected by such occurrences as the lynchings of Italians in the South. The

point of interest lies in the reply of M. Prinetti, the minister for foreign

affairs.

I have, etc.,
G.V.L.MEYER.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
IN THE SENATE. (SITTING OF DECEMBER20, 1901.)SIGNOR SARACCO PRESIDING.
The Senate met at 2 p. m., and after some unfinished business had been

attended to proceeded to the consideration of the question proposed by

Senator (Baron) Fava to the ministry of foreign affairs as to the present

conditions of the difficulty with the United States in the matter of the

lynching at Erwin, Miss., and as to the intentions of the ministry in

connection with the settlement of this difficulty.

SenatorFavarehearsedthestoryofthelynching,andblamedthe

Government for having kept secret for some time this so grave crime. In

regard to an indemnity, he declared that it would be more decorous for Italy

to refuse absolutely to accept it; remarked, also, that for the four preceding

lynchings the Federal Government had never given proper satisfaction to

inquiring what the intentions of the ministry were as to the solution of this

most important matter.

M. Prinetti (minister for foreign affairs) in reply said that he had supposed

he had previously explained the attitude of the Government toward the

lynching at Erwin, and declared that absolutely nothing had been done to

keep the fact of the crime secret. The Government, he continued, had

instructed its diplomatic agents to use all its efforts to identify and bring to

justice the criminals, but he added (comments from the senators) that all

these efforts had been in vain. He described the course taken, saying that

the Italian Government had, in a note to the Federal Government, rehearsed

the details of the facts of the case and insisted upon the necessity of

providing a remedy. The Federal Government had received the note with

promises for the future to use all possible efforts to prevent the repetition of

similar occurrences. He was not of the opinion of the Senator (Fava) about

refusing the indemnity offered by the Federal Government to the families of

the murdered men; the Government of the King would not demand an

indemnity, because it could not admit that money could compensate for the

shedding of the blood of Italian citizens, yet the Government would accept

an indemnity for the families of the victims, if spontaneously offered. M.

Prinetti concluded by saying that while Italy should maintain a proper

attitude toward its colonists abroad, she should not appear too vigorous on

their behalf, because it was a fact that in those far regions the Italians were

received with a great measure of benevolent hospitality. (Cries of “good”

and other indications of approval.) Baron Fava accepted the declaration of

the minister and thanked him.

[Document 279]
Mr. Hill to Signor Mayor des Planches.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 2, 1902.

No. 8.]

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Signor Carignani’s

note of November 14 last, in which, under the instruction of the Royal

Government of Italy, he presents its protest against the failure of the

authorities of the State of Mississippi to identify and punish the persons

who committed the assault upon certain Italian subjects at Erwin in that

State.

The Department has taken note of the views presented by Signor Carignani

and will forward copies of his note to the committees of the Senate and

HouseofRepresentativeshavingunderconsiderationthePresident’s

recommendation that indemnity be graciously tendered to the families of

the victims and that legislation be enacted to give the Federal courts

original jurisdiction of treaty offenses against aliens.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 280]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Iddings.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 31, 1901.

No. 32.]

aSIR: * * * I inclose copy of a letterfrom the attorneys of the United States

Lloyds, who are anxious to ascertain exactly what the relations between

Italy and the Sultan Osman Mahmud are.

You will investigate the matter and report.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.
aNot printed.

[Document 281]
Mr. Iddings to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
Rome,August 29, 1901.

No. 81.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction No. 32,

of July 31 last, directing me to obtain information in regard to the relations

between Italy and the Sultan, Osman Mahmud.

Italy, since 1889, has included Somaliland within her sphere of influence in

Africa, and the Sultan apparently accepted her sovereignty, but some

months ago he rebelled, influenced, perhaps, by the Mad Mullah, who is

making trouble within the neighboring English sphere. But soon after the
effectively that, when theAsturíafoundered, the Sultan had so far returned

to his allegiance that his aid was used, it is alleged, in protecting the

stranded ship and cargo.

Within two or three days the Italian Government has received from S.

Pestalozza, its consul-general at Zanzibar, who has charge of this region,

dispatches indicating that Osman Mahmud has quieted down to loyalty, and

fully recognizes Italian sovereignty. He has signed an agreement which

binds him to protect, by all means in his power, wrecked ships and their

cargoes; to prevent trade in firearms and intoxicating liquors; to consent to

the erection of light-houses on his coast, and to fly the Italian flag over all

his people’s vessels—the sambucii—sailing boats of 300 or 400 tons. For

this work and submission Italy will allow him about $5,000 a year in

monthly payments.

I am, etc.,

LEWISMORRISIDDINGS.

[Document 282]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Iddings.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 21, 1901.

No. 50.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 81, of August 29 last, I have to say that the

Department will be pleased to have you send to it three copies of the recent

Italian convention with the Sultan of Somaliland as soon as it shall have

been published by the Italian Government.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 283]
Mr. Meyer to Mr. Hay.
AMERICANEMBASSY,
Rome,December 11, 1901.

No. 121.]

SIR: * * * I have the honor to send you herewith three copies of the treaty

between Italy and Sultan Osman Mahmud of Somaliland.

I am, etc.,
G.V.L.MEYER.
[Inclosure.]
TREATY.
[Translated from the Italian, the Italian text having been translated from the

Arabic]

In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.

On the basis of the previous convention between the powerful Italian

Government and the Sultan Osman Mahmud, Sultan of the Mijurtines,

bearing date of Shaaban 6, 1306, corresponding to April 7, 1889, and

likewise on the basis of the declaration made in writing by the aforesaid

Sultan to the above-mentioned Government under date of Jamed-el-Ewel,

1313, corresponding to November 16, 1894, the aforesaid Sultan Osman

Mahmud, in view of the misunderstanding that has occurred between him

and the Government of Italy, has recognized that he has contravened the

orders of the said Government, and at the request of the same, which is

understood to have been made with a view to elucidating the situation and

to removing every cause of misunderstanding, both parties have agreed to

the stipulations hereinafter stated. To this effect the Government of Italy has

appointed as its special delegate the Chevalier Giulio Pestalozza, its consul-

general, and the Sultan Osman Mahmud, Sultan of the Mijurtines agrees for

himself, personally, and also in the name of his own sons or of his relatives

who may succeed to the sultanate, and with the full consent of all the

sheikhs and notables of the aforesaid Mijurtines, who are present on this

occasion, to the following articles:

ARTICLEI. The Sultan Osman Mahmud, Sultan of the Mijurtines,

places his own person, his sultanate, and the entire territory of the

Mijurtines,undertheprotectionandflagofthepowerful

Government of Italy; he hoists the Italian flag in all the ports of

call of the coast, and assumes the custody thereof, as do likewise

all his dependents.

ART.II. All sambuks and all Mijurtine vessels belonging to persons

under his administration must be registered by the Government

and carry the Italian flag, according to-the laws and maritime

regulations. This they are to do through the medium of the royal

consul.

ARTICLEIII. The sultan of the Mijurtines shall afford protection and

assistance to all Italians and foreigners who shall arrive in his

country either for pleasure or for the purpose of engaging in trade.

He shall be responsible for any harm or injury that may be done

them in his territory. Every jurisdictional act concerning such

persons shall, however, be reserved for the Royal Government.

A IV. If, which God forbid, any vessel shall be stranded or

wrecked on the Mijurtine coasts, it shall in nowise be permissible

to plunder the cargo or to molest the crews and passengers of such

vessels, but it shall be the duty of the sultan and of the sheiks of

the district nearest to the scene of the disaster to lend all aid and

protectionimmediately,facilitatingthetransportationofthe

persons to Aden, or to another seat of government to which the

interested parties may desire to be taken. The sultan shall order

the cargo and all the appurtenances of the vessel to be well

guarded until the arrival of the owner or owners, to whom said

cargo and appurtenances shall be delivered. On this ground the

an adequate reward from the owner or owners of the vessel and

cargo. The amount of such reward shall, if necessary, be fixed by

the royal consul at Aden as the circumstances may seem to him to

warrant, he having first heard the arguments of the sultan.

ARTICLEV. In confirmation of his aforesaid written declaration, and

in pursuance of the agreement now made, Osman Mahmud, sultan

of the Mijurtines, formally pledges himself under oath, before

God, to prohibit the importation of firearms and of ammunition

therefor, such as balls and cartridges, on all the Mijurtine coast, as

also by land. Consequently, not a single gun or a single cartridge

shall be imported, either for the sultan himself or for others,

unlessthepermissionoftheRoyalGovernmentorits

representative shall previously have been obtained in writing. If

the aforesaid provisions shall be violated either by the sultan or

by one of his dependents, or by any inhabitant of Mijurtina, the

sultan shall be responsible therefor, and it shall be his duty to

deliver such guns or cartridges as may have been clandestinely

introduced to the Royal Government; furthermore, the offender

shall be liable to imprisonment, or to a fine, which shall not be

less than 100 rupees for each gun and 300 rupees for each box of

cartridges that shall be ascertained to have been clandestinely

imported; and, in case of the escape of the offender, the fine shall

be imposed upon his tribe, or shall be chargeable to the sultan.

The Royal Government hereby grants to the sultan the privilege

of retaining such guns as he now has; the said arms shall be

numbered and registered as belonging to the sultan. When the

Government shall desire it, such guns may be exchanged for guns

of Italian manufacture. The prohibition to import firearms in all

Mijurtina shall be announced by the sultan in writing or in such

other way as may be deemed most suitable.

A VI. When the Royal Government shall desire to erect a

light-house on Cape Assir (Guardafui), having its base in the sea,

in the village of Ollok, or in that of Damo, as likewise another

light-house in another locality, such as Alula or Bandar Felek, it

shall be at perfect liberty to do so. The Royal Government shall

have the right to keep in the localities selected by it for the

erection of light-houses such number as it may deem necessary of

soldiers, employees, and of persons having charge of said light-

houses and engaged in keeping them in running order. In such

localities the administration and government thereof shall belong

to Italy. It is understood that in the localities of Bandar Alula and

BandarFelekandtheirdependenciestherightsheretofore

exercised shall still be exercised by the same party as in the past.

This convention, drawn up in duplicate, has, after having been read and

explained,beenconfirmed,approved,andsignedbySultanOsman

Mahmud, sultan of the Mijurtines, and by the sheiks who were present with

him on the occasion, and whose names appear below: Done at Bandar

Ollok, this 3d day of Jamad-el-Ewel, 1319, corresponding to August 18,

1901.

(Signed)
SULTANOSMANMAHMUDYUSSEF,
Sultan of the Mijurtines.

Y .

M .

Y O.

OMARMOHAMMEDGURE.

And all the Mijurtine notables.
Year 1319, Jamad-el-Ewel the third.

Witnesses:

SAÏDYUSSEF,Dragoman.
MOHAMMEDISMAIL,Dragoman.
G.PESTALOZZA,
Consul-General on a Special Mission.
We hereby certify that we took part in the negotiations.
V.RICHERI,
Captain, Commanding the Royal Steamer Colombo.F.SOLA,
Royal Consul-General of Italy at Aden.

[Document 284]
Mr. Iddings to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

AMERICANEMBASSY,
Rome,August 1, 1901.

(Mr. Iddings inquires if he shall give testimony against a pickpocket, which

is desired by an Italian court.)
[Document 285]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Iddings.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 1, 1901.

(Mr. Adee states that Mr. Iddings’s testimony may be given on terms

consistent with representative dignity. Unless interrogatory in open court is

indispensable, personal deposition at the embassy is preferable.)
[Document 286]
Mr. Iddings to Mr. Hay.
A E ,
Rome,August 10, 1901.

No. 72.]

S: I have the honor to confirm my telegramsent to you on August 1, and

your replyreceived on the 2d instant, both in reference to my giving my

testimony against a pickpocket. My deposition is to be taken at the embassy

by the judge before whom the case has come. With thanks for the courtesy

of your permission in this matter, I am, etc.,
LEWISMORRISIDDINGS.
aPrinted ante.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 287]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Iddings.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 8, 1901.

No. 33.]

SIR: I inclose herewith copy of a dispatch from the consul-general of the

United States at Rome requesting instructions in regard to issuing passports

to minors residing in Italy and born in the United States of alien parents, the

particular case in point being that of a minor, Francesco Guarino, to whom a

passport was issued by you against the consul-general’s representations.

The question raised by the consul-general is, in his own words, as follows:

Can a minor residing temporarily or permanently abroad, but born

naturalized, be considered an American citizen? And is such

minor entitled to an American passport?

ThepositionoftheDepartmentisthatbirthintheUnitedStates,

irrespective of the nationality of the parents, confers American citizenship;

that no act of the parent can deprive the child of the status thus acquired,

and that consequently such children, even though taken abroad by their

parents, are entitled to be treated as citizens of the United States. In view of

the decisions of our Federal courts, there can be no doubt of the correctness

of this position. It has been almost uniformly held by our Federal courts that

birth within the dominions and jurisdiction of the United States confers

citizenship irrespective of the nationality of the parents. The question was

squarely presented to the Supreme Court in 1897 in the case of Wong Kim

Ark, who was born in the United States of parents who were subjects of the

Emperor of China. In 1890, when he was 17 years of age, he went to China

for a visit, returning to the United States the same year. He was permitted to

enter the United States, and remained here until 1894, when he again went

to China for a visit. He returned to the United States in 1895, but the

collector of customs at San Francisco denied his application for admission

on the ground that he was not a citizen of the United States. Upon habeas

corpus the United States district court ordered him to be discharged on the

ground that he was a citizen of the United States. The United States

appealed to the United States Supreme Court, and that court (169 U. S.,

649) affirmed the judgment of the lower court, thus authoritatively settling

the question.

The question whether the father by removing the child from the jurisdiction

of the United States or otherwise can deprive him of the citizenship

conferred upon him by birth has also been passed upon by the Federal

courts. In ex parte Chun King (35 Fed. Rep., 354) Judge Deady, in

delivering the opinion of the United States circuit court, said:

In my judgment, the father can not deprive his minor child of the

statusofAmericancitizenshipimpresseduponitbythe

circumstances of its birth under the Constitution and within the

jurisdiction of the United States. This status once acquired can

only be lost or changed by the act of the person when arrived al

majority and the consent of the Government.

Your action in granting the passport was correct.

I am, etc.,
AAA,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
C G U S,
Rome, Italy,June 20, 1901.

No. 99.]

SIR: I have the honor to report the following: A minor, named Francesco

Guarino, born in the United States of Italian parents, not naturalized,

applied to our embassy in Rome, through our consul at Palermo, where he

is now residing, for a passport. The application was granted by the chargé

d’affaires, Mr. Iddings, against my representations, under the plea that the

boy was born in the United States and was to be considered a United States

citizen, although a minor and his parents being at the time of his birth and

still are Italian subjects.

As the question may arise again, I deem it my duty, with the agreement of

Mr. Iddings, to respectfully request the Department for a strong legal

opinion upon the subject, in order to settle the controversy and to guide our

action in the future.

The point is this: Can a minor residing temporarily or permanently abroad,

but born in the United States of alien parents who have never been

naturalized nor intimated their intentions of becoming naturalized, be

considered an American citizen? And is such minor entitled to an American

passport?

No. 864, section 992 of title 25 of the Statutes of the United States relating

to citizenship reads as follows: “All persons born in the United States and

not subject to any foreign power, excluding Indians not taxed, are declared

to be citizens of the United States.” It would therefore appear clear to me

that a child born in the United States of alien parents can not be considered

to be a United States citizen, especially when said child is outside of the

United States, no more than a child born abroad of American parents could

be considered a citizen of the country where he happened to be born.

Then again, Prof. Alexander Porter Morse, in No. 7 of the Treaties of

Citizenship, published in Washington, considers “the country of the father is

that of the children, at least during their minority.”

This point involves the right of a United States legation or embassy abroad

to make aliens American citizens, that right lying, I believe, solely within

the power of the United States courts.

All of which is respectfully submitted.

I am, etc.,
HECTOR DECASTRO,
United States Consul-General.

[Document 288]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington, D. C.,August 16, 1901.

MR.SECRETARY OFSTATE: In the action brought against the Auric Mining Company,

of Hinsdale County, Colo., by Mrs. Fenice Ferrara, for indemnity by reason

of the death of her husband, an employee of the said company, caused by a

disaster in the mines, the district court of Pueblo, Colo., is said to have

decided that the plaintiff had no right to sue in justice, owing to her quality

of resident and subject of the Kingdom of Italy.

This decision seems to be in contradiction of the treaty of February 26,

1871, between Italy and the United States, and I have the honor to submit to

the high judgment of your excellency a copy (which, I pray, be eventually

returned) of the proceedings and of the decision in said case, accompanied

by a letter of Mr. M. J. Galligan, counsel of Mrs. Ferrara, for such measures

astheFederalGovernment,custodianofandresponsibleforthe

international compacts, will see fit to take.

While asking that you will in the meanwhile acknowledge the receipt of this

note, I renew, etc.,C
[Inclosure.]

S C ,County of Hinsdale, ss:
FF , In the district court thereof.
v.
TAMC .

Comes now the above-named plaintiff, Fenice Ferrara, and, leave of court

being first had and obtained, files this her amended complaint, and alleges:

(1) That the defendant is, and at all times herein mentioned was, a

corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the

laws of the State of Colorado, and doing business therein.

(2) That the plaintiff, Fenice Ferrara, is the wife and widow of

Pietro Ferrara, deceased.

(3) That on or about the 26th day of June, A. D. 1897, the above-

named defendant, the Auric Mining Company, was operating a

mine at or near Henson, in Hinsdale County, Colo.; that in such

operation they were operating the Ute mining claim, the Ulay

Lode mining claim, and other lode mining claims, all being

situated in Galena mining district, said county and State. That in

the operation of such mines they employed several men.

(4) That on or about the 26th day of June, A. D. 1897, and for

about twenty days prior thereto, said Pietro Ferrara was in the

employ of said defendant as a miner underground in said Ulay

mine, which was then and there being operated by said defendant

as aforesaid.

(5) That the said Pietro Ferrara, in the regular course of his

employment as such miner for the said defendant, was at work in

said mine as an employee of the said defendant.

(6) That it was the duty of the said defendant to use reasonable

and ordinary care in providing a reasonably safe and suitable

place for the said Pietro Ferrara to work in, in the regular line of

his duty, but that the said defendant, negligently disregarding its

duty,anddisregardingtherightsofthesaidPietroFerrara,

carelessly and negligently failed and neglected to use reasonable

and ordinary care in timbering the mine where the said Pietro

Ferrara was at work as such employee in the regular line of his

duty, and by reason of the carelessness and negligence of said

defendant, and without any fault or negligence of the said Pietro

Ferrara, a large rock fell from the roof or foot wall of said mine

and struck the said Pietro Ferrara with great force and violence,

inflicting severe and fatal injuries upon him, from the effects of

which he died shortly after, That the said Pietro Ferrara received

said injuries, as aforesaid, on the said 26th day of June, A. D.

1897.

(7) That said Pietro Ferrara was only working in said mine for a

short time prior to receiving said injury and was wholly unaware

of the dangerous and unsafe condition of said mine, and did not

havetheknowledge,orequalmeansofknowledge,ofthe

dangerous condition of said mine which the said defendant had.

(8) That the said Ferrara had been at work in the said Ulay mine

for the period of twenty days prior to the date of such injury.

(9) That the said defendant knew, or, by the use of ordinary care,

might have known, of the unsafe and dangerous condition of said

mine which resulted in said injury to the said Pietro Ferrara.

(10) That it was the duty of the defendant to use reasonable and

ordinary care in providing a reasonably safe and suitable place for

said Pietro Ferrara to work in, and to use reasonable and ordinary

care in furnishing timber and timbering said mine so as to keep it

in a reasonably safe condition for said Pietro Ferrara to work

therein; but that said defendant negligently failed to do so and

negligently failed to keep said mine in good repair, and by reason

of such negligence the said Pietro Ferrara received said injuries,

and it was no part of the duty of said Pietro Ferrara as such

employee to see after the timbering and repairing said mine.

(11) That said Ferrara was employed at about the end of a drift in

said mine, the exact location of which is to plaintiff unknown.

That blasts had been discharged, and about one hour thereafter the

superintendent of said mine, acting under and by authority of said

defendant, ordered the said Pietro Ferrara to commence work

therein in the way, to wit, of drilling for new blasts. That no

precaution had been taken by said superintendent against falling

rock,althoughsaidsuperintendentwellknewthedangerous

condition of the spot where he had ordered the said Pietro Ferrara

to commence work.

(12) That the said Pietro Ferrara left surviving him this plaintiff,

who was his wife. That at the time of his death, caused by such

injuries as aforesaid, he was 30 years old, and in good health and

able to work and earn money, and was, and for a long time prior

to his said injuries was, earning the sum of $3 per day. That the

said plaintiff relied upon said wages of the said Pietro Ferrara for

sustenance, having no other assets, and is now destitute by reason

of the death of the said Pietro Ferrara.

(13) That, by reason of the premises, said plaintiff has been

damaged in the sum of $5,000.

Wherefore the plaintiff demands judgment against the said defendant, the

Auric Mining Company, for the sum of $5,000 and the costs of this action.

M.J.GALLIGAN, BORDWELL &KOHN,
Attorneys for Plaintiff.
STATE OFCOLORADO,County of Hinsdale, ss:G. D. Bordwell, being first duly

sworn, upon oath deposes and says that he is one of the attorneys for the

plaintiff in the above entitled cause; that he has read the above and

foregoing amended complaint, knows its contents, and that the matters and

things therein stated are true, as he verily believes; that he makes this

verification for and on behalf of the plaintiff, for the reason that the said

plaintiff is not a resident of Hinsdale County, Colo., and now absent

therefrom.

GDB
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 12th day of January, 1899.

[] JCG
Filed January 18, 1899. James C. Gates, clerk.

FENICEFERRARA, PLAINTIFF, Amendment to defendant’s answer.
v.

THEAURICMININGCOMPANY, A CORPORATION, DEFENDANT.
Comes now the defendant, leave of court having been first had and

obtained, and files this its amendment to its original answer herewith, and

for a further and fourth defense to the plaintiff’s amended complaint says:

Defendant is informed and believes, and so alleges, that the plaintiff is, and

at all times heretofore has been, a resident citizen and subject of the

Kingdom of Italy, and that the plaintiff is not now, and never has been at

any time, a resident or citizen of the State of. Colorado or of the United

States of America, and is not entitled to bring or prosecute this action in any

courts of the State of Colorado.

Wherefore the defendant prays that it may be hence dismissed, and that it

recover its costs laid out and expended in this behalf.

WOLCOTT &VAILE, H.H.DUNHAM,
Attorneys of Defendant.
Said court granted the said motion and allowed the said amendment to be

filed over the objection of the said plaintiff, and dismissed the said jury and

abandoned the then trial of the said cause before the said jury.

That afterwards the said plaintiff filed a demurrer, which said demurrer is in

words and figures as follows, to wit: In the district court.

S C ,County of Pueblo, ss.
FF , Demurrer.
v.

TAMC .

Now comes the plaintiff and demurs to the amendment to defendant’s

answer filed herein, on the ground that said amendment does not contain

facts sufficient to constitute a defense to plaintiff’s complaint of cause of

action.

M.J.GALLIGAN,
Attorney for Plaintiff.
That afterwards the said defendant moved to strike the said demurrer from

the files, which said motion was sustained by the court over the objection of

the said plaintiff, and the said plaintiff then and there moved to have the

said action set down for hearing and trial, and the said court overruled the

said motion, to which ruling due exception was taken by the said plaintiff.

That thereupon the said defendant, by its attorney, moved for judgment

upon the pleadings, for the reason that no reply had been filed to the said

amendment to the defendant’s answer, the said motion being oral and

without any previous notice to plaintiff or her attorney. And the court

sustained said motion and rendered judgment in favor of the said defendant

for costs of suit, when the record in this case shows that the plaintiff was

allowed to prosecute without the payment of costs as a poor person, and

dismissed the said action at the costs of said plaintiff as aforesaid.

That the said judgment dismissing the said action and denying the said

plaintiff the right to prosecute this action, for the alleged reason that the said

plaintiff is and has been a resident and subject of the Kingdom of Italy, and

that the plaintiff is now and never has been at any time a resident or citizen

of the State of Colorado, of the United States of America, and is not entitled

to bring or prosecute this action in any of the courts of the State of

Colorado, as alleged in the said amendment to defendant’s answer, is in

violation of the treaty of 1871 between the Federal Government of the

United States of America and the Kingdom of Italy, which said treaty

provides as follows: “A III. The citizens of each of the high contracting

parties shall receive, in the States and Territories of the other, the most

constant protection and security for their persons and property, and shall

enjoy in this respect the same rights and privileges as are or shall be granted

to the natives, on their submitting themselves to the conditions imposed

upon the natives.

“Theyshall,however,beexemptintheirrespectiveterritoriesfrom

compulsory military service, either on land or sea, in the regular forces, or

in the national guard, or in the militia. They shall likewise be exempt from

anycontributionwhatever,inkindorinmoney,tobeleviedin

compensation for personal services.

“ARTICLEXXIII. The citizens of either party shall have free access to the courts

of justice in order to maintain and defend their own rights, without any

other conditions, restrictions, or taxes than such as are imposed upon the

natives; they shall, therefore, be free to employ, in defense of their rights,

such advocates, solicitors, notaries, agents, and factors as they may judge

proper in all their trials at law; and such citizens or agents shall have free

opportunity to be present at the decisions and sentences of the tribunals in

all cases which may concern them, and likewise at the taking of all

examinations and evidences which may be exhibited in the said trials.”

Which said treaty and said provisions are in full force and effect.

And the court erred in the premises, as aforesaid, and a new trial should be

granted the plaintiff in accordance with the provisions of the said treaty, as

the said court was bound to take judicial notice of the provisions of the said

treaty.

II.

The judgment of the said court is against law.

MJG ,
Attorney for Plaintiff.
Filed in the office of the clerk of the district court this 11th day of May,

1901. L. B. Strait, clerk, by E. F. Nichols, deputy.

And afterwards: That on the 29th clay of June, 1901, the same being one of

the regular days of the May, 1901, term of said court, there was among the

proceedings had and done and entered of record the following order, which

said order is in words and figures as follows, to wit:

FENICEFERRARA
v.

THEAURICMININGCOMPANY.
On this day it is ordered that the plaintiff’s motion for a new trial herein be

and the same is hereby overruled and denied. To which ruling of the court

the said plaintiff excepts.

[Document 289]
Mr. Hay to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August, 1901.

No. 704.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 16th

instant presenting for the consideration of this Government the complaint of

the Italian subject, Mrs. Fenice Ferrara, that she has been denied justice in

the district court of Pueblo, Colo.

In reply, I have the honor to say that it appears from the transcript of the

record of judicial proceedings transmitted by you that Pietro Ferrara, an

Italian subject, an employee of the Auric Mining Company, a corporation of

the State of Colorado, while working in a mine belonging to said company

near Henson, Colo., on June 26, 1897, was injured by the falling of a large

rock from the roof of the mine, and died shortly thereafter. The widow of

the deceased brought an action against the mining company in the district

court of the county of Hinsdale, to recover damages for the death of her

husband, on the ground that the same was due to the negligence of the

company. She claimed damages in the sum of $5,000. By agreement of the

parties a change of venue was had to the district court of the county of

Pueblo. In the course of the proceedings a motion was made by the

defendant that the case be dismissed on the ground that the plaintiff was a

nonresident alien and not entitled to prosecute the action in any of the

courts of Colorado. The court granted this motion and rendered judgment

dismissing the case on May 6 last. The plaintiff, through her attorney,

excepted and gave notice of an appeal to the court of appeals (supreme

court) of Colorado. The appeal was granted upon condition that the plaintiff

files an appeal bond. It appears that the plaintiff did not perfect the appeal,

however, but instead, on May 11, filed a motion for a new trial in the same

court, one of the grounds of such motion being that the judgment was in

violation of the treaty of 1871 between the United States and Italy, the

pertinent portions of which are as follows:

‘“ARTICLEIII. The citizens of each of the high contracting parties shall

receive, in the States and Territories of the other, the most

constant protection and security for their persons and property,

and shall enjoy in this respect the same rights and privileges as

areorshallbegrantedtothenativesontheirsubmitting

themselves to the conditions imposed upon the natives. * * *

“ARTICLEXXIII. The citizens of either party shall have free access to

the courts of justice in order to maintain and defend their own

rights, without any other conditions, restrictions, or taxes than

such as are imposed upon the natives; they shall, therefore, be

freetoemploy,indefenseoftheirrights,suchadvocates,

solicitors, notaries, agents, and factors, as they may judge proper

in all their trials at law; and such citizens or agents shall have free

opportunity to be present at the decisions and sentences of the

tribunals in all cases which may concern them; and likewise at the

taking of all examinations and evidences which may be exhibited

in the said trials.”

On June 29 last the court denied the plaintiff’s motion for a new trial.

The plaintiff, through her attorneys, appeals to the Italian Government to

make demand upon the Government of the United States for the sum of

$5,000, “for which,” they allege, “she was deprived the right of litigation in

violation of the said treaty between the two countries, and such other or

further sum as may be just and equitable for the affront and indignity which

she received by being thus discriminated against.”

You submit the matter to this Department for such measures as the Federal

Government may see fit to take.

In the opinion of the Department the case, in its present stage, is not one for

diplomatic intervention, for the reason that the plaintiff has not exhausted

her judicial remedy. It frequently happens that litigants are denied rights by

the decisions of inferior courts and are obliged, in order to establish such

rights, to carry the case to the courts of last resort.

The plaintiff in the present case should pursue the judicial remedy afforded

by our laws, perfecting her appeal to the court of appeals (the supreme

court) of Colorado, and, if necessary thereafter, by appropriate proceedings,

bring the case before the Supreme Court of the United States.

Furthermore, under the laws of the United States, the circuit courts of the

United States have original jurisdiction of civil suits like the present one to

which an alien is a party. It is suggested for the consideration of the

attorneys of the plaintiff whether an original suit should not be brought in

the circuit court of the United States for the district of Colorado.

Until the remedy of recourse to the civil tribunals has been exhausted by the

plaintiff and justice is finally denied her, there appears to be no ground for

the presentation of a diplomatic claim.

The inclosures in your note are returned as requested.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 290]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

EMBASSY OFHISMAJESTY THEKING OFITALY,
Washington,October 3, 1901.

MR.SECRETARYOFSTATE: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your

excellency’s note of August 24, 1901, No. 704, relative to the claim of Mrs.

Fenice Ferrara, and to thank you therefor. It is stated in said note that, in the

present state of the question, the Department of State is of the opinion that

there is no ground for diplomatic intervention, inasmuch as the claimant has

not exhausted all lega, means of redress.

The contents of the aforesaid note has been communicated to Mrs. Ferrara

and her lawyer by the royal consul at Denver, and said lawyer has sent a

letter to the consul containing certain explanations which appear to be of

special importance.

I decided to lay the matter before the Department of State only after a

careful examination of the evidence produced in the case, from which I

thought that there appeared to be no doubt that the claimant had in reality

exhausted all legal means for the assertion of her rights before the courts.

aThe letterof Mr. M. J. Galligan, a lawyer of Pueblo, Colo., a copy of

whichIherewithinclose,confirmsandexplainsthesituationmore

satisfactorily.

Itconsequentlybecomesmydutyagaintosubmitthecasetoyour

excellency’s consideration, and I feel confident that the considerations

stated in the letter of Mrs. Ferrara’s legal adviser, and the inquiries which

you will think proper to make on the subject, will cause the question to be

decided in favor of an unfortunate woman who, in addition to having lost

her husband, who was killed while at work, has been left in the most abject

poverty.

Thanking you for the kind attention with which you will, I am sure, be

pleased to examine this note, I have the honor, etc.,CARIGNANI.
P. S.—I herewith inclose the papers in the case, requesting that they may be

returned to me.
CARIGNANI.
aNot printed.

[Document 291]
Mr. Adee to Signor Carignani.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 10, 1901.

No. 708.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 3d

instant, with inclosed letter from M. J. Galligan, attorney for Mrs. Fenice

Ferrara, relative to her complaint that she had been denied justice in the

district court of Pueblo, Colo.

The Department has given careful consideration both to your note and its

inclosure, but without being led thereby to alter the conclusion expressed in

its note of August 24 that Mrs. Ferrara had not exhausted her judicial

remedies and hence that there was no ground for the presentation of a

diplomatic claim in her behalf.

Mr. Galligan states that when Mrs. Ferrara was denied the right to prosecute

her action in the district court of the State her judicial remedy was

practically exhausted; and he asserts, also, that she was, by her poverty,

practically prevented from taking further proceedings.

The Department’s note of August 24 points out the particulars in which the

plaintiff’ failed to avail herself of the judicial remedy afforded her when the

district court denied the motion for a new trial.

The poverty of the plaintiff, which, it is alleged, prevented her from taking

the necessary legal proceedings to establish her rights, affords no basis for a

claim of a denial of justice.

It is a rule practiced not only by many American courts, but also by those of

othercivilizedstates,thattheplaintiffshall,asaconditiontothe

solvi) he may thereby occasion. Such requirement can not be treated as a

denial of free access to the courts, nor as a denial of justice giving ground

for diplomatic intervention. Nor in any case could this Government be

expected to perform the function of parens patriæ by providing even a

meritorious foreign claimant with pecuniary aid which his own government

might decline to afford. Much less could the United States be expected to

pay outright this claim, considering that the Government was not in the

remotest degree connected with the transaction out of which the claim

arose, and that justice has not been judicially denied.

“The stranger, in all countries, is subject to the local law, as respects either

the prosecution or defense of his case. In both aspects, he stands upon the

same footing as the natives, save la caution judicatum solvi, very frequently

imposed upon the alien plaintiff.” (2 Calvo, Int. Law, sec. 865.) “Though

the plaintiff foreigner be thus allowed to bring his suit, he is, by the laws of

the States, compelled to give bail (fournir caution) for costs and damages.”

(4Phillimore,Int.Law,p.643.)WhiletheDepartmenthasbefore

enunciated its views in this case, it has been at pains to set forth fully in this

note the grounds of its decision, which is so fully sustained by reason and

authority, that it should be considered as final.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 292]
Signor Carignani to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram—Translation.]

ITALIANEMBASSY,
Manchester, Mass.,September 15, 1901.

I am in receipt of the following telegram from the minister of foreign

affairs:

I learn with profound sorrow of the death of the President, the

victim of an assassination which has excited the greatest horror in

Italy. I beg that you will immediately convey to the Federal

Government and the family of the lamented President these

sentiments in the name of the Government of the King and in my

own.

PRINETTI.
CARIGNANI,
Chargé d’Affaires of Italy.

[Document 293]
Mr. Hay to Signor Carignam.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

I have made direct acknowledgment of the touching message of condolence

ofhisexcellencytheministerofforeignaffairs.Ourpeopledeeply

appreciate such tributes from a nation they so truly esteem.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 294]
Mr. Hay to the minister of foreign affairs of Italy.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

I have received through Signor Carignani the feeling message of sympathy

conveyed by your excellency on behalf of the Italian Government. The

American Government and people are especially grateful in this hour of

sorrow for the condolence of a nation which has so recently suffered

through a like horrible crime.
JOHNHAY,Secretary of State.

[Document 295]
Cardinal Rampolla to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

ROME,September 15, 1901.

His Holiness, having been with deep sorrow apprised of the death of

President McKinley, condemns the heinous attempt which was attended

with such baneful results, and very keenly shares the mourning of the

American nation.
M.CARDINALRAMPOLLA.

[Document 296]
Mr. Hay to Cardinal Rampolla.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 19, 1901.

I have the honor to request you to convey to His Holiness the deep

appreciation here felt for his expression of sympathy with the sorrowing

people of this country.
JOHNHAY,Secretary of State.

[Document 297]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,July 29, 1899.

No. 338.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith translations of various new

regulations and notifications issued by the Japanese Government recently,

which are of interest as relating to foreigners.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure 1.]
IMPERIAL ORDINANCES.
The chairman of the international committee has forwarded the following

translations by Dr. Lönholm for publication.
Imperial ordinance No. 329, of July 7, 1899.
1. If aright in an immovable which might be set up against third persons has

been duly acquired by an alien or a foreign juridical person before the time

fixed in the imperial ordinance, No. 251, of the thirty-second year of Meiji,
but has not been registered before the said time, it can not be set up against

third persons registered within one year from such time.

2. For the immovables mentioned in article 1, special registry books shall

beopenedandkeptattherespectiveregistryofficeswithinwhose

jurisdiction the places are where such immovables are situated.

3. Each folio of a registry book mentioned in the preceding article is

divided in a column for the number of registration, a division for the

designation of the immovables, and four sections headed respectively Kō,

bOtsu, Hei, Tei.The division for the designation contains a column for the

description. Each of the four sections contains a column for the subject-

matter of the registration and a column for the number of the order.

In the column for the number of registration as to each piece of land or

building is entered the order in which it has first been registered in the

registry book.

In the column for the description the land, buildings, or out-buildings are

described and alterations of the same are entered. In the column for the

number of the description the order of priority of the matters entered in the

column of description is entered.

In the column for the subject-matter of section Kō are entered:

In the column for the subject-matter of section Otsu are entered matters

relating to preferential rights, pledges, and mortgages.

In the column for the subject-matter of section Hei are entered matters

arelating to leases.
In the column for the subject-matter of section Tei are entered matters

relating to rights not mentioned in the three preceding paragraphs.

In the column for the number of the order is entered the number indicating

the order of priority of each matter registered in the column for subject-

matters.

4. When an application for registration is made, all facts which can be set

up against third persons must be mentioned in the application, and the

documents necessary to prove such facts must be annexed.

5. A copy of the registry book of a foreign consulate relating to an

immovable, mentioned in article 1, has the same effect as the registry book.

When an application for registration as to an immovable-registered in a

foreign consulate is made after this ordinance takes effect, the provisions of

barticle 163of the law concerning the registration of immovables apply

correspondingly.

The minister of justice may make necessary rules in regard to matters

mentioned in the foregoing two paragraphs.

6. As to matters not provided for in this ordinance the provisions of the law

concerning the registration of immovables apply correspondingly.
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
This ordinance takes effect on July 17, 1899.
Imperial ordinance No. 333, of July 7, 1899.
1.WhenaJapanesesubjectorJapanesejuridicalpersonacquiresa

superficies or lease intended to be perpetual, which has been created for an

alien or for a foreign juridical person, in land which belongs to the

Government, such person acquires the ownership of the land.

2. If in the case mentioned in the preceding article the land does not belong

to the Government, the superficiary or lessee may acquire ownership of the

land on paying a proper sum to its owner.

If a superficiary or a lessee, on the demand of the owner, gives notice of his

intention not to acquire the ownership as above provided, or if he does not

within one year after such demand proceed as specified in the foregoing

paragraph, the owner may apply to the court to have the duration of the

superficies or the lease determined in accordance with the provisions of the

civil code on paying a proper indemnity.

3. The provisions of the preceding two articles shall not affect any rights

which third persons may have in such land.

ADDITIONAL PROVISION.
This ordinance takes effect on July 17, 1899.

[Inclosure 2.]
The following procedure is established for dealing with registration of

immovables which are subject to the rights of foreigners or foreign judicial

persons.

(Signed)

KIYOURAKEIGO,
Minister of Justice.
ARTICLEI. The provisions of the detailed regulations for carrying out

the law of registration of immovables shall, except when there is

a special provision to the contrary in this notification, apply,

mutatis mutandis, in the case of registration governed by the

provisions of Article I of imperial ordinance No. 329, of 1899.

ARTICLEII. The local courts shall prepare land registers relating to

the rights of foreigners or foreign juridical persons in accordance

with the forms Annex No. 1, and registers of buildings relating to

the rights of foreigners or foreign juridical persons, in accordance

with the forms Annex No. 2.

A III. Copies of the registers of foreign consulates shall be

bound together and kept separately, according to each country, by

the local courts, and the president of a local court shall note on

the back of the covers the number of pages they contain and write

thereon his official title and name and affix his seal of office; and

having also sealed keiin, shall transmit them to the registration

office, which has control in the matter.

ARTICLEIV. The local courts shall make translation of the copies of

the registers of foreign consulates, and the procedure laid down in

the preceding article shall also be followed in the case of these

translations.

according to the order of the registrations in the various volumes,

and shall also affix the same numbers to translations of copies of

registers.

ordinance No. 329, of 1899 is written in a foreign language, the

applicant shall attach to it a translation thereof.

ARTICLEVII. In transferring the registrations of foreign consulates to

the registers, in accordance with the provisions of the second

clause of Article V of imperial ordinance No. 329, of 1899, it

shall be made according to translation of them.

ARTICLEVIII. When the registrations of foreign consulates have been

transferred to the registers, the fact that they have been transferred

to page No. ----- of volume No. ----- of the registers, the numbers

of the registrations and the dates shall be noted on the copies of

the registers of foreign consulates and on the translations of them,

and they shall be sealed by the registrar.

A IX. In the case of registration made in accordance with

imperial ordinance No. 329, of 1899, index books of registrations

of land and of registrations of buildings shall be specially kept.

Matters relating to the registrations of foreign consulates shall

also be inserted in those index books.

A X. In cases where Japanese subjects or juridical persons

acquirerightsofsuperficiesorrightsoflease,whichwere

established with the intention of their continuance in perpetuity

for foreigners or foreign juridical persons, the registrar shall,

when he registers them in land registers relating to the rights of

foreignersorforeignjuridicalpersons,closetheentriesof

registration relating to those rights.

Under the circumstances mentioned in the preceding clause, when

there are among those registration entries registrations relating to

other rights, which have as their subject rights of superficies or

rights of lease registration of cancellation of such, registration

shall be effected and the registration entries shall be closed after

the registrations relating to other rights have ceased to appear

among the registration entries.

ARTICLEXI. In cases where Japanese subjects or juridical persons

acquire rights of ownership of land in accordance with Article I or

II of imperial ordinance No. 333 of 1899, when there are among

the entries of registration of the land registers relating to the rights

of foreigners or foreign juridical persons, registrations relating to

other rights which have as their subject rights of superficies or

rights of lease, and when those registrations remain uncanceled,

registration of such rights of ownership only shall be effected in

the general register.

ARTICLEXII. In cases where there are registrations relating to the

same land in the general register and in the land register relating

to the rights of foreigners or foreign juridical persons, or in the

copies of the registers of foreign consulates, the registrar shall, in

a convenient manner, put marks of mutual reference in suitable

places among the registration entries (including, in the case of

copies of the registers of foreign consulates, the translations) of

each register.
That is the time fixed for the taking effect of the new treaties, either the

17th of July or the 5th of August, 1899.
That is A, B, C, D.
Properly “hiring,” chintaishaku.
That article relates to the forms on which registrations are to be made in

[Document 298]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,October 4, 1899.

No. 364.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a note addressed by me to

the Japanese minister of foreign affairs concerning the registration of

transfers by assignment of titles to property held under perpetual leases in

the foreign settlements of the country.

It seems to me that the requirement of payment, as a revenue to the

Government, of 2½ per cent of the value of any property held under a

perpetual lease, confirmed by the treaty, is inadmissible—that such a

burden placed upon the property should not be borne by the assignee, who

should stand in the same position in respect to such property, in all respects,

as the original holder.

That a title to property under a perpetual lease should be registered as a

superficies, thereby restricting the uses of the property, and, perhaps, the

duration of its use, seems to me clearly inadmissible, as it certainly would

change the conditions contained in the original lease.

Though I may possibly be in error in my position in respect to the

registration tax of 2½ per cent of the value of the property since there is no

law compelling an assignee to register, I am confident that I am correct in

my opinion as to the registration of property as a perpetual superficies being

in violation of treaty stipulations in respect of such property.

Awaiting notification of the decision of the Japanese Government in reply

to my note, I have the honor to ask instructions upon the questions

involved, that I may make no mistake should I insist upon the Japanese

Government recognizing the correctness of the position I have already

taken.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tokyo,September 30, 1899.

No. 164.]

SIR: Referring to the brief conversations we have had recently in respect of

the registration tax of 2½ per cent upon the value of property held by

foreigners in the respective foreign settlements in Japan under perpetual

leases by the Government, which, as I am informed, is required by the

registering officers to be paid in registering any transfer or assignment of

such leases; and also in respect of such registration of such perpetual leases

being required to be made as perpetual superficies, I have thought it best to

express to your excellency in writing, in short, some views touching these

matters now entertained by me.

By the stipulations made in Article XVII of the treaty between the United

States and Japan in respect of the several foreign settlements whereby such

settlements are incorporated with the respective Japanese communes, it

appears that existing leases in perpetuity in foreign settlements must be

confirmed,andthatanynewconditionswhateverimposedbythe

Government are in contravention of the rights of the holders of real

property under such leases. If I correctly understand the full import of the

foregoing stipulations, the 2½ per cent of the value of the property so held,

if imposed in registering a transfer of title, is a tax upon the property not

contemplated, and, as it would seem, is inadmissible. The imposition of

such a tax by so much reduces, in effect, the value of the property and

changes the original conditions of the lease itself, which stipulates a certain

sum to be paid annually to the Government—an annual tax upon the land,

and the only tax, as it appears to me (except certain municipal taxes

provided for in the leases themselves and in the agreements entered into

between the Government and the representatives of the treaty powers), that,

under the provisions of the treaty, can rightfully be levied upon it by the

Government. It seems that the leaseholder fully complies with the terms of

the contract of lease made between the Japanese Government and himself

when he annually pays his stipulated rent; and in registering a transfer or

assignment of a perpetual lease, such additional sum to be paid to the

Government by the assignee on the value of the property so transferred,

though called a registration tax, is an additional tax upon the property for

revenue, which, however, would not be the case if a fixed registration fee

only was required, without regard to value, upon all transfers of property

alike in compensation for the work done in registering, in which no

additional income to the Government from the property was to be derived.

I may add that while the forms of the deeds of title giving leases of

Government not only to the original holders, but, in terms, to their heirs and

assigns as well, and, as I conceive, no tax should be imposed by the

Government upon the heirs or assigns of the original lease in addition to

thatimposedupontheoriginallessee.Itmaybeclaimedthatthe

registration of a transfer of an assignment of title to an assignee is not made

obligatory by law and is to be registered or not at the option of the assignee;

but to protect his title against a third party (who through fraud by the

original holder of the property might acquire a second assignment of title

which would be good if first registered), he must have his assignment

registered for his protection and is thereupon compelled to pay 2½ per cent

of the value of the property not contemplated in making the original grant

of the title, which was made, as already stated, not only to the original

holder but to his heirs or assigns, thus, in my view, imposing in effect an

additional condition upon the title confirmed under the treaty.

The registration of such perpetual leases at the Saibansho by which, if I am

correctly informed, such leases are to be registered as perpetual superficies,

will also, in my opinion, change the conditions of the original contracts of

lease, inasmuch as a superficies, if I correctly understand the meaning of

that term, restricts the holders of such a lease to uses of the land in certain

respects, and. in some contingencies, though declared perpetual, will restrict

its duration also, and consequently impairs the value of the property. By the

terms set out in the original perpetual leases the leaseholders have the

perpetual use of the lands for all purposes whatever and for all time,

provided they keep up their annual payments as stipulated in the original

contracts of lease.

Knowing that your excellency’s Government does not intend or desire to

put any additional burden upon citizens of the United States holding

propertyintheforeignsettlementsundertheirperpetualleasesnot

warranted by the treaty between the two countries, I have the honor to

submit to your excellency the foregoing statement for such consideration as

the merits of the questions involved will warrant.

I avail, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.

[Document 299]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,October 6, 1899.

No. 365.]

SIR: Referring to my dispatch No. 364 of the 4th instant, concerning the

registration tax of 2½ per cent of the value of property held in the foreign

settlements, under perpetual leases, required to be paid on registering

transfers of such leases, I have the honor to call attention to the fact that the

laws of Japan in respect to real property held under perpetual lease or

otherwise are peculiar, especially in this, that land and buildings upon the

land are regarded as separate and distinct property, and that a sale or

transfer of lease of land does not include structures upon it as a matter of

course, but may be sold or transferred apart from the structures and the

structures likewise apart from the land.

My note to the minister of foreign affairs, it will be observed, makes no

reference to the registration tax upon the value of the buildings that may

have been erected by the lessees, but only upon the value of the lands for

the use of which perpetual leases were granted by the Government. That,

under the general law applying as well to Japanese subjects as to foreigners,

I could rightfully claim exemption from such tax upon the value of the

buildings, I had so much doubt that I omitted to do so, though I understand

thatsomeoftherepresentativeshereofothercountriesmakethat

contention as well as for the exemption of the tax upon transfers of

perpetual leases of the lands.

Thinking it proper to make the above explanatory statements to avoid any

possible misunderstanding as to the extent of the claim of exemption from

the registration tax presented by me to the Japanese Government, I have,

etc.,
AEB

[Document 300]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Buck.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 6, 1899.

No. 260.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatches Nos. 364 and 365,

of the 4th and 6th ultimo, respectively, concerning the registration tax of

24½ per cent of the value of property held in the foreign settlements in

Japan under perpetual leases required to be paid on registering transfers of

such leases.

With the former dispatch you inclose a copy of your note to the Japanese

minister for foreign affairs, maintaining that such a tax is not warranted by

the treaty between the United States and Japan.

The Department concurs in your view that under Article XVII of our treaty

with Japan existing leases in perpetuity are to be confirmed without other

conditions or burdens than those imposed by existing leases at the date of

the treaty. All lands previously granted free of rent for the public purposes

of the settlements remain free. In the confirmation of leases no change in

vestedrightscanbeeffectedbyrequiringthemtoberegisteredas

“perpetual superficies,” if such would be the effect. But in the assignment

of leases between private parties for private purposes citizens of the United

States are subject to the same registration fee or charge as is imposed on

Japanese subjects, unless the original leases stipulate to the contrary. This is

indicated by Article II of the treaty.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 301]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,December 29, 1899.

No. 392.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of instruction No. 260, of

the 6th ultimo, in reply to my dispatches Nos. 364 and 365, of the 4th and

6th of October last, in respect to perpetual leases in foreign settlements in

Japan being confirmed, under the treaty, without other conditions being

imposedthanareprescribedinexistingleases,statingthat,inthe

confirmation of such leases, no change in vested rights can be effected by

requiring them to be registered as perpetual superficies, if such would be

theeffect,thusapprovingthepositiontakenbymeinthatregard.

Concerning the assignment of such leases, however, I am instructed that, as

between private parties for private purposes, citizens of the United States

are subject to the same registration fee or charge as is imposed upon

Japanese subjects, unless the original leases stipulate to the contrary.

I now have the honor to report that by imperial ordinance (copy inclosed)

the Japanese Government has so amended the law of registration as to

recognize that perpetual leases of property in foreign settlements can be

registered as such without change, instead of as perpetual superficies as

heretofore required, thus substantially though indirectly conceding my

claim in that particular.

In respect to the requirement that a registration tax of 2½ per cent on value

to be paid by the assignee of a perpetual lease in foreign settlements

between private parties, I infer from a conversation which I have had with

the minister of foreign affairs that such registration tax is not to be enforced

—conceding my contention that such tax ought not to be required to be paid

inconsiderationofthestipulationsoftheleasesthemselvesandthe

provisions of Article XVII of the treaty—though it will be enforced upon

registration of mortgages and other liens on such property.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure.]
THE TRANSFER OF LAND.
Imperial ordinance No. 458 of December 27, 1899.

[Translated by Dr. L. LÖNHOLM.]

The imperial ordinance No. 329, of the year 1899, is amended as follows:

ARTICLEI. When a superficies (perpetual lease) created in a foreign settlement

is transferred, such transfer can not be set up against third persons unless it

ais entered in the title deed by the chihōchōof the place where such land is

situated.

If an application according to the foregoing provision has been made by the

parties concerned, or if a notification concerning a superficies (perpetual

lease) has been made, the chihōchō must, without delay, give notice thereof

to the registry office within whose jurisdiction the land is situated.

When a chihōchō gives notice of the transfer of a superficies (perpetual

lease) a copy of the title deed must be annexed; but in case of a second or

subsequent notice it is sufficient to add the designation of the land, the

names of the parties concerned, their nationality and domicile, the ground

of the transfer of the right, and the date.

If a right other than that mentioned under paragraph 1, which might be

setup against third persons, has been duly acquired by an alien or a foreign

juridical person before the time fixed in the imperial ordinance No. 251 of

the thirty-second year of Meiji,but has not been registered before the said

time, it can not be set up against third persons, unless it is registered up to

the 31st of December, 1900.

A IV. When an application for registration is made, all facts which can

be set up against third persons must be mentioned in the application, and

the documents necessary to prove such facts must be annexed.

When a registry office has received a notice of the transfer of a superficies

(perpetual lease) it must register it ex officio, and the same applies when in

case of a notification concerning a superficies (perpetual lease) an alteration

in a registration is to take place.

If when an application for the registration of a right whose subject is a

superficies (perpetual lease) is made, such superficies (perpetual lease) is

not yet registered, such registration must be made ex officio.
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
Entries as to the transfer of a superficies (perpetual lease), made in a title

deed by a chihōchō or a consulate before the taking effect of this ordinance,

have the same effect as entries made by a chihōchō according to the

provisions of this ordinance; but this does not affect the rights of third

personswhichhavebeenregisteredafterthetimefixedinimperial

ordinance No. 251 of the thirty-second year of Meiji.
aThat is, for Yokohama and Kobe, the kencho.
bThat is, the time fixed for the taking effect of the treaties.

[Document 302]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,January 12, 1900.

No. 394.]

SIR: Referring to my dispatch No 392 of the 29th ultimo, relating to the

imperial ordinance recently published concerning the law of registration of

land title, permitting perpetual leases of property in the foreign settlements

to be registered as such without change, I have the honor to state that in an

interview with his excellency the minister for foreign affairs yesterday I

learned that the requirement of the ordinance that the registration of such

leases or transfers thereof in the chihōchō (local government office) instead

of the registry office proper, as also the use of the term perpetual lease” as

synonymous with “perpetual superficies “was because the law had made

obligatory the payment of 2½ per cent of value as a registration tax or

charge on such property at the registry office, and the law did not recognize

the registration of perpetual leases as such. As an ordinance could not

directly repeal or annul the provisions of the law in those respects, it

became necessary in order to meet the objections made by me and others to

indirectly by ordinance recognize perpetual leases in parenthesis only and

by changing the place of registration to relieve perpetual leaseholders from

the registration charge of the 2½ per cent of value.

I am informed by our consul-general at Yokohama that registration of

perpetual leases as such and transfers thereof at the local government office

is going on without charge other than the nominal sum in stamps in

payment of a proper fee for registration.

I have, etc.,
AEB

[Document 303]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Buck.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 24, 1900.

No. 271.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 392 of the 29th

ultimo,reportingthepresentattitudeoftheJapaneseGovernment

respecting the registration of perpetual leases in foreign settlements in

Japan.

In reply I have to say that the attitude of the Japanese Government in the

matter, as it is now reported by you, is unobjectionable.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 304]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,February 5, 1900.

No. 398.]

SIR: For the information of the Department, and as a matter of some

importance, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of resolutions

adopted at a meeting of foreign residents in Yokohama concerning the

registration of titles of perpetual leases in the former foreign settlements

there, together with a copy of a communication from Mr. John Lindsley, an

American resident, transmitting the resolutions to Consul-General John F.

Gowey; also the dispatch (copy) of the consul-general in forwarding them,

and also a copy of my instruction to the consul-general in respect to the

resolutions and the request made by Mr. Lindsley.

Considering the information I had received as to the attitude of our people

in Yokohama concerning the registration of titles of perpetual leases, upon

thepromulgationoftheimperialordinanceNo.458ofthe27thof

December last, which, at the time, was published and discussed in the

newspapers, and the fact that no complaint had reached me, and no inquiry

had been made in respect to the effect of the ordinance, I had assumed that

the ordinance was regarded by them as measurably satisfactory, and was

surprised that the American residents there should join with foreigners of

other nationalities in passing the resolutions and that my efforts with the

Imperial Government should be solicited in their behalf, without first

hearing what, if anything, had already been done by me in the direction of

their suggestions.

While the imperial ordinance No. 458 of December 27 last (copy inclosed

with my despatch of the 29th of December, No. 392), in providing for the

registration of titles of perpetual leases as “superficies” (perpetual leases),

was not entirely satisfactory, yet, as stated in my dispatch No. 392, I

regarded it as indirectly in accord with treaty provision.

I understand that the resolutions do not express the views of all American

residents holding titles of perpetual leases in Yokohama, though they

probably do of a majority of them, as the meeting passing the resolutions, I

am informed, was fairly representative.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure 1.]
COPY OF RESOLUTIONS PASSED AT A MEETING OF LAND RENTERS OF THE FORMER YOKOHAMA FOREIGN SETTLEMENT, HELD ON JANUARY19,

1900.
Itisresolvedbythismeetingoflandrentersoftheformerforeign

settlement of Yokohama that the following facts be brought to the notice of

the Imperial Japanese Government:

1. That although the revised treaties provide that the existing

Government leases in perpetuity of foreign-settlement property

shallbeconfirmed,stepshavenotyetbeentakenbythe

Government to confirm them, and the laws of Japan appear to

contemplate their compulsory conversion into a new and different

kind of right, which is called “superficies.”

2. That under existing laws the right of perpetual lease is not

recognized, and since the coming into operation of the revised

treaties the holders of such leases have been unable to sell or

mortgage their land except on the terms of allowing the leasehold

interest to be registered as a “superficies,” which they have been

and are unwilling to do.

3. That the nonrecognition of what foreigners conceive to be a

right plainly secured to them by their title deeds and by treaty has

resulted in a general feeling of insecurity, and in stopping all sales

andmortgagesofformerforeign-settlementpropertyandis

threatening such property with a very serious depreciation in

value.

4. That in order to remedy the evils of the situation and to restore

perpetuity and make all necessary provisions for their recognition

bylaw,andfortheregistrationofthemunderaseparate

designation.

5.Thatpropertiesheldbyforeignersintheformerforeign

settlements have been made subject to new conditions and taxes

and charges from which in the opinion of this meeting the revised

treaties were intended to exempt them.

And it is further resolved that copies of the foregoing resolutions be

forwarded to His Imperial Majesty’s minister for foreign affairs through the

usual channels.

[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Lindsley to Mr. Gowey, United States Consul-General.
YOKOHAMA,January 24, 1900.

S: Acting on behalf and by authority of a representative body of citizens of

the United States of America, all of whom are holders of perpetual leases of

property in the former foreign settlements, granted and confirmed by the

Imperial Japanese Government in accordance with treaty stipulations, I

have the honor to inclose a copy of certain resolutions passed unanimously

at a duly convened and largely attended meeting of foreign landowners held

in Yokohama on the 19th instant, in which the said citizens took part, and to

request that the same be forwarded to his excellency the minister of the

United States, in Tokyo.

It is hoped by American landowners that his excellency the minister of the

United States will support the views expressed in the resolutions, and that

he will use his good offices in assisting them to obtain the relief so

necessary and so earnestly desired.

I have, etc.,
JOHNLINDSLEY.
[Inclosure 3.]
Mr. Gowey to Mr. Buck.
UNITEDSTATESCONSULATE-GENERAL,
Yokohama, Japan,January 24, 1900.

No. 1685.]

Yokohama, accompanying a copy of a resolution passed at a meeting of

certain foreigners at Yokohama relative to land titles.

I have, etc.,
J.F.GOWEY.
[Inclosure 4.]
L U S,
Tokyo,January 31, 1900.

S: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 1685, of the 24th

instant, inclosing a copy of a communication to you from Mr. John Lindsley

with a copy of resolutions passed at a meeting of holders of perpetual leases

of property in the former foreign settlement in Yokohama in respect to their

titles. The resolutions set forth the leaseholders’ complaint that the Imperial

Government has not yet confirmed their titles as provided by treaty, but

have imposed new conditions in contravention of treaty stipulations and

declare the necessity, for the protection of the leaseholders, that the Imperial

Government should at once confirm titles and register them accordingly as

perpetualleases;andinMr.Lindsley’scommunicationthehopeis

expressed that I support the views given in the resolution and use my good

offices to obtain the relief so necessary and so earnestly desired.

The American holders of perpetual leases in Yokohama in joining in passing

the resolutions were not aware, it would seem, of what action I had taken to

secure them protection of their property rights guaranteed by treaty, since,

until the receipt of the resolutions and letter accompanying your dispatch, I

have had no inquiry from any of them for information as to what I had done

or proposed to do for their protection or request to take any action whatever

in that respect.

That our fellow-citizens in Yokohama may know of what attention I have

been giving to this important matter I proceed to give a resume of what has

been done and the real situation in respect to registration of land titles as I

understand it.

In September last, learning that a British subject holding a perpetual lease in

Yokohama in the foreign settlement had been denied its recognition as such

and was required to have it registered, if at all, as a superficies, anticipating

that the same course would be taken in respect to registration of titles of

American citizens, I addressed a note to the minister of foreign affairs,

calling attention to the treaty stipulations prohibiting the imposition of any

condition whatever in addition to those set out in the leases themselves, in

which note I claimed that the registration of such perpetual leases at the

Saibansho, by which, if I was rightly informed, such leases were to be

registered as perpetual superficies, would, in my opinion, change the

conditions of the original contracts of lease, inasmuch as a superficies, as I

understood, restricted the holders of such lease to uses of the land in certain

respect and—in some contingencies, though declared perpetual—would

restrict the duration also and consequently impair the value of the property.

Before addressing the official note to the minister of foreign affairs I had in

leases as superficies, and since have had several interviews with the

minister, expressing my opinion of such a requirement as violative of treaty

provisions. In all our interviews the minister has expressed himself as fully

conceding that perpetual leases and their transfers must be registered

without change of their conditions.

OnthepromulgationofimperialordinanceNo.458,concerningthe

registration of perpetual leases in question, he assured me then, as he has

since, that, by that ordinance requiring such leases to be registered as

superficies (perpetual leases), the Imperial Government made no change in

the character of the titles whatever; that the courts must recognize the

ordinance as providing for the registration of perpetual leases without

change of conditions of such leases by the registration therein provided for;

and that he would give me in an official note an explanation of the purpose

andrealeffectoftheordinanceasintendedandunderstoodbyhis

Government, which note would be a duplicate of that already sent to the

British minister. Awaiting the receipt of the minister’s note, which I now

have, has caused some delay in acknowledging the receipt of your dispatch

and in responding to the accompanying resolutions and the request of Mr.

Lindsley.

To be accurate in giving the views of the Japanese Government in this

matter, I quote from a translation of the minister’s note as follows: “The

Imperial Government is of the opinion that, though the rights of perpetual

leasesareregisteredassuperficiesaccordingtotheabove-mentioned

imperial ordinance (No. 329), such action is not in violation of the treaty;

because it is provided in article 45 of the law for the operation of the civil

code that, ‘As to a superficies created for an alien or a foreign legal person

the provisions of the civil code apply only so far as it is not otherwise

provided by treaty or regulation;’ therefore the right of perpetual lease, i. e.,

the right of superficies created for foreigners, is considered a kind of special

superficies, and it is clear that it is not the right of superficies according to

the civil code.

“Again, the interpretation given by the Imperial Government is, that even

after the right of perpetual lease has been registered in accordance with the

above imperial ordinance, the said title-deed has the same validity as

before.However,thatimperialordinancewasamendedbyimperial

ordinance No. 458, of December 27, of last year, as appeared in the Official

Gazette (copy of which is herewith inclosed), in which the words ‘perpetual

lease’ were specially inserted in brackets after the word ‘superficies,’ by

which it is made still more clear that the so-called right of ‘superficies’ is

the right of ‘perpetual lease.’ It is provided therein also that the transfer of a

perpetual lease can not be set up against a third party unless the fact of such

transfer is indorsed upon the title deed, and that indorsements of transfer

hitherto entered upon the title deed shall have the same effect as an

indorsement made in accordance with the above ordinance. The validity of

the title deeds having thus been confirmed, there is, in my opinion, no room

left for such doubts as are expressed above.”

While the fact that the ordinance does not simply state that these titles are to

be registered as perpetual leases by omitting the term superfices altogether

may be disappointing, yet the fear expressed in the resolutions that the

question may be raised in the courts as to whether such registration may not

in effect impair the titles of perpetual leases seems to be met by the

assurancesandinterpretationgivenbytheImperialGovernment,and

should such question by any possibility be so raised treaty stipulations will

control. No ordinance in respect to registration of titles can successfully

impair rights specifically guaranteed by treaty; and in registering titles, as

prescribed by the ordinance of December 27 last (No. 458), American

citizens do not lose thereby any treaty right in respect to property so

registered, the titles to which were originally guaranteed by the Imperial

Government.

On communicating to American holders of perpetual leases in Yokohama

what has been done the last four months concerning the registration of their

land titles, I am confident that they will appreciate the fact that I have not

beenunmindfuloftheirinterestsorhavefailedtomakeproper

representations to the Imperial Government in their behalf in respect of

their property rights as guaranteed by treaty.

Having already, before the receipt of the resolutions accompanying your

dispatch, in conversation with the minister of foreign affairs, informally

made reference to them as published in the newspapers, I do not see how I

can do more at this time, or hereafter, than I have already done, unless some

additional reason should appear requiring further representations to the

Imperial Government, or unless so instructed by our Government, which

has full information in respect to this matter.

I am, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.

[Document 305]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Buck.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 17, 1900.

No. 272.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 394, of the 12th

ultimo, in which you report that in an interview with the Japanese minister

for foreign affairs, you have learned that the requirement of the ordinances

thattheregistrationofperpetualleasesofpropertyintheforeign

settlements or transfers thereof should be made in the chihosho (local

government office), instead of the registry office proper, as also the use of

the term “perpetual lease” as synonymous with “perpetual superficies” were

because the law had made obligatory the payment of 2½ per cent of value

as a registration tax or charge upon such property at the registry office, and

also because the law did not recognize the registration of perpetual leases as

such, and that as an ordinance could not directly repeal or annul the

provisions of the law in those respects, it became necessary in order to meet

theobjectionsmadebyyouandothers,toindirectly,byordinance,

recognize perpetual leases in parenthesis only and by changing the place of

registration to relieve perpetual lease holders from the registration charge of

the 2½ per cent of value.

In reply I have to say that as a practical solution of the difficulty, the course

described is unobjectionable, so far as appears, especially so, as it is not

shown that this solution works any hardships.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 306]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,April 7, 1900.

No. 417.]

aSIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of a communicationand a

amemorandumreceived from Mr. John Lindsley and Rev. E. S. Booth,

claiming to act under instructions of the executive committee of the

American Asiatic Society of Yokohama, in which they set out at length

many reasons for complaint that the Japanese Government have failed to

protect American perpetual leaseholders of property in the former foreign

settlements in that port in their rights guaranteed by treaty. Their numerous

complaints may be summarized in genera] as follows:

1. That leases in perpetuity held by Americans in the foreign

settlementshavenotbeenfullyconfirmedbytheJapanese

Government as stipulated by treaty, but rather avoided instead by

requiring their registration as superficies (perpetual leases).

2. That in requiring their leases of land to be registered at the

kencho(prefecturaloffice)andthebuildingsthereonatthe

saibansho (local court), and the charge of 2½ per cent of value of

buildings on registration of a transfer of titles to such buildings,

are in conflict with treaty provisions.

3. That the tax now levied or any tax to be levied by the Japanese

authorities on the buildings upon the land held under perpetual

leases is a violation of treaty stipulations, properly construed; and

that the method employed in estimating the value of buildings for

taxation and the taxes so levied are unjust, and with other taxes

are a hardship.

4. That in consequence of long tenure and use of their lands and

buildings under extraterritorial jurisdiction, not taxed and not

disturbed by the Japanese Government or the local authorities,

prescriptive rights have been acquired and now the Japanese

Government, on assuming jurisdiction over their property, should

be estopped from enforcing her tax laws upon the building as well

as upon the lands.

5. That in consequence of the failure of the Japanese Government

to comply with treaty obligations in respect of their property

rights,theirholdingshavedepreciatedinmarketvalue,and

transactions in selling or mortgaging property are paralyzed.

1. In respect of the first ground of complaint, as summarized above, I have

the honor to refer to my previous dispatches upon that subject—No. 364 of

October 4 and No. 392 of December 29, 1899; also No. 394 of January 12

and No. 398 of February 5, last, and inclosures; also to the inclosed copy of

a note of the minister of foreign affairs to the minister of France; also the

ainclosed cuttingsfrom most of the newspapers published by foreigners in

Yokohama and the leading newspaper of Kobe, which in respect to this

matter are supposed to voice to a large degree the prevailing opinion of

foreign residents in those cities, though not to be taken as evidence in

coming to a conclusion on the merits of the case, and all except the Herald

regard the course taken by the Government as substantially complying with

treaty provisions, to wit: the Japan Weekly Mail of February 3 and 17, last

(the latter a republication from the Daily Mail of February 12 and 14); the

Daily Mail of the 2d and 5th ultimo; the Japan Daily Herald of February 5

and 12, last; the Daily Advertiser of the 1st ultimo, all published in

Yokohama, and the Kobe Chronicle of the 5th ultimo.

In this connection I also respectfully refer in particular to “Regulations

relating to foreigners in Japan,” a copy of which accompanied my dispatch

No. 338 of July 29, last, under the head of “Registry of immovables”

(imperial ordinances Nos. 329 and 333 of July 7, last), in which is

prescribed the books of registry of land and other immovables; and with the

same dispatch a “Notification of the department of justice (No. 41 of July

10, last) respecting registration; also the authority for the issuance of

imperial ordinance No. 458, found in law No. 71 of March 18, 1899, which

reads as follows:

With respect to the acquisition, loss, or transfer of property rights

in immovables and ships, made by aliens or foreign legal persons

before the operation of the revised treaties, the cases in which the

registration of the said rights is necessary and the process of

registration may be specially determined by imperial ordinance.

aAlso copies of pagesof the register books of Yokohama; also copies of two

reports, Nos. 1822 and 1829, from George H. Scidmore, esq., deputy

consul-general at Yokohama, made on my request. (Mr. Scidmore is a

member of the executive committee of the American Asiatic Society, with

Mr. Lindsley and Mr. Booth, who present these complaints. Mr. Scidmore is

regarded a good lawyer. He has been in the consular service in Yokohama

since May, 1876, as consular clerk and then deputy consul-general, and has

a good knowledge in respect to what he reports.) Since the Japanese

Government itself executed the leases and, so long as such leases should be

held by foreigners, guaranteed their perpetuity, and in case such leases

should be transferred to Japanese subjects (imperial ordinance 333 with

dispatch 338) they are to acquire actual ownership—which latter fact may

be taken as additional evidence of the recognition on the part of the

Government of their perpetuity—and since actual ownership is now vested

in the Government, it would seem that, so long as such leases were held by

foreigners, no one but the Government itself could question the rights

guaranteed by it, independent of the fact of treaty stipulations to hold

inviolate and confirm all rights guaranteed by the terms of such lease.

Hence, in consideration of imperial ordinance 458 and the interpretation put

upon it by the Japanese Government, as given by the minister of foreign

affairs, together with the ordinances and regulations above cited, also the

facts and opinions presented in inclosures herewith, have or have not leases

held in perpetuity been confirmed as required by treaty?

Can rights under leases held in perpetuity, entered in the register provided

for the registration of superficies, and entered as “superficies (perpetual

leases”) be impaired by that method incident to registration, when the

Government, the party of the first part, has guaranteed the rights specified

in the leases and has declared by imperial ordinance that method of

registration and has interpreted it to mean full compliance with treaty

provisions in respect of such leases? If they are to be so impaired, the

claimants are right in their contention.

What force there may be in the claim that by the expiration of the present

treaty the Government or any individual who may possibly at that time

Wave acquired the ownership of land held under perpetual lease will

interpose in any way, so far as to work a denial of any right solemnly

guaranteed by the Government in the leases themselves, seems to be

speculative.

2. Concerning the second cause of complaint, the “notification (No. 41) of

the department of justice” in Article II (with my dispatch No. 338 of July 29

last), in carrying out the law of registration in respect of land and buildings

being separate and distinct kinds of property to be separately registered,

applying to foreigners and Japanese alike, provides that “The local court

shall prepare land registers relating to foreigners and foreign juridical

persons and registers of buildings relating to the rights of foreigners and

foreign juridical persons.”

It is claimed that the buildings, equally with the lands, are included in the

word “property” in the provision of Article XVII of the treaty with the

United States providing for the confirmation of existing leases; that any

transfer of a perpetual lease of the land in conformity with the laws in the

United States and in other countries carries with it all buildings upon it as a

matter of course, as is clearly to be understood by a proper construction of

treaty provisions. That the requirement in case of transfer of property, that

the land and buildings are to be registered separately and in separate offices,

will cause much inconvenience and vexation to foreign leaseholders I have

no doubt; but the question arises whether Japanese or foreign laws should

control in this respect. I think all foreigners object and naturally to this

requirement as a hardship and an annoyance apart from any charge for

registering a transfer of buildings. (See Scidmore’s statement No. 1822,

above referred to, paragraph 8.) But in event that objection should be

removed and land and buildings were included in one instrument of transfer

and entered at one office in the same register, and the charge of 2½ per cent

on value of buildings as now required to be paid should still be imposed, the

most important cause of complaint would still exist, because the chief

contention is that the buildings should equally be exempt from any form of

taxation as the lands.

3. This leads to the third matter of complaint: That any tax whatever,

whether the charge of 2½ per cent of value of buildings on transfer of lease,

or any other public charge or tax on buildings for municipal purposes, is

inadmissible under the treaty, and business and other taxes to be levied are

cumulative and a hardship.

To fully understand what basis there is for such contention in respect to

“house tax,” I beg to refer to the inclosed copy of the “Land regulations for

the port of Yokohama,” the only regulations for foreign settlements not

contained in the book of “Treaties and conventions of Japan,” which book

is presumed to be in the library of the State Department; also copies of two

atitles of perpetual leasesof property in Yokohama. (Forms of such leases at

other ports are to be found in the book of “Treaties, etc.”) It will be

observed that the regulations of the several foreign settlements vary in

terms, as also do the conditions set out in the forms of perpetual leases. In

Yokohama and Nagasaki failure to comply with the conditions of annual

payment of rent, etc., forfeits the land, and in addition the buildings

thereon; while in Tokyo, Kobe, and Osaka, in case of failure of the annual

payment of rent, proceedings are to be instituted against the leaseholder.

Sincein YokohamaandNagasakitheleaseholderswererequiredby

regulations to erect buildings, and in case of default in the annual payment

of rent they were to forfeit their leases and their properties, including

buildings, were to revert to the Government, which fact is argued to be an

additional reason to claim that the buildings are a part of the property and

should, under the treaty, be exempt from taxation as well as is the land, may

it not be to some degree reasonable and as fair, perhaps, to suppose that this

provision was made because, under Japanese law, the land and buildings are

distinct and separate properties, and the disposition of the land without

specification as to the buildings does not include the buildings? And the

buildings, being the absolute properties of leaseholders while the lands are

not, may it not be inferred that the Japanese Government provided that on

reentering into possession of the land the buildings thereupon should also

revert as a penalty for the nonperformance of contracts by the leaseholders?

How much force should be given to the contention that since, in Article

XVII of the treaty with the United States, the word “property “is used as

applying to leases held by foreigners in perpetuity and the word “land” as

applying to grants in perpetuity for public purposes, “reveals the fact in the

one case that land and something attached to it was meant” and land only in

the other, would seem to depend upon the intention of the high contracting

parties to the treaty and the interpretation the two Governments may now

put upon the text of that article.

aIt is contended that under articles 86, 87, and 242 of the civil code,copied

in full on page 18 of the memorandum under discussion, buildings are

accessorytotheland.Hence,underJapaneselawaswellastreaty

stipulations, a transfer of a lease held in perpetuity necessarily, unless

stipulated to the contrary, carries with it a transfer of the buildings, and for

that reason no separate registration nor any charge therefor should be

imposed upon them as separate and distinct properties. As to whether such

argument is sound, as it would be under the laws of the United States

perhaps, the opinions of some Japanese authorities will throw some light.

Interpreting article 87 of the civil code, Dr. Umé, professor of law in the

ImperialUniversityofTokyo,andmemberofthecodeinvestgation

committee, states: “An accessory has two necessary requisites, according to

this article (87): 1. It must be for the constant use of its principal thing, as a

key to a box or a bucket to a well. A thing used for a time is not an

accessory, as a table or chair, to a house. 2. An accessory must be owned by

the owner of the principal thing; that is to say, the owner of the two must be

the same, else the accessory can not follow the disposal of the thing to

which it is attached. This article of course shows the general rule that an

accessory follows the principal thing. If there should be any contract or

promise to the contrary, such contract or promise must be followed.”

Also the opinion of Mr. Okamatsu, lecturer on the civil code at the Tokyo

Law School, the Meiji Law School, the Semmon Gakko, etc.: “To be an

accessory a thing must fulfill the following five conditions: 1. It must be

another thing than the principal thing. 2. It must be attached to another

thing. 3. An accessory must belong to the owner of the principal thing. This

provision is not found in foreign codes; but if the tenant of the land or the

occupant of a building attaches to the land or building his own things for his

own use, it is unjust that he should thereby forfeit his ownership of the

things so attached. 4. An accessory must be for constant use. 5. The

constant use must be for the sake of the principal thing.”

Interpretingarticle242ofthecivilcode,Mr.Okamatsustates,after

summarizing the provisions of the laws of most foreign countries relating to

land and buildings thereon: “To acquire an accessory immovable with the

principal immovable according to this article (242), the said accessory must

fulfillthefollowingconditions:1.Itmustbeattachedfixedlyand

permanently to the immovable. 2. It must be attached to the immovable as

an accessory (subordinate) to it. An ‘accessory’ (subordinate) here means a

thing that is joined to another thing, is used for the same economical

purpose, and can be regarded as one thing in the everyday life. If, therefore,

thereisnorelationofsuperiorandsubordinatebetweenthetwo

immovables, and they are independent of each other, then they are two

separate things, both in fact and in law, and can not be said to be attached to

an immovable.Take, for example, a house. It is in nature attached to the

land. But the ideas of our country up to the present day have regarded it as

a thing independent of the land and not as belonging to the land. Hence the

question of attachment to an immovable can not here arise.”
The closing lines of the opinion of Mr. Okamatsu, in respect to article 242,

underlined as above, if a proper interpretation of that article of the code,

would seem to destroy the argument of the complainants based on their

interpretation of the code in respect of accessories. I know of no Japanese

decision or opinion in conflict with the opinions of Mr. Okamatsu and Dr.

Umé upon the subject of accessories under Japanese law.

If the interpretation of Article XVII of the treaty must be interpreted in the

light of and in conformity with the laws of the United States, then it would

seem that the argument of the complainants should hold good.

Further, it will be observed that the land regulations for Yokohama provide

buildings for lighting and cleaning streets and for a police force. Since,

under extraterritorial jurisdiction, it was provided that they might tax their

own property, including buildings, for the purposes stated, now that their

power to tax has ceased to exist, can the claim that the Japanese authorities,

under whose jurisdiction they now are, have no right to tax their buildings

formunicipalpurposesholdgood?Areforeignleaseholders,in

consequence of now having come under Japanese jurisdiction, free from

any obligation to pay taxes levied by the Japanese authorities though they

may not have levied a tax upon themselves as provided by the regulations

while under extraterritorial jurisdiction?

The French treaty with Japan is cited and Article XXI is quoted in support

of the claim of exemption from tax on buildings as well as land. While that

article of the French treaty is considered somewhat stronger in expression,

as implying that the word “propriétés” was intended to include buildings,

than Article XVII of the United States treaty, yet the French minister here,

whocontendsforexemptionfromthe“housetax,”expressesmuch

uncertainty of success. The matter is still pending and he is awaiting

instructions, in doubt whether he will be supported by his Government in

his claim. Neither the German nor the British minister has confidence of the

success of such contention, and, I understand, have not objected formally to

the imposition of the tax on buildings. Both have stated that they did not see

much hope of success of such claim of exemption. Meantime the Japanese

Government has not announced any decision upon the question.

In my dispatch No. 365, of October 6 last, it will be remembered that I

stated that I had made no claim of exemption from the registration tax on

value of buildings because of doubt of the grounds upon which to base such

a claim. In instruction No. 260, of November 6 last, acknowledging the

receipt of both that dispatch and my No. 364, of October 4, I was not

directed in respect of what action, if any, I was to take upon that question in

particular; but the clause of that instruction which stated that, “in the

assignment of leases between private parties for private purposes, citizens

of the United States are subject to the same registration fee or charge as is

imposed on Japanese subjects, unless the original leases specify to the

contrary,” I understand to mean, not only that the charges made on the

registration of buildings when transferred with or without the land (which is

hereinbefore discussed), but also that other taxes by the Japanese authorities

on buildings on the property of a foreign holder of a perpetual lease for

municipal or other purposes could be required to be paid, the same as if a

Japanese subject held the property instead, since the leases themselves do

not stipulate to the contrary.

As to the manner of estimating the value of buildings for taxation and the

taxes so levied being unjust, and numerous other taxes and charges a

hardship, there seems to be, under treaty stipulations, no legal ground of

complaint. The same method, as I am informed, is employed in estimating

the house tax of Japanese subjects and the same rate of tax levied, the tax

law applying to Japanese and foreigners the same. In this respect it seems

that no charge of discrimination against foreigners can successfully be

made, and it will be observed that no such charge is specifically made in the

memorandum of complaints. Whether these taxes may be unjust, and with

numerous other taxes a hardship or excessive, is shown in some respects by

athe following inclosures: The statementof Mr. John McLean, vice and

acting consul-general of the United States at Yokohama, giving value of

land and buildings owned by him in the foreign concession of the Bluff;

also in respect to the property which is now occupied by the consulate and

the taxes paid thereon; also the statement of Mr. Scidmore, No. 1822, above

cited, in respect of the value of the property of the Grand Hotel, the

Yokohama Club, and the Oriental Hotel, all on the Bund and within the

foreign settlement, and the taxes paid on the land of each, respectively. As

to other taxes sought to be levied being cumulative or excessive—the

business tax, income tax, and other charges complained of—laws No. 32

and 33, inclosed with my dispatch No. 359,of September 27, 1899, in

respect of “business tax” and “revised income tax law,” will furnish definite

information.

4. In the matter of prescriptive rights claimed to have been acquired by long

tenure and use of property in the foreign settlements under extraterritorial

jurisdiction, while my opinion is that that contention is not well founded, I

need not discuss the question pending instruction from the Department.

5. Finally, in respect of the fifth subject of complaint—that because of the

failure of the Japanese Government to comply with treaty obligations, about

which statements of grievance in general and particular are set forth and

because of which it is claimed that property has depreciated in value so

much that no real estate transactions are made—my information on inquiry

is that, of American residents, property holders, in Yokohama only about

one-third are in support of this and other complaints, and not a majority

evenofthe American AsiaticSociety,forwhichthetwogentlemen

addressing me speak, except the complaint touching the requirement for

separate registration of buildings and lands at separate offices in a transfer

of perpetual leases including buildings. The president of that society, Mr. J.

R. Morse, and Mr. Scidmore, a member of the executive committee in

whose behalf these complaints are submitted, and others have personally

expressed to me their impatience with the course taken by the complainants

in general, but have submitted to it that the questions raised might, once for

all, be settled at the Department of State. They say that the reason for the

paralysis of trade in perpetual lease property is largely due to the agitation

by the leaseholders themselves, and that of course property can not have the

market value it should have when the holders discredit their titles.

In remarking generally on these complaints I think I am justified in saying

that some of our American residents in Yokohama who hold perpetual

leases, together with a large proportion, perhaps a majority, of property

holders among the British and German subjects, have from the first been

opposedtotreatyrevisionbywhichextraterritorialityhasnowbeen

abolished. They have constantly been apprehensive concerning their fate

when the new treaty should go into operation. They have been looking for

and expecting trouble under Japanese control; and it is not to be wondered

at when it is considered for how many years they have lived in Japan but

not of it, so independent and free from vexatious taxes and many other

burdens incident to city life in their own country. They have regarded the

Japanese as inferiors and now, being under the control of Japanese law and

Japanese officials, some of them, though unwittingly no doubt, are inclined

to exaggerate their troubles. Having little confidence in the purposes of the

Japanese Government and local authorities, it is hard for them to adjust

themselves to their new conditions. That they already have had and will

continue to have some reason to complain of inefficient local officials is not

to be denied; but in my opinion they have no sufficient reason to suspect the

good faith of the Government, which seems to be earnest in the desire and

purpose to demonstrate to the world that Japan has not been received into

the family of nations too soon.

Though of some specific claims and items of complaint set forth in the

memorandumnospecialmentionhasbeenmade,Ithinktheyare

substantially covered by my statements in respect to the various classes of

complaints, together with the inclosures and the laws and regulations to be

found at the Department.

ThatimperialordinanceNo.458isdisappointing,andthattheterm

“superficies” (perpetual lease) is used instead of simply “perpetual lease”

gives occasion of complaint because of ambiguity of definition is true; and

if the conclusion of the State Department should be that, in consideration of

treaty stipulations, there is sufficient ground for further appeal to the

Japanese Government for a more specific and direct confirmation of leases

held in perpetuity, I shall, of course, press the matter with vigor, as I also

shall in event of instructions to do so in respect of any other of the matters

of complaint. I desire to do all in my power to protect American interests

and that every right guaranteed to them by treaty shall be made secure; and

I would be pleased if it were possible for American residents to remain as

free from taxation as they were under extraterritorial jurisdiction.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure 1.— Translation.]
T,February 26, 1900.

M M I have examined the letter which your excellency did me the

honor to write me on the 9th of the current month on the subject of the title

to lease in perpetuity. As I told you in my letter of the 3d, the provisions of

the civil code which may be in conflict with those of the treaties are,

naturally, not applied to the title to lease in perpetuity. The provision which,

in article 268 of the civil code, limits the titles of holders of superficies, it

goes without saying, and, as a general rule, all the provisions which imply

conditions other than those which are written in the titles to leases in

perpetuity, do not apply to these.

Accept, etc.,
VT.AOKI.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Scidmore to Mr. Buck.
UNITEDSTATESCONSULATE-GENERAL,
Yokohama, Japan,March 28, 1900.

No. 1822.]

SIR: Agreeably to the request contained in your letter of March 26, 1900, I

have the honor to submit the following in response to your questions

relating to the status of land tenures in the late foreign settlements of Japan:

1. Since the promulgation of the Japanese imperial ordinance No. 458, of

December 27, 1899, I have not heard of any instance in which there has

beenanyspecificcomplaintbyforeignersorcontroversywiththe

authorities concerning the registration of transfers of property.

2. It is my opinion that that ordinance, as interpreted by the Japanese

minister of foreign affairs, secures foreign holders of property their rights

under the treaties.

3. The interpretation of the Japanese Government, as given by the minister

for foreign affairs, of that ordinance is a reasonable one.

4. The judge of the Yokohama Ku Saibancho, who ignored the treaty

provisions, and who apparently took the view that the civil code of Japan

contained all of the law applicable to such registration, has very recently

“resigned” and has retired to private life. What his successor may do is

uncertain, but in view of the requirement of the ordinance that he shall

register “a copy of the title deed in question,” it strikes me that it is of very

little importance what his opinion in the matter may be. The assurance of

the minister of foreign affairs amounts to a pledge of the good faith of the

Japanese Government.

5. The civil code provisions do not, and evidently were not intended to,

cover the registration of the foreign settlement titles. They are exceptional

titles. The term “superficies,” whether alone or bracketed with “perpetual

lease” is unscientific and inaccurate. Strictly speaking, these tenures appear

to be of the nature of determinable fees, but, all things considered, it is not a

matter of vital importance that they be known by any particular name. What

is of importance is that their nature or character be preserved in the manner

stipulated in the original title deeds from the Japanese Government. This

will be done, I believe, by recording “a copy of the title deed in question.”

6. Your sixth question reads:

“Does a proper construction of Article XVII of the treaty between the

United States, or treaties of other powers, with Japan, exempt foreign

holders of perpetual leases in the foreign settlements from any tax on

buildings erected on their leased land?”

Reading Article XVII with the aid of Article II of the treaty, a fair

construction appears to be that the tax on buildings is payable, unless we

can find an exemption in a treaty with another power. The treaty with

France has been cited in this connection, and until the French and Japanese

Governments determine what and how much they mean by the word

“propriétés” in Article XXI, our position must remain uncertain.

7. I have not heard of, and do not believe that there is, any unfair

discrimination made against foreigners in the mode of levying taxes on

buildings or in the amount of such tax.

8. To require a separate registration of the transfer of buildings where they

are sold with the land would be, in my opinion, in the case of foreign-

settlementpropertyamanifestviolationofprecedentsinconnection

therewith; and an evasion of the intention of the treaty provisions. For

purposes of taxation the land and the buildings may be regarded separately,

but in passing title they are, under American, English, and most continental

laws, considered as united. Previous to July 16, 1898, the date of the

coming into force of the civil code, there was no general law of real

property in Japan. Local customs prevailed, and the modes of tenure were

of great variety. The American treaty with Japan was promulgated in 1895.

9. The 2½ per cent tax on registration of transfers ought not to be levied on

the value of buildings if they are conveyed with foreign-settlement land. If

they are conveyed separately, I can see no reason for their exemption from

such tax. The Japanese Government, by ordinance No. 458, has, in effect,

conceded the exemption of the land from this tax.

10. I can find no express treaty stipulation under the recent extraterritorial

jurisdiction whereby foreigners in Japan were exempted from taxation. The

Japanese Government then refrained from taxing foreigners, probably under

motives of policy. To enforce collection in every case would have involved

resorttoaboutseventeendifferentconsularcourts,andwouldhave

produced endless petty squabbles and friction. Other reasons, if any, should

appear in the legation records.

11. I do not believe that any sovereign State would be bound to admit the

force of prescription as applicable to exemption from taxation.

12. Between the years 1865 and 1868, by arrangement with the Japanese

authorities, the foreign landholders of Yokohama selected a committee

known as the municipal council of the foreign settlement, for the purpose of

regulating police, street, and other local affairs. This council derived its

income from 20 per cent of the ground rents donated by the Kanagawa

kencho and from monthly licenses for the sale of liquors. The revenue from

these licenses was soon lost, by reason of the refusal of some of the dealers

to pay it, and in 1868, it being found that expenses were in excess of

income and the Japanese being anxious to resume control, the so-called

municipal system came to an end. No taxes other than for liquor licenses

and ground rent were ever paid by foreigners here previous to treaty

revision. Expenses for street lighting and sprinkling have been met by

13. At the time of the first allocation of lots of land to foreigners here,

Yokohama was a small fishing village, and tenures were governed by local

custom. So far as I can learn, these tenures were of a feudal nature. The

Japanese Government obtained the lands required from the original holders

and became the direct landlord vis à vis the foreigners. At the time of the

recent revision of the treaties the classification of native-owned land in

Yokohama had assumed in most respects the forms now existing—that is,

so far as taxation is concerned.

14. Lot No. 4, B, Bund, Yokohama, occupied by the new Yokohama United

Club, contains 540 tsubos, and the annual ground rent thereon amounts to

yen 151.06. With the new building this property is estimated to exceed yen

250,000 in value.

Lot No. 11, Bund, Yokohama, occupied by the Oriental Hotel, contain s498

tsubos, and the annual ground rent thereon amounts to yen 139.31. The

property is capitalized at yen 300,000.

Lots Nos. 18, 19, and 20, Bund, Yokohama, occupied by the Grand Hotel,

contain 1,735 tsubos, and the ground rent thereon amounts to yen 485.35.

The property is capitalized at yen 250,000.

No purchase money whatever was paid for these lands by the original

foreign holders, to whom they were allotted upon application approved by

the consuls and upon the payment of a certain amount of ground rent in

advance.

I may be able in a few days to add further information of interest in the

premises. Meanwhile, I trust that these hastily written observations may be

of some value to you.

I have, etc.,
GHS ,
Deputy Consul-General.
N. B.—See supplementary report of Mr. Scidmore attached, giving full

value of the Yokohama Club and the Oriental Hotel properties. Club land

value, yen 75,000; tax, yen 151.06; rate, a little more than 0.002. Oriental

Hotel land value, yen 50,000; tax, yen 139.31; rate, a little less than 0.003.

CONSULATE-GENERAL OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Yokohama,April 3, 1900.

DEARMINISTERBUCK: The Yokohama Club property is valued thus:

Yen.

Ground 75,000

Building 160,000

Machinery 30,000

Furniture, etc 50,000

Billiards and bowling 12,000

Library 10,000

Total 337,000

The Oriental Hotel property is estimated as probably worth:

Yen.

Ground 50,000

Building 150,000

Furniture, good will, etc 100,000

Total 300,000

I shall send you figures for the Grand Hotel later.

Yours, respectfully,
GHS
[Inclosure 3.]

UNITEDSTATESCONSULATE-GENERAL,
Yokohama,March 30, 1900.

No. 1829.]

SIR: I have this morning had a long interview with Judge Watanabe,

president of the Yokohama Chiho Saibansho, relative to the land titles of the

foreign settlement, and the following are the leading items of information

then obtained by me:

1. Not a single transfer of foreigners’ property here has been

presented for registration since the issuance of the ordinance No.

458, of December 27, 1899.

2. When a case arises it will be disposed of in accordance with

that ordinance, and registration will be made in the form directed

by ordinance No. 329, of July 6, 1899. (See Lonholm’s translation

of law concerning registration of immovables, pp. 77, 88, and 90.)

3. A deed from a foreigner conveying land with buildings thereon

must be registered in the land register and the buildings register,

separately. The fact of such registration will appear by two

indorsements on the deed.

4. The saibansho, under ordinance No. 458, will receive through

the kencho and register a transfer of land only. The registration of

the transfer of, or any right affecting, the buildings can be

obtained only by separate and direct application to the saibansho.

5. The registration fee (a percentage on the value of the property)

will be exacted in all cases except actual transfer of land. On

mortgages, I am informed by the kanagawa kencho, this fee will

be six one-thousandth of the value.

6. Judge Watanabe will send to me a copy of the register showing

how a transaction will be treated. I am sorry that I can not get it

to-day.

I have, etc.,
GEO.H.SCIDMORE,
Deputy Consul-General.
N. B.—In my letter No. 1822 of the 28th instant, paragraph 12, “one-third

of the ground rent” should read “20 per cent of the ground rent.” Kindly

make this correction.

[Inclosure 4.]
PORT OF YOKOHAMA LAND REGULATIONS.
I.Mode of acquiring land.—Any person desiring to lease land within the

location fixed upon for foreign renters must first apply to the consul or

consular agent of his nation, officially and in writing, or if there be none

appointed, to the consul of any friendly power, specifying as nearly as can

be ascertained the locality and boundaries of the said land, and the said

consul or consular agent will thereupon inquire of the land officer and the

other foreign consuls whether any impediment exists to its settlement by

reason of previous negotiation or application by third parties, or otherwise,

provided always that if such impediment do exist, then and in such case a

reasonable time shall be allowed the first claimant to settle for the said land;

and the failing to do so within such reasonable time shall be considered and

held a virtual surrender of such prior right of settlement, and the same shall

revert to the foreigner next applying, on notice to that effect being given to

his consul, and no good cause shown why it should not revert as aforesaid.

II.Only bona fide residents eligible to rent land.—Allotments of land will

be made only to bona fide residents, and renters of land will be required,

under penalty of forfeiture of title deed, to erect within six months after date

of title deed, and in accordance with these regulations, buildings of a value

of not less than: On water lots, $150 for each 100 tsubo measurement; on

rearage lots, $50 for each 100 tsubo measurement.

III.Finalsettlementandtitledeeds.—Thepriorityoftheindividual

claimant having been determined as aforesaid, a note, under the hand and

seal of the consul, will be furnished him for delivery to the land officer,

who will without delay proceed with him to measure the land in question.

The measurement having been ascertained, the money for one year’s rental

will be immediately paid to the chief land Officer, who will give a receipt in

triplicate, with translation, for the same, stating also the measurement and

boundaries of the said land. Two copies of the said receipt will be handed

by the renter to his consul, who will transmit one copy to the governor. The

governor will forthwith issue a title deed in triplicate in the form agreed

upon and hereunto annexed, one copy to be archived by the governor, one

by the consul, and one copy to be delivered to the renter.

The governor will also notify the other consuls of the issue of such title

deeds, specifying the measurements and boundaries of the land.

IV.Boundary stones to be placed.—When land is rented a time will be

appointed, and stones having the number of the lot distinctly cut thereon to

define the boundaries will be fixed in the presence of an officer deputed by

the consul,-or the land officer, or his deputy, and of the renter, in such

manner that they may not interfere with the lines of road or the boundaries,

or in any other way give cause for litigation or dispute hereafter.

V.Streets, roads, sewers, and jetties.—It is clearly understood and agreed to

that land devoted to public use as streets, roads, etc., is not included in the

measurement of rented lots, and is not to be infringed on in any way.

In the acquirement of new lots of land provision shall be made for the

requisite extension or creation of streets, roads, and jetties.

The proprietorship of the soil being in the Japanese Government, the streets,

roads, and jetties will at all times be kept in thorough order, and sewers or

drains will be made when necessary by the Japanese Government, and no

tax will be levied on renters of the foreign quarter for this purpose.

VI.Rent,whenpayable.—TheannualrentpayabletotheJapanese

Government on all land rented within the foreign quarters will be payable in

advance on the ----- day of the ----- month of each year.

The governor will address the several consuls ten days previous to the said

date, stating when, where, and to whom the said rent must be paid, and the

said consuls will give notice to the renters. The officer appointed to receive

the rent will give a receipt in triplicate, with translation, for the same, one

copy of which shall be archived by the governor, one copy by the consul,

and one to be delivered to the renter.

Should a renter neglect to pay the rent on the day fixed, the governor will

acquaint the consul under whose jurisdiction the defaulter is, who will

enforce immediate payment.

VII.Transfer of lots.—The interest in a lot shall always be held in law and

equity to reside in that person in whose name the title of record appears, and

no title shall pass unless the deed is lodged for record within three days

from the date of the conveyance, but no lot can be transferred within one

year after the date of title deed.

Within the said foreign quarter no Japanese shall erect new houses or sheds

so near the residences or places of business of foreigners as to endanger

them in case of fire, and if he does the governor will abate the nuisance.

No Japanese shall open a place of public entertainment within said location

withouttheunanimousconsentoftheconsularauthoritiesunderthe

penalties hereinafter provided against maintaining a nuisance.

VIII.Extent of lot and usage to which applied.—Straw sheds, bamboo or

wooden houses, or buildings of inflammable kinds shall not be erected in

the settlement, nor shall any trade or profession be carried on within its

limits dangerous to the safety of life or property, or obnoxious to the

general health, under a penalty of $25 for every twenty-four hours such

nuisance shall remain unabated. Nor shall contraband goods or merchandise

likely to endanger life or property—such as gunpowder, saltpeter, sulphur,

large quantities of spirits, and such like—be stored in the premises of any

individual, under a penalty of $25 and $25 for every twenty-four hours the

nuisance shall remain. The place where such trades or professions may be

carried on or which such merchandise may be stored must be sufficiently

distant from either dwellings or warehouses to prevent all risk of damage or

inconvenience, and be fixed upon by the authorities after consultation

together.

The public roads must not be encroached upon or obstructed, as by

scaffolding for the purpose of building or by building materials of any kind,

beyond the time essential for the completion of the work, or in such manner

as shall at any time block up or materially interfere with the thoroughfares,

or by projecting eaves of houses, or fences, or gates, or doorsteps, or

entrances; by the heaping up of goods for any length of time, and such like,

under a penalty of $10 for each twenty-four hours they shall remain after a

notification by the Japanese or consular authorities to remove them.

The public or individuals must not be inconvenienced by the accumulation

of filth in gutters or upon the roads, by the firing of guns, carelessly

creating noise or disturbance, furious riding or driving, or leading horses up

and down the chief thoroughfares for exercise, or by any act coming

legitimately within the meaning of the term nuisance, under a penalty of

$10 on commission of either of said offenses. All fines shall be recovered

before the consul of the nation to which the offending party belongs, or if

there be none in the port then they may be recovered before the Japanese

authorities, and shall be paid over to the committee appointed under clause

9 of these regulations, to be used for the purpose therein stated and for

which said committee is appointed.

IX.Street lamps and police.—It being expedient and necessary that some

provision should be made for the lighting and cleaning of streets and for a

watch or police force, the foreign consuls aforesaid shall, at the beginning

of each year, convene a meeting of the renters of land within the said

foreign quarter to devise means of raising the requisite funds for these

purposes; and at such meeting it shall be competent to the said renters to

declare an assessment in the form of a rate to be made on the said land or

buildings, and in the form of wharfage dues on all goods landed at any

place within the said quarter, and to appoint a committee of three or more

persons to levy the said rates and dues and apply the funds so realized to

the”purposesaforesaid,orinsuchmannerasmaybeagreedand

determined upon at the said meeting. And to that end the said committee

shall be empowered to sue all defaulters in the consular courts under whose

jurisdiction these may be; and in case the said defaulters have no consular

representative at this port, then the governor of Yokohama shall, upon

application of the committee to the foreign consuls, recover from such

defaulters the amount due from them for land assessment or wharfage dues

and pay the same to the said committee.

Moreover, at such yearly meeting the accounts of the committee for the past

year shall be laid before the assembled renters for their approval and

sanction.

It shall be competent for the foreign consuls collectively or singly, when it

may appear to them needful, or at the requisition of the renters of land, to

call a public meeting at any time, giving ten days’ notice of the same,

setting forth the business upon which it is convened, for the consideration

of any matter or thing connected with the land; provided always such

requisition shall be signed by not less than five of the said renters and that it

set forth satisfactory grounds for such request.

The resolutions passed by a majority at any such public meeting on all such

matters aforesaid shall be valid and binding upon the whole of the renters of

land within the said limits, if not less than one-third of them are present.

The senior consul present at any such meeting shall take the chair, and in

the absence of a consul then such renter as the majority of voters present

may nominate.

If renters of land in public meeting assembled as herein provided decide

upon any matter of a municipal nature not already enumerated and affecting

the general interest, such decision shall first be reported by the chairman to

theconsulsfortheirjointconcurrenceandapproval,withoutwhich

approval officially given such resolution can not become valid and binding

upon the renters as a body.

X.Sale of spirits or liquors, opening of public houses, etc.—No foreigner

or Japanese shall sell spirits or liquors or open a house of entertainment

within the foreign quarter without a license’ to do so from the said consuls,

or the majority of them, and if a Japanese, also from the governor, and upon

good and sufficient security given for the maintenance of order in their

establishments.

XI.Breach of regulations.—Should any one of the consuls at any time

discover a breach of the regulations, or should information thereof be

lodged with him, or should the local authorities address him thereon, he

shall in every case within his jurisdiction summon the offender before him

and, if convicted, punish him summarily.

Should any foreigner who has no consular authority at this port commit a

breach of the regulations, then and in such case the Japanese chief authority

may be appealed to by any one or more of the consuls to uphold the

regulations in their integrity and punish the party so infringing them.

XII.Provisional clause.—Hereafter should any correction be requisite in

theseregulations,orshoulditbenecessarytodetermineonfurther

regulations, or should doubts arise as to the construction of or powers

conferred thereby, the same must be consulted upon and settled by the

consuls and governor in communication together, who shall equitably

decide thereon, the consuls submitting the same for confirmation to the

representatives of their respective countries in Japan.

The consuls referred to in these regulations are consuls (or persons duly

acting as such) of powers having treaties with Japan.
F.HOWARDVYSE,
H. B. M. Acting Consul.
EMD,
United States Consul.

DGVP ,
H. N. M.’s Vice-Consul.
A true copy;

PB W,
Acting Junior Assistant.
[Inclosure 5.]

STATEMENT OF MR. M’LEAN.
APRIL14, 1900.

What is the size of the lot occupied by the consulate-general in Yokohama,

and what is the present estimated value? What is the amount of annual

ground rent?

(Answer.) The lot measures 627 tsubos. The estimated value is 150 yen per

tsubo. The annual ground rent is yen 175.40, payable in advance. Value of

lot as above, yen 94,050. Ground rent, 0.0018 of value.

What is the value of the building occupied by the consulate, and what is the

amount of house tax?

(Answer.) The estimated value of the building is yen 5,000. The house tax

paid for six months amounted to yen 31.89. House tax for six months, 0.006

of value.

What is the estimated value of the lots on the Bluff owned by you, and what

is the amount of annual ground rent?

(Answer.) Lot No. 206 Bluff contains 989 tsubos, and its estimated value is

yen 15 per tsubo. Value of lot as above, yen 14,835. Ground rent, at 0.12

per tsubo, yen 118.68, 0.008 of value.

What is the value of the buildings on the said lots, and what is the amount

of house tax levied thereon?

(Answer.) The present value of the buildings is yen 14,000. The house tax

amounted to yen 14 for six months. House tax for six months, 0.001 of

value.
JML
Not printed.
Not printed.

aNot printed.
aNot printed.
aMemorandum not printed. Articles referred to are as follows:

Article 86. Land and things fixed to it are immovable (fudō-san,

the word used in the Japanese text of the treaty with France). All

other things are movables. Obligations performable to bearer are

deemed to be movable.

Article 87. If the owner of a thing attaches to it another thing

owned by him for permanent use in connection with it, the thing

attached becomes an accessory. The accessory thing is subject to

all dispositions made of the principal thing.

Article242.Theownerofanimmovablething(fudō-san)

acquires the ownership of a thing which is attached to it as an

accessory, but this does not affect the rights of a person who by

virtue of a special title has attached the thing to the other.
aNot printed.
aNot printed.

[Document 307]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tokyo, Japan,July 6, 1900.

No. 450.]

SIR: Referring to my dispatch No. 417, of the 7th of April last, transmitting

respecting leases of land in perpetuity in the foreign settlements not having

been confirmed as provided by treaty, and in respect to buildings thereon

being taxed in violation of the true intent and meaning of treaty provisions,

I have the honor to transmit herewith a communication and accompanying

amemorandumfrom N. W. McIvor, esq., attorney for Messrs. Bower &

Martin, giving a case in point involving the same questions, this day

received. Having as yet received no instruction upon the general subject

which was discussed at length in my No. 417, and the next outgoing mail

closingto-day,withoutattemptingtodiscussindetailtheargument

submitted by Mr. McIvor, that the papers in the case may possibly be

received at the Department in time for consideration before instruction is

prepared in consequence of my dispatch No. 417, I forward them at once

with a few observations only.

1. In respect to “Form of title and registration,” nothing in the argument set

outintheinclosedmemorandum,notheretoforepresentedinthe

memorandum forwarded with my dispatch No. 417, seems to be presented.

The argument, however, is more able and is more forcibly presented. The

reference to the position lately assumed by the British Government that the

registrationoftitlesas“superficies(perpetuallease)”isnotentirely

satisfactory (not that it is “not in any sense satisfactory,” as stated in the

memorandum) as a substitute for titles held in perpetuity is true and the

chargé d’affaires of Great Britain here has now been so instructed and has

made such representation to the Japanese Government.

I may add in this connection that since the position taken by the British

Government has become known a larger number of American property

holders in Yokohama believe that titles held under leases in perpetuity have

not been sufficiently confirmed.

2. As to “Separation of houses from lands for purposes of registration and

taxation:”

On page 9 of the memorandum, paragraph marked “X,” in discussing the

Japanese text of the treaties the words “fudosan “and “jisho “are dwelt upon

to prove that the Japanese text, more closely than the foreign texts,

establishes the conception of the union of the land and its buildings

(fixtures).Notwithstandingthelogicoftheargumentinthatrespect

presented, that “there can be therefore no possible doubt as to what is

included in its meaning”—to wit, the union of both land and buildings as

one immovable, as claimed—is still in question. This point is discussed

under summary No. 3 of memorandum of complaints in my dispatch No.

417. The opinion of the two Japanese law commentators therein cited were

their interpretation of articles 86, 87, and 242 of the civil code, quoted on

pages 12 and 13 of the memorandum herewith, and the question involved

turns upon whether their interpretation is the correct one. The two Japanese

were interpreting the provisions of those respective articles of the code

sinceitsadoptionandasitnowstands.Mr.Umé,oneofthetwo

commentators referred to, was one of the compilers of the code.

On page 16 of the memorandum is the statement that “it is admitted that the

properties have always been freely sold and recorded, even at the ken-cho,

as whole properties (including land and its improvements).”

I think that one would draw an erroneous inference from this statement,

because until the new treaties went into operation I understand that the

registry was made only at the respective consulates, and in case of registry

of titles at the American consulate they were registered in full. Even if

recorded at the ken-cho, they were entered as properties in land, giving

metes and bounds, making no reference to and taking no cognizance of

improvements whatever.

In respect to the position taken by Great Britain, as stated in closing

paragraph (page 18) of the memoradum, it is true, as I am informed by the

British chargé d’affaires, that his Government holds that the buildings on

property held under perpetual lease should be considered as included with

the land in making transfers, and should not be subject to taxation on

registration any more than the land itself. Whether the French Government

has yet made an interpretation of its treaty with Japan to the same effect I

am not yet advised, though stated in the closing line of the memorandum as

having been announced.

There seems to be some force in the general argument of Mr. McIvor, he

having made as strong a statement in behalf of his client as possible, and if

the treaties are to be interpreted in the light of law and custom in the United

States, and if, when the treaty was made with Japan, it was understood and

intended by the contracting parties that the status of property held under

perpetual lease was to remain unchanged in any respect, touching taxation

and registration when extraterritorial jurisdiction was given up, it would

seem that the contention against separate registration of building and taxes

thereon should prevail.

That the requirement that transfers of property should be registered as

superficies (perpetual lease) is disappointing to some degree, is true, as I

have stated in previous dispatches, and in conversation with the minister for

foreign affairs on this subject he expresses a desire that some arrangement

should be made by which actual ownership of property now held under

lease in perpetuity can be effected to the satisfaction of the complaining

leaseholders. I anticipate that at the next session of the Diet some law to

that effect will be urged to be enacted.

I have, etc.,
AEB
Not printed.

[Document 308]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tokyo, Japan,December 14, 1900.

No. 526.]

SIR: Referring to my dispatches of December 24 last, of April 7 last, and of

July 6 last, Nos. 392, 417, and 450 respectively, concerning the various

questions which have arisen as to registration and taxation of property held

under leases in perpetuity in the former foreign settlements by American

citizens in Japan, as also of the buildings erected thereon, I have the honor

toinviteattentiontoimperialordinanceNo.458,accompanyingmy

dispatch No. 392, and especially to that paragraph of Article I which reads

as follows:

If a right in an immovable other than that mentioned under

paragraph 1, which might be set up against third persons, has

been duly acquired by an alien or a foreign juridical person before

the time fixed in imperial ordinance No. 251 of the thirty-second

year of Meiji (viz, the time of the operation of the new treaties),

but has not been registered before that time, it can not be set up

against third persons unless it is registered before the 31st of

December, 1900.

Also to the inclosed copy of a note from the Japanese minister for foreign

affairs, of date the 10th instant, addressed to the British minister in answer

to formal representations made by the British chargé d’affaires ad interim,

and furnished me as a reply also to similar representations informally made

by me upon the same subject.

In view of my interpretation of the above-transcribed paragraph, and in

view of the fact that doubt on the part of the property holders whether they

should be required to pay the 2½ per cent registration fee on registration of

buildings, few if any registrations of buildings were being made; and the

timebeingshortinwhichcompliancewiththeordinancerespecting

registration would afford protection to property rights, I was on the point,

October 1, of preparing a note to the minister for foreign affairs asking an

extension of time for registration beyond December 31 of this year, when,

incidentally discussing the subject at the foreign office, I was informed than

anextensionofsixmonthswastobegrantedinwhichtoperfect

registration. Hence I made no formal request.

It now appears from the answer of the minister for foreign affairs that it has

been discovered that no right of registration is to be lost and no property

right is to be jeopardized in consequence of failure to register property on or

before the 31st instant, and that no necessity exists for the extension of the

time for registration as provided in ordinance No. 458. The reasoning seems

tobesomewhatinvolvedandIamnotentirelyconvincedthatthe

conclusionreachedisnotaquestionableone.WhiletheJapanese

Government’s own interpretation of their ordinances is supposed to govern,

it is difficult in this instance to reconcile the text of the paragraph of

ordinance 458 in question with the interpretation given by the minister for

foreign affairs, and it remains to be seen whether the Japanese courts will

give effect to the views of the Japanese Government as expressed in his

excellency’s note.

In this connection I am glad to be able to say that I am informed at the

foreign office that a bill will be introduced and doubtless passed by the diet

very soon to be convened providing for the registration of perpetual leases

as such, leaving out the word “superficies,” as now provided for by

ordinance No. 458, and thus eliminating any question as to change of form

or character of leases in perpetuity by registration.

This, I understand, could have been done by ordinance No. 458, and would

now be done by ordinance but for the reason that there is no authority to

change a law by ordinance. Perpetual leases not being known to the law, the

ordinance could only couple the term “superficies “with “perpetual lease,”

the latter in brackets, which at the time was supposed to give recognition of

such leases and protection of all rights otherwise guaranteed by treaty, but

which has not proved satisfactory to leaseholders.

I understand that the proposed bill is also to provide for registration of

buildings constructed prior to the date of the operation of the new treaties

on property held under perpetual leases and not since transferred without

payment of the 2½ per cent on value now chargeable under the registration

law. This will afford great relief, as heretofore registration of such leases at

theconsulatemadenoreferencetobuildings,sinceunderforeign

jurisdiction the buildings were supposed to be included with the land in any

transfer without special mention, while by Japanese law they are not so

included as a matter of course, and buildings must be registered separately.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
Mr. Takaaki, Japanese minister for foreign affairs, to Sir Claude Macdonald, British minister.
DECEMBER10, 1900.

No. 40.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note No. 52 of

October 4 of this year, addressed by Mr. Whitehead, Her Majesty’s chargé

d’affaires, to my predecessor, Viscount Aoki, in which he states that the

imperial ordinance No. 458 of 1899 provides in the first clause of Article I

that the transfer of a perpetual lease established in the former foreign

settlements may be set up against third persons by having the fact indorsed

on the title deed by the chihō-chō, but that the last paragraph of the said

article provides that “if a right in an immovable other than that mentioned

under paragraph 1, which might be set up against third persons, has been

duly acquired by an alien or a foreign juridical person before the time fixed

in imperial ordinance No. 251 of the thirty-second year of Meiji (1899), but

has not been registered before the said time, it can not be set up against

third persons unless it is registered before the 31st of December, 1900.”

The British subjects who own perpetual leaseholds in the former foreign

settlements, it appears, not only know that Her Majesty’s Government and

other treaty powers have objections to the separation of land and houses as

regards immovables therein, but as they would have to pay no small

registration fee if they registered their houses separately from their lands,

they have hitherto hesitated to obtain registration of the immovables owned

by them within the settlements. Mr. Whitehead is therefore desirous that the

Imperial Government should, if possible, until the question of perpetual

leases is settled, extend the limit of time for registration, which is fixed by

the above imperial ordinance as the 31st of December of this year.

The Imperial Government have given careful consideration to the question

of whether or not they ought to extend the limit of time fixed by the above

imperialordinance,asrequestedbyMr.Whitehead,andtheyhave

unavoidably been compelled to come to the conclusion that there is no

reason for extending it. I have accordingly the honor to inform you that

their reasons are as follows: The rights determined by the last clause of

Article I of the said imperial ordinance, which are able to be set up against

third persons if registration is effected by the 31st of December of this year,

are special rights of priority pledges, mortgages, and leases, etc., established

on the perpetual leases, as well as rights of ownership, special rights of

priority, pledges, and leases, etc., of buildings such as were acquired by

foreigners or foreign juridical persons prior to the date fixed by the imperial

ordinance No. 251 of 1899—that is to say, the time of the coming into

operation of the new treaties— and are limited to such as can be set up

against third parties in accordance with the laws governing the act of

establishment of the said rights. In other words, rights in immovables

acquired by foreigners or foreign juridical persons prior to the coming into

operation of the new treaties (with the exception of perpetual lease) which

could be set up against third persons without being registered in accordance

with the laws governing the act of their acquirement could up to the time of

theoperationofthetreatiesbesetupagainstthirdpersonswithout

registration being necessary; yet, as from the time of the coming into

operation of the treaties they came under the control of the laws of Japan,

they could not, according to article 177 of the civil code, without the special

regulations of this imperial ordinance, be set up against third persons unless

registeredonthedayofthecomingintooperationofthetreaties.

(Translator’s note: Article 177 reads as follows: “Where an immovable is

concerned the acquisition or loss or any change in the nature of a right in

rem can not be set up against, a third person unless registration has taken

place in accordance with the provisions of the law of registration.”) The last

clause of Article I referred to therefore extended the limit of time during

which the preferential order of rights in immovables duly acquired by

foreigners or foreign juridical persons (with the exception of perpetual

lease) prior to the operation of the new treaties should follow the order of

the act of their establishment and not the order of registration till the 31st of

December this year.

Such being the meaning of the last clause of Article I of that imperial

ordinance, the limit of time for the registration of rights acquired by

foreigners prior to the operation of the new treaties is not absolutely

determined by the last day of this year, and rights in immovables acquired

by foreigners prior to the operation of the new treaties may be registered at

any time. But if they are registered in or after January next year the order of

the preferential rights in them will follow the order of registration and not

the order of the acts establishing them.

I am of opinion that, in deciding whether proper reasons exist for again

extending the time during which preferential rights could be contended for

according to the order of the act establishing them, and not according to the

order of registration, it is necessary to examine the difference or similarity

of the protection which they enjoy by a comparison of the rights established

prior to the operation of the treaties and the rights subsequently established.

It goes without saying that persons who have acquired, subsequent to the

operation of the new treaties, rights, such as mortgages established upon

perpetual leases within the former foreign settlements, as well as ownership

of buildings erected on such properties, and other rights in the buildings,

such as mortgages, leases, etc., can not set them up against third persons

without registering them. That is, these rights from the first are in order

preferential according to the order of registration, and do not follow the

order of their establishment; and leaving for the time out of the question the

propriety or otherwise of the Imperial Government having applied the term

“superficies” to perpetual leases within the foreign settlements, and of the

contention of the Imperial Government that the guaranty in the fourth

clause of Article XVIII of the Anglo-Japanese treaty simply refers to land

on perpetual lease, and does not extend to houses erected thereon, without

reference to the propriety or otherwise of these things, the acquirement or

loss and change in the nature of rights in rem with regard to immovables

after the operation of the treaties, with the exception of the case of the

transfer of perpetual leases, can for the first time be set up against third

parties by registration; and the Imperial Government has so far neither

determined nor seen reason to determine special regulations providing that

the order of preference with regard to these rights should follow the order of

establishment and not the order of registration.

In a word, if we compare the rights in immovables acquired prior to the

operation of the new treaties and the rights subsequently acquired, and the

different degree of protection they enjoy, we see that the former have the

privilege up till the 31st day of December this year of contending for

preference in accordance with the order of their establishment, while the

latter have not from the first enjoyed this privilege, but have from the date

of the establishment of such rights at once obtained order of preference in

accordance with the order of registration.

If we inquire into the origin of the time specified in the last clause of Article

I of the imperial ordinance No. 458 of 1899; that is to say, of the period of

grace during which preference can be contended for in accordance with the

order of the establishment of the rights, we find in the first article of

imperial ordinance No. 329 of July 6, 1899, which was amended by that

imperial ordinance, “If a right in an immovable which might be set up

against third persons has been duly acquired by an alien or a foreign

juridical person before the time fixed in imperial ordinance No. 251 of the

thirty-second of Meiji (1899), but has not been registered before the said

time, it can not be set up against third persons unless it is registered within

one year from such time.” However, according to the text of the title deeds

by which perpetual leases have been established, in cases of transfer of

perpetual leases they can be set up against third persons if the fact has been

indorsed on the title deed by the chihōchō having jurisdiction over the place

where the land is situated. Imperial ordinance No. 458, therefore omitted

from the provisions of the first article quoted above the case of the transfer

of a perpetual lease, and so provided that rights other than rights of

perpetualleaseacquiredbyforeignersinimmovableswhichhadnot

undergone registration prior to the date of the operation of the new treaties

could not, unless registration was effected within a fixed period of grace, be

set up against third persons; and it extended such period of grace, which,

according to the previous imperial ordinance was one year, altering it to

reach to the 31st of December this year.

The questions of the propriety or otherwise of the Imperial Government

applying the term “superficies” (perpetual lease) to perpetual leases, and of

whether or no any conditions other than those written on the title deeds

should or should not under the fourth clause of Article XVIII be attached to

houses erected on properties held on perpetual lease, have not yet been

settled; but I do not consider that there is any reason on this account to

extend the time during which rights acquired by foreigners in immovables,

with the exception of perpetual leases, prior to the operation of the new

treaties, can be claimed in accordance with the order of their establishment.

Forrightsacquiredbyforeignersinimmovables,exceptingperpetual

leases, after the coming into operation of the treaties have preference in

order in accordance with the order of registration, notwithstanding that the

above two questions have not yet been settled. That is to say, rights

acquired prior to the operation, of the treaties as compared with rights

acquired subsequent to the operation of the treaties enjoy special privileges,

as a result of the above imperial ordinance, up to December 31 of this year,

but they lose these privileges on the 1st of January next year, and thus for

the first time occupy an equal position with rights acquired after the

operation of the treaties; and I therefore see no reason that the nonextension

of this time should, as Mr. Whitehead fears in his note of October 4, cause

very great inconvenience to British subjects holding perpetual leases, or

occasion loss to them.

The Imperial Government therefore regret to be unable to consider the

question of extension of the above period, in spite of Her Majesty’s chargé

d’affaires’ request to that effect. Again, the construction placed upon the last

clause of the first paragraph of imperial ordinance No. 458 seems to me,

from Mr. Whitehead’s note, to be that when the time mentioned therein has

elapsed rights in immovables acquired by foreigners prior to the operation

of the treaties can not be registered. But, as I have already had the honor to

state, there is no objection to the registration after the 1st of January next

year of rights acquired by foreigners in immovables prior to the operation

of the treaties. The only thing is simply that preference for rights registered

after that date can not be contended for in accordance with the order of their

establishment. I have no doubt, therefore, that your excellency will agree

with the view of the Imperial Government that there is no reason for

extending the time mentioned in the last clause of Article I of the above

imperial ordinance.

In conclusion, there is a matter to which I wish to call your excellency’s

attention, namely, that the case of the attempted transfer of a perpetual lease

and the buildings erected on the property between Mr. T. R. Brewer and Mr.

C. K. M. Martin, cited in Mr. Whitehead’s note, seems to be considered (by

Her Majesty’s chargé d’affaires) as a case not within the limits of the

application of the last clause of Article I of the imperial ordinance No. 458.

I do not know for certain the date of that transaction, but I believe, to judge

from the terms of the above note, that it was after the operation of the new

treaties. If this is really so, that transaction would not be affected, even if

the time fixed in the said imperial ordinance were extended by such

extension. That is to say, as I have had the honor to state at length above,

the last paragraph of the said first article refers only to rights in immovables

acquired by foreigners prior to the operation of the new treaties, with the

exception of perpetual leases, and no rights acquired after the operation of

the treaties, with the sole exception of cases of the transfer of perpetual

leases, can be set up against third persons without registration being

effected, notwithstanding the time mentioned in the clause of the article

mentioned.

I take, etc.,
KT ,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 309]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tokyo,December 26, 1900.

(Mr. Buck reports that he has information that the Japanese Government

will very soon announce its final decision in the matter of separate registry

of and tax on buildings in the foreign settlements, etc., which matter was

discussed in his dispatches of April 7 last and July 6 last, and in which some

governments have entered protests; and that he is unable to understandingly

represent the position of the United States in the absence of definite

instructions on the subject.)
[Document 310]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tokyo, Japan,December 28, 1900.

No. 528.]

S: I have the honor to confirm my telegramof date the 26th instant,

relatingtoregistrationandtaxationofhousesintheformerforeign

settlements.

Having received no instructions in respect of the matters discussed in my

dispatch of April 7 and July 6 last, and much anxiety being expressed by

American residents in the late foreign settlements and many inquiries made

as to the position the United States assumed, pending action by the Japanese

Government upon the protests of Great Britain, France, and Germany,

expected very soon, I thought it necessary to telegraph as above.

I have, etc.

A.E.BUCK.
aPrinted ante.

[Document 311]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tokyo, Japan,January 7, 1901.

No. 532.]

SIR: Referring to my dispatch No. 526, of date the 14th ultimo, concerning

the registration of immovables of United States citizens on property held

under leases in perpetuity in the former foreign settlements in Japan for

protection against third parties, especially the limitation in time for the

registration of such immovables under ordinance No. 458, I have the honor

to inclose herewith a copy of a note to the Japanese minister for foreign

affairs upon that subject.

The note was written to remind the minister of our interviews in which I

had expressed doubt whether, if a case in point should be brought before the

courts, they would sustain in their rulings the construction put upon the

clause apparently limiting the time to the 31st of December last, as given in

his note to the British minister, and to put on record a reservation in my

acceptance of the construction he had given the ordinance.

While I do not anticipate any case to arise in which, in consequence of

fraud, a claim to any building will be set up by a third party, yet possibly

one might arise, bringing in question whether owners of buildings not

registered before January 1 of this year might not have lost priority of title

against some claimant holding a subsequent title through fraud of the

original owner.

I have, etc.,
AEB
[Inclosure.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
January 1, 1901.

SIR:Referringtomypreviousconversationswithyourselfandmy

correspondence with your excellency’s predecessor on the subject of the

property rights held by citizens of the United States in the former foreign

settlements under titles of perpetual lease, as guaranteed by treaty, and

particularly in respect to the provisions of that clause of Article I of imperial

ordinance No. 458, of December 28, 1899, which stated, “If a right in an

immovable other than that mentioned under paragraph 1, which might be

set up against third persons, has been duly acquired by an alien or a foreign

juridical person before the time fixed in imperial ordinance No. 251, of the

thirty-second year of Meiji, but has not been registered before that time, it

can not be set up against third persons unless it is registered before the 31st

of December, 1900,” I have the honor to state that, by courtesy of my

colleague, the minister of Great Britain, I am informed that by a note of

your excellency to him—as I have before been informed by your excellency

personally—the interpretation put by the Imperial Government upon the

paragraph of the ordinance above cited is to the effect that the limit of time

for the registration of the rights in question is not thereby absolutely

determined by the first day of this year, but that the said rights may be

registered” at any time, the only question involved being simply that if they

are registered on or after January 1 of this year the order of preferential

rights in respect thereto will follow the order of registration and not the

order of their establishment; and that such being the construction put upon

the ordinance by the Imperial Government they have unavoidably been

compelled to come to the conclusion that there is no reason for extending

the limit of time fixed by the above ordinance for the registration of such

rights, and that they are therefore unable to consider the question of such

extension.

While accepting provisionally the construction put upon the ordinance in

question, I nevertheless deem it proper to make reservation in behalf of

citizensoftheUnitedStatesrespectingtherightsinvolved,should,

perchance, at any time a different construction be put upon the said

ordinance by a Japanese court of law.

I avail, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.

[Document 312]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Buck.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 28, 1901.

(Mr. Hay states that the registration as superficies of titles to perpetual

leases is not acceptable to this Government without some authoritative

interpretation of the Japanese Government that title under that style is not

inferior to that of the perpetual lease; and that, so far as advised, this

Government is not prepared to concede that buildings on perpetual leases

are subject to taxation not specified in original lease.

Instructions sent by mail.)

[Document 313]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Wilson.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 31, 1901.

(Mr. Hay acknowledges receipt of Mr. Buck’s dispatch No. 532, and directs

Mr. Wilson to request the Japanese Government to withhold its decision

until the Department can have time to prepare and forward its views on

questions of property leases, their registration, etc.)
[Document 314]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Wilson.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 7, 1901.

No. 338.]

SIR: Mr. Buck’s Nos. 364, 394, 398, 417, 450, 526, and 528, dated,

respectively, October 4, 1899, and January 12, February 5, April 7, July 6,

December 14, and December 28, 1900, concerning land tenure in the

former foreign settlements, were duly received.

The Department telegraphed to Mr. Buck on the 28th ultimo as follows:
This was followed on January 31 by my telegram reading as follows:
Complaint is made by American holders of perpetual leases in foreign

settlements that their right, title, and estate in said leases are in effect

impaired by reason of Japanese laws requiring—

First. The registration of the transfer of land titles in perpetual

leases as “superficies.”

Second. Separate registration, in distinct offices and records, of

the transfer of lands and of the buildings thereon, and imposing a

charge in the nature of a tax for the registration of the latter of 2½

per cent of their value.

It is claimed that both requirements are in contravention of the guaranty of

the treaty of November 22, 1894, between the United States and Japan.

The attitude of the Japanese Government in relation to these questions is set

forth in an extract from the note of the Japanese minister to the British

minister, contained in Mr. Buck’s letter to Consul-General Gowey, inclosed

in his No. 398, of February 5, 1900, to the Department, which is in

substance that “the right of perpetual lease, i. e., the right of superficies

created for foreigners, is considered a kind of special superficies, and it is

clear that it is not the right of superficies according to the civil code;” that

even “after the right of perpetual lease has been registered in accordance

with the imperial ordinance (No. 329) the title deed has the same validity as

before; but that said ordinance was amended by imperial ordinance No.

458, in which the words ‘perpetual lease’ were specially inserted in brackets

after the word ‘superficies,’ in order to make it more clear that the so-called

right of superficies is the right of perpetual lease. As to the form or mode of

confirmation, it is also stated that it is provided in the ordinance that the

transfer of a perpetual lease can not be set up against a third party unless the

transfer is indorsed upon the title deed; and that such indorsement hitherto

made shall have the same effect as an indorsement made in accordance with

the above ordinance; that the validity of the title deeds has thus been

confirmed.”

Forms of title deeds are given in the inclosure in Mr. Buck’s No. 417, one

described as in “Foreign settlement, Bluff,” and the other in “Foreign

settlement of Yokohama.” They are alike in all essential respects, the former

running as follows: “The Kanagawa Ken Rei leases to Mrs. V. T. Lindsley,

an American citizen, her heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, the

lot of land described, as long as she or her heirs, executors, administrators,

ground rent named, payable in advance on June 1 in each and every year to

the Japanese Government; that said lot or any parcel thereof shall be

transferable to no person other than a subject or a citizen of a power having

a treaty with Japan.

“That no parcel of such lot, or building thereon, shall be sold or leased to

any Japanese subject, unless authorized by both Japanese and consular

authorities, legalizing each transfer or lease.

“That the grantee, her heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns shall

conform to the regulations made and to be made by the Japanese local

authorities and consuls in conjunction.

“That nonperformance of said conditions renders the title deed null and

void; the lot shall revert to the Japanese Government, and the buildings

thereon shall become their property.”

The above lease contains no stipulation for any exemption from further

charge, and if any existed it was solely in virtue of the law of the

extraterritorial jurisdiction, which has been abolished.

This view is confirmed by the form of a receipt, stated in Mr. Lindsley’s

brief given at the time of the original purchase, that the sum paid “is in full

of purchase money of lot.”

An inclosure in said dispatch states that the land regulations of Yokohama

provide that the proprietorship of the soil being in the Japanese Government

no tax will be levied on renters of the foreign quarter for the purposes of

streets, roads, jetties, sewers, and drains; that foreign holders are authorized

to levy taxes for lighting, street cleaning, and police purposes; that the

interest in a lot shall always be held to reside in the owner of record (which

is stated in the inclosure to be at the consulate); that no title shall pass

unless the deed is lodged for record within three days from the date of the

conveyance, but no lot can be transferred within one year after date of title

deed.

It is to be observed that the taxes thus leviable are in the nature of taxes for

municipal purposes.

It is also observed that the registration of a transfer within three days from

the date thereof is essential to the validity of the conveyance.

In the treaty between the United States and Japan, of November 22, 1894, it

is provided, in Article II, that citizens or subjects of each of the high

contracting parties in any part of the territories of the other “may there own

or hire and occupy houses, manufactories, warehouses, shops, and premises

which may be necessary for them, and lease land for residential and

commercialpurposes,conformingthemselvestothelaws,policeand

customs regulations of the country like native citizens or subjects.”

They “shall enjoy, respectively, the same treatment in matters of commerce

and navigation as native citizens or subjects, or citizens or subjects of the

most favored nation, without having to pay taxes, imposts, or duties of

whatever nature or whatever denomination levied in the name or for the

profitoftheGovernment,publicfunctionaries,privateindividuals,

corporations, or establishments of any kind, other or greater than those paid

by native citizens or subjects or citizens or subjects of the most favored

nation.

Article XVIII stipulates that “existing leases in perpetuity upon which

property is now held in the said settlements shall be confirmed, and no

conditions whatsoever other than those contained in such existing leases

shall be imposed in respect of such property.” * * *

“All lands which may previously have been granted by the Japanese

Government free of rent for the public purposes of the said settlements

shall, subject to the right of eminent domain, be permanently reserved free

of all taxes and charges for the public purposes for which they were

originally set apart.”

Imperial ordinance No. 329, of July 7, 1899, provides: “If a right in an

immovable which might be set up against third persons has been duly

acquired by an alien or a foreign juridical person before the time fixed in

the imperial ordinance No. 251 of the thirty-second year of Meiji, but has

not been registered before the said time, it can not be set up against third

persons unless it is registered within one year from said time.”

This ordinance was amended by imperial ordinance No. 458, December 27,

1899, as follows: “When a superficies (perpetual lease) created in a foreign

settlement is transferred, such transfer can not be set up against third

persons unless it is entered in the title deed by the chihoco of the place

where such land is situated. If a right other than that mentioned under

paragraph 1 which might be set up against third persons has been duly

acquired by an alien or a foreign juridical person before the time fixed in

the imperial ordinance No. 251 of the thirty-second year of Meiji, but has

not been registered before the said time, it can not be set up against third

persons unless it is registered up to the 31st of December, 1900.”

It is clear that under the terms of the above lease and treaty the Japanese

Government can not alter, impair, or diminish the title and estate in the

perpetual lease. And the attitude of the Japanese Government mentioned in

Mr. Buck’s said letter to Consul-General Gowey, as well as the amendatory

ordinance No. 458, evince that understanding and construction of the treaty

by the Japanese Government.

If it be true, as contended, that the superficies is a different and inferior

estate to that of the perpetual lease, the registration laws applicable to the

former could not apply to the latter. Whether the amendatory ordinance

cures the defect of the registration laws depends on its validity and

authoritative construction by the Japanese Government.

But the Department concurs in the construction given by the Japanese

minister, that a perpetual lease may, without, however, altering the title or

estate, be styled by a certain analogy a special kind of superficies not

defined or provided for by the code, and for this reason and under the

express terms of the last paragraph of Article 1 of the amendatory ordinance

the failure to register the transfer of perpetual lease within the period

therein prescribed could not affect the rights of the transferee by precluding

him from setting up said transfer against third persons.

The objection of the leaseholders, when analyzed, lies not to a mere law

requiring registration of perpetual leases, nor to the mere ideal severance of

the estate into lands and buildings for the purposes of registration, but to the

effect of the required form of registration on the title to the land.

Mere acts or omissions of ministerial officers, unauthorized by law, in

omitting essential or adding superfluous words in the recording of the

instrument, or by recording the transfers in an improper book, or under an

improper description of title, should be subject to redress by the courts in an

action of mandamus or for damages. If not, such acts and omissions would

appear to be an abuse of power justifying refusal to offer the transfers for

registration and the bringing of a test case for an authoritative decision of

the question.

In the United States the courts lean against that construction of a grant by a

State which implies exemption from the ordinary powers and burdens of

taxation as belong in the nature of a renunciation of sovereignty. Such

exemption must be clearly and expressly given, and is in general strictly

construed.

This view is reenforced by the consideration that, as is stated, no buildings

were on the lands at the time of the original grants, in consideration of

which the ground rents were payable; and by the further consideration that

improvements are ordinarily assessed for taxation in the United States on

account of the increased value of the land.

It does not, therefore, seem clear that under the terms of the said lease and

treaty, alien holders of the perpetual leases can object to a law merely

requiring their assignees to register and have recorded separately lands and

houses; nor to the 2½ per cent tax on houses erected since the coming into

operation of the treaties, nor even to such tax on houses before erected.

Article II of the treaty puts them in respect of taxes on a footing of equality

with the subjects of Japan or with the citizens or subjects of the most-

favored nation; unless it can be successfully maintained that the treaty

stipulation for the confirmation of the leases, without other conditions than

those contained therein, impliesex vi terminiexoneration of land and

buildings from all taxes or charges other than the annual payment of the

ground rent.

The treaty provides for the confirmation of leases in perpetuity without

conditions other than those contained in leases then existing.

The only condition of the kind named is the payment of the ground rent. It

does not prohibit the segregation of the leasehold estates into lands and

houses for the mere purpose of registration, so long as the title and estate is

notdiminishedorimpaired;andunlesstheoriginalleasestipulates

expressly or by implication a perpetual exemption from registration and

taxation other than ground rent, the treaty between the United States and

Japan does not seem to forbid it. The Department, however, appreciating

the force of the arguments adduced in support of such exemption in virtue

of the treaty, reserves its decision for further consideration of this point.

Mr. Buck’s No. 417 states that the regulations of the several settlements

vary in terms, as do also the conditions in the forms of the perpetual lease;

that the land regulations for the port of Yokohama provided that foreign

holders might levy taxes upon their lands and buildings for police, lighting,

and street cleaning, but now, with loss of extraterritorial jurisdiction, they

do not have this power, and the question stated by Mr. Buck is relevant,

whether the Japanese authorities may not now have the right to tax, at least

for these municipal purposes.

Article I of ordinance 458 inhibits the transfer of a superficies (perpetual

lease) from being set up against third persons unless the transfer has been

registered; but as above shown, under the construction by the Japanese

minister of the amendatory ordinance, and under the terms of the first

paragraph of Article I, and under the express terms of the last paragraph of

Article I, there is no period limited for the registration of the transfer.

The wisdom of the policy of registration laws is too well settled to admit of

question. In the United States they are found in most, if not all, of the

States. While no explanation has been made to the Department (except Mr.

Buck’s report that there is no law compelling a transferee to register) of the

effect as stated in Article I of ordinance 458 of the failure to register

transfers,itispresumedthatthearticleisintendedtoaccomplish

substantiallythesameobjectinthisregardasiscontemplatedby

registration laws in the United States. The ordinance does not profess to

invalidate unrecorded transfers, but to prevent their being set up against

third persons.

But the case of the leaseholders seems to be clearer and stronger under the

French treaty. Article 21 of the treaty between France and Japan provides

that “leases in perpetuity in virtue of which foreigners actually possess

property in settlements shall be confirmed, and properties of this nature

shall be subject to no impost taxes, charges, contributions, or conditions

whatsoever other than those expressly stipulated in the lease in question.”

This stipulation expressly exempts the said properties from all taxes or

charges other than the single one of the payment of the ground rents or

compliance with any other conditions expressly stipulated in the leases; and

if the word “properties” includes buildings on the lands as fixtures, they are

equally exempt. The question is, therefore, one of construction of the

juridical meaning of the word “properties” as used in the text.

Messrs. Lindsley and McIvor, in their briefs, contend “that for the word

‘proprietés’ in the French text, the word ‘fudo-san’ is used in the Japanese

text, and that the words ‘terrains’ and ‘jisho’ are correspondingly used,

evincing a discriminating legal use of the terms, the former word meaning

in the Japanese civil code ‘real estate or immovables,’ in the sense of article

86 of the civil code, ‘land and things fixed to it are immovables;’ while the

words ‘terrains’ and ‘jisho’ mean vacant lands.” If their interpretation is

correct, the word “properties” would include land and fixtures.

It is not stated whether, during the pre code era, the word “fudo-san” was in

use and expressed the same legal conception as that attributed to it by the

code; but if so, the exemption stipulated in the lease would seem clearly to

apply also to the buildings, even if the treaty provisions be interpreted in the

sense of the words of the Japanese text and laws.

But it may well be contended that the treaty should be construed according

to the laws and usages of the country of the holders’ origin; that is to say,

according to the law of the extraterritorial jurisdiction in force and there

applicable at the time the treaty was formed; that the treaty should be

construed according to the laws, usages, and customs in force at the time

when and at the place where it was to be carried into execution, under

which land and its fixtures constituted a juridical entity; and that it could

not be justly interpreted in the light of Japanese laws not then and there in

force, the provisions of which, in derogation of existing rights, were not in

the contemplation of both high contracting parties. The rights then vested

and existing in all their extent could not be presumedly intended to be

impaired,andcertainlycouldnotbeimpairedwithoutexpresstreaty

provision authorizing it; and especially could it not be done by any doubtful

construction.

American holders would therefore be entitled to the same exemptions as the

French holders, in virtue of the favored-nation clause of the treaty between

the United States and Japan.

It is impracticable for the Department at present to attempt to give a final

construction of the rights of the foreign holders of the leases owing to its

unfamiliarity with the laws, usages, and legal terminology of Japan, and to

its want of information as to the arguments urgedin extensoby the Japanese

Government in support of its contention. But it is hoped that a mutually

friendly discussion of the questions involved may lead to their final and

satisfactory elucidation and settlement. The apparently favorable disposition

of the Japanese Government is evinced by the statement in Mr. Buck’s No.

526 of December 14, 1900, that a bill will doubtless be passed by the Diet

for the registration of perpetual leases as such and for the registration of

buildings constructed prior to the coming into operation of the new treaties

without payment of the 2½ per cent tax. In the meantime you will lend your

assistance to the American holders of leases in respect of the freedom of

fixtures from other charges than those imposed on the lands to which they

are attached, and you will seek, if necessary, a clearer act of confirmation of

these titles than appears to have been made.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.
Printed ante.
Printed ante.

[Document 315]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,February 8, 1901.

No. 539.]

aSIR: I have the honor to confirm your telegraphic instructionof the 28th

ultimo.

On the 31st ultimo I handed to the minister for foreign affairs a signed

memorandum, copy of which is herewith inclosed, embodying the contents

of the above instruction. I also inclose a copy of Mr. Kato’s reply, in which

he expresses his preparedness to enter into an examination of the questions

indicated when a detailed expression of the views of the Government of the

United States shall have been received.

Viscount Aoki’s note of January 15 to the British minister (quoted in

inclosure with Mr. Buck’s No. 398, of February 5, 1900), and his note to the

French minister, dated February 26, 1900 (inclosure with Mr. Buck’s No.

417, of April 17, 1900), seem to contain in effect such an authoritative

interpretation. I apprehend that the minister for foreign affairs would

willingly give a still more emphatic and unequivocal interpretation, which,

whatevermightbethefuturerulingsoflawcourts,wouldprotect

leaseholders from damage by making the Government of Japan responsible.

However, it is probable that, to end the great dissatisfaction on this score,

exact registration of perpetual leases in terms as such and only such will be

provided for by law.

I believe that the Japanese Government will not concede that buildings

which stand on land held under perpetual lease should for that reason be

exempted from the house tax or from any other charges to which buildings

in general are liable.

aI have the honor to confirm also your telegraphic instructionreceived the

2d instant.

Accordingly, in a note dated the 5th, copy of which is herewith, I made the

above request to the Japanese Government.

In reference to Mr. Buck’s No. 532, no reply has yet been received to his

notetoMr.KatodatedJanuary1,designedtoholdtheJapanese

Government to the foreign office’s interpretation of the last clause of article

1 of ordinance No. 458, which interpretation (in inclosure with Mr. Buck’s

No. 526, of December 14) appears to be authoritative.

Shortly before January 1 the British, French, and German ministers sent

three practically identical, notes on the same subject, but further strongly

protesting against the Japanese Government’s refusal to prolong the time

beyond December 31. Day before yesterday they received Mr. Kato’s

replies. That to the British minister, which I have read, points out that the

clause objected to was inserted as an act of grace, upon the written request

of Sir Ernest Satow, for the purpose of allowing ample time for absentees to

secure by registration the priority of such rights as subleases, mortgages,

etc., already held.

The Japanese Government are now engaged in preparing for presentation to

the present session of the Diet (which terminates on March 24) a bill whose

object is said to be to clear up, so far as possible, those points in all matters

connected with the immunities and obligations of holders of perpetual

leases in the former settlements, which, under the new treaties, are now

uncertain or disputed. What the bill will decide—which it will concede by

its provisions and which it will refuse by silence—of all the changes asked

for by the foreigners is not shown, since the authorities insist that the bill

remain secret until actually laid before the Diet.

Many months ago the French, German, and British representatives, under

instructions from their Governments, claimed, as well as immunity from all

charges against lands held under perpetual leases, immunity from the house

tax and from all other charges against buildings standing on such lands.

Their position remains unchanged. They contend that the buildings are “part

and parcel of the lands.”

The present French position differs from the British and German in that the

French minister goes so far as to claim that income tax may not be levied on

income derived from property held under the perpetual leases, probably

meaning the houses included.

In the German position there is a point not dwelt upon by others, based on

the fifth paragraph of Article XVIII of the German treaty. It is: That the

perpetual leaseholds may now be sold to Japanese without becoming, by the

process, titles in fee simple (as well as to any foreigners). If the German

treaty secures this right contrary to the conditions of the original leases,

then Imperial ordinance No. 333, of July 7, 1899, appears to conflict with

that treaty. It seems that this right would widen the market for selling the

leases and would prevent the settlement properties from getting irrevocably

out of the hands of foreigners, who could not own them in fee simple.

The Germans rely upon paragraph 4 of Baron von Marschall’s note of April

4, 1896, to secure forever, irrespective of the lapse of their treaty, any rights

acquired before or during its operation.

Neither the British, French, nor German representative has yet received a

definite reply to his representations.

An unfortunate misunderstanding, by which it has been widely believed that

buildings must always be registered, has been brought about by a mistake in

Dr. Loenholm’s translation of the law of registration and by the fact that

there are separate registry books for land and for buildings. I have the honor

to inclose herewith the translation of lawreferred to, with the mistake

indicated. From that law—particularly from article 106, for example—it

appears that the holder of a perpetual lease to a lot who owns the house

thereon is quite safe in the ownership of his house without registering it. I

may here add that the Japanese themselves ordinarily do not register their

houses if they own the land upon which those houses stand.

The best support of the argument that the houses and lands are regarded by

the treaties as one is thought to be contained in Article XXI of the French

treaty. But as the houses were not in existence when the leases were made,

and never belonged to the Japanese Government, it is difficult to understand

how they can be considered as properties held under (en vertu de) leases in

which the Japanese Government is the lessor.

Since under the old system the foreign communities assessed themselves

for keeping the streets in order and for lighting, policing, etc., it may be

claimed that with the transfer of that duty to the Japanese authorities there

goes also a certain right to tax; and since the necessity of such expenditure

depends upon the buildings, house taxes may perhaps be regarded to some

extent as moneys to meet those expenditures. It is certain that the foreign

quarters cost the authorities much more than the Japanese quarters do.

It is of interest to note that, even with the present taxable valuation, shrunk

by the settlement properties increase in value to only about one-sixth of the

actual value, the land tax alone would be much greater than the ground rent.

I hope soon to be able to give some statistics on this point.

Then, if it should be decided that the land only is referred to in the treaties,

it is to be subject to no imposts, etc., further than those expressly stipulated

in the leases, i. e., than the annual rent.

Under ordinance No. 458 transfers of property held under perpetual leases

are registered without charge.

It is understood that transfers of such property by bequest are likewise

registered free. As the title deeds were granted to those who originally

received them, and to their heirs and assigns, this seems to be secured by

the terms of the leases.

It may possibly be questioned, on the ground that registration is part of the

general municipal system under which foreigners have come, whether the

registration of mortgages upon and of subleases of property held under

perpetual leases should be free. Under the old treaties equitable mortgages

were mostly made use of, but ordinary mortgages could be registered at the

consulate, the parties thus acquiring a secondary protection in case the

original documents could not be produced. As a satisfactory degree of

safety was obtained in the old way, although the new way, involving, like

all Japanese registration, which is after the Torrens system of Australia, the

courts affirming the validity of the right registered, provides the greatest

degree of safety, yet the imposition of taxes upon any registrations in which

property held under perpetual leases is alone concerned seems to be an

additional burden on such property and to be contrary to the treaties.

From what I hear I think that the Japanese Government will exempt lands

held under perpetual leases from all charges of every kind; but that they will

not admit that houses standing upon such lands are for that reason to be

exempted from the various charges to which any other houses are liable.

I have, etc.,
HUNTINGTONWILSON.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Koto, Japanese minister for foreign affairs.
[Memorandum.]

Pending the receipt of fuller expression of the views of his Government, the

undersigned chargé d’affaires ad interim of the United States, has the honor

tohandthismemorandumtohisexcellencyHisImperialJapanese

Majesty’s minister for foreign affairs.

The registration as superficies of title to perpetual leases is not acceptable to

theGovernmentoftheUnitedStateswithoutsomeauthoritative

interpretation of the Japanese Government that the title under that style is

not inferior to that of the perpetual lease.

The Government of the United States are not now prepared to concede that

buildings on perpetual lease are subject to taxation not specified in the

original lease.

HUNTINGTONWILSON.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Kato to Mr. Wilson.
TOKYO,February 2, 1901.

The minister for foreign affairs has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of

a memorandum which the chargé d’affaires of the United States was good

enough to hand to him on the 31st ultimo, in anticipation of a fuller

expression of the views of the United States Government on the subject of

theregistrationofperpetualleasesandthetaxationofbuildingson

perpetual lease.

Upon the receipt of such detailed expression of views, the minister for

foreign affairs will be prepared to enter into an examination of the questions

which are briefly described in the memorandum under acknowledgement.

[Inclosure 3.]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Kato.
FEBRUARY5, 1901.

MONSIEUR LEMINISTRE: Under telegraphic instructions from the Secretary of State, I

have the honor to request, through your excellency, on behalf of the

Government of the United States, that the Imperial Japanese Government be

so good as to further withhold their decision on the questions of property

leases, their registration, etc., until the Department of State can have time to

prepare and forward its views.

Trusting that I shall soon be able to make to your excellency more detailed

communication of my Government’s position on all the allied questions

indicated above, I avail, etc.,
H W

[Document 316]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,February 19, 1901.

No. 540.]

SIR: Referring to my dispatch No. 539, dated the 8th instant, on the subject

of the settlement property questions, I have the honor to inclose herewith a

copy of the reply to Mr. Buck’s note of January 1, relating chiefly to

imperial ordinance No. 458.

A copyofthereplytomynoteofthe5thinstant,conveyingthe

Department’s request that the decision of the questions about the leases,

etc., be withheld until they shall have had time to forward their views, is

also inclosed. While all these questions may be now under consideration by

the Japanese Government, internally, yet as they say, technically, perhaps,

oratleastofficially,nodecisionispending.Itappearsthatseveral

Governments are making representations which must be answered in turn;

and that a bill is to be sent to this Diet.

A memorandum prepared in the legation chancery is likewise inclosed. It is

an effort to set down concisely some points as to what was the condition of

settlement property before the new treaties, what is its present condition,

and what may still be desired.

I have, etc.,
H W
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]
D F A ,
Tokyo,February 12, 1901.

SIR: In a note which his excellency the minister of the United States has

done me the honor to address tome under date of January 1, 1901, he refers

tohiscorrespondencewithmypredecessor,ViscountAoki,andthe

conversation which he subsequently had with me, on the subject of the

property rights held by citizens of the United States in the former foreign

settlements, and states that he has been informed that according to a note

addressed by me to the minister of Great Britain the interpretation put by

the Imperial Government upon the provision of the last clause of Article I of

the Imperial ordinance No. 458 of the thirty-second year of Meiji (1899) is,

as he had already been informed by me personally, to the effect that the

limitoftimefortheregistrationofrightsthereinmentionedisnot

absolutely determined by the aforesaid article, but that the only question

involved is that if such rights are registered before such limit of time their

order of priority will be in accordance with the order of their establishment,

whereas if they are registered after the expiration of the term fixed in that

article they rank in accordance with the order of their registration. Mr. Buck

provisionallyacceptstheconstructionplacedupontheordinancein

question by the Imperial Government, but he has nevertheless deemed it

proper to make reservation on behalf of citizens of the United States

respecting the rights involved, should, perchance, a different construction

be put upon the same ordinance by a Japanese court of law.

In reply to the above-mentioned note of the minister of the United States, I

have the honor to confirm the interpretation of the last clause of Article I of

thesaidordinance,andtodeclarethatthereisnothingtoprevent

registration being made after the period fixed in that ordinance.

The grace in question was solely for the purpose of allowing all rights other

than perpetual leases, which had been acquired by foreigners in immovables

before the date the revised treaties went into operation, the exceptional

privilege of taking the order of priority in accordance with the order of their

creation and not of their registration.

In regard to the reservation which Mr. Buck makes on behalf of the citizens

of the United States respecting the rights involved, having in view the

contingency of a construction different from the one declared by me being

placed by a Japanese court of law upon the said ordinance, I beg to say that

while, on the one hand, I am unable to admit the necessity of Mr. Buck’s

reservation, I do not feel, on the other, that I can properly enter upon an

examination of the question of the value to be assigned to interpretations

placed by the Imperial Government on the laws and ordinances of the

Empire.

Accept, etc.,
KATOTAKAAKI,
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]
Mr. Kato to Mr. Wilson.
DEPARTMENT OFFOREIGNAFFAIRS,
Tokyo,February 16, 1901.

SIR: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 263, dated the 5th

instant, in which you inform me that you have been instructed by telegraph

by the honorable the Secretary of State to request the Imperial Government

“to further withhold their decision on the questions of property leases, their

registration, etc., until the Department, of State can have time to prepare

and forward its views.”

While it is not clear what kinds of leases are referred to by the words

“property leases,” assuming them to refer to perpetual leases of land in the

former foreign settlement, I may at once state that when the Imperial

ordinances Nos. 329 and 458 of the thirty-second year of Meiji (1899) were

promulgated in aid of the treaty stipulations bearing on the subject of such

perpetual leases, the Imperial Government were well satisfied that nothing

contained in those ordinances were out of harmony with the terms of the

revised treaties. This decision having been arrived at at the time those

ordinances were promulgated, there is now no decision pending on the part

of the Imperial Government, although further consideration of the questions

involved may possibly at any time lead to an alteration or modification of

theviewswhichhavebeenentertainedbytheImperialGovernment.

Nevertheless, I have no hesitation in assuring you that any expression of the

views which the Government of the United States may see fit to formulate

inreferencetothosequestionswillatalltimesreceivethatcareful

consideration which the Imperial Government have always been ready to

extend to the representations of your Government.

Accept, etc.
KATOTAKAAKI.
[Inclosure 3.]

A memorandum relating to:

(1)Theconditionsunderwhichpropertyintheforeign

settlements was formerly held;

(2) Japan’s new treaty obligations in respect thereto;

(3) The steps already taken by the Japanese Government to meet

their treaty obligations; and

(4) Points still requiring attention.
MEMORANDUM.
I.What was.—The Japanese Government set aside and rented to foreigners,

for building purposes, certain lots of ground on leases in perpetuity. These

lots were leased to bona fide residents only, and the leaseholders were

required in some cases, under penalty of forfeiture of their titles, to erect

within a fixed period of time buildings of a substantial character.

The proprietorship of the soil was expressly reserved to the Japanese

Government. The leases specified certain “lots of land,” and the chief

conditionwasthepaymentofastipulatedannualgroundrent,in

consideration of which the Japanese authorities engaged to keep the streets,

roads, sewers, etc., in good repair without additional charge, the “ground

rent” thus being in lieu of the ordinary Japanese land and municipal taxes.

Provisionwasmadeforfurtherassessmentsforspecialpurposes,if

required, either by the leaseholders themselves or by the authorities with

their consent.

The rate of annual ground rent varied with different places, and was fixed at

times, as in Nagasaki and Yokohama, in terms of Mexican dollars; and

elsewhere, as in Hiogo, Osaka, and Tokyo, in terms of the native coin “bu.”

The-value of the latter was variously determined, sometimes “weight for

weight” with foreign coins, and sometimes by convention (as in the tariff

convention of 1866 and the Austro-Hungarian trade regulations). Both these

forms of currency fluctuated considerably in value with the rate of silver,

but specially the “bu,” which was also subject to deterioration in recoinage.

Thus the actual amount of ground rent was variously reckoned in different

places, and even in the same locality the rent might be fixed at a different

rate at different times, according to the value of the “bu” when the leases

were issued.

Onthelotssoleasedforeignerserectedbuildingsforresidenceand

business. “They had absolutely nothing to show for their title to the houses

but their deeds to the land,” and this, under consular jurisdiction, was

considered a sufficient showing. Transfers of the land generally included

the buildings, unless there was a special agreement showing a contrary

purpose. Transfers were indorsed on the title deed by the kencho and

registeredattherespectiveconsulateswithoutanychargeotherthan

notarial fees. Such registration was simply notarial and not ex officio.

Transfers of title to a Japanese subject had to be sanctioned officially by the

consular and Japanese authorities jointly.

In case of forfeiture of a lease the lot reverted to the Japanese Government,

and in some cases the buildings thereon also became the property of the

Japanese Government.

Provision was made for the enlargement of the districts occupied by

foreigners, when necessary. Such extra settlement properties might be let at

a fixed rate, as the Bluff property in Yokohama, or be subject to the

ordinary Japanese Imperial and municipal taxes, as in Tokyo, and in Kobe

until 1888, or be charged a fixed rental based upon the average of the

ordinary Japanese taxes for a few years previous— including also taxes on

the buildings—as was the case with the Kobe Hill lots after 1888.

II.The new treaty provisions.—The United States treaty provides (Article

XVII):

(1) That the several foreign settlements in Japan shall * * * be

incorporated with the respective Japanese communes and shall

thenceforth form part of the general municipal system of Japan. *

* *

(2) That existing leases in perpetuity upon which property is now

held in the said settlements shall be confirmed, and no conditions

whatever other than those contained in such existing leases shall

be imposed in respect of such property. * * *

By Article XVIII:

(3) That the present treaty shall * * * be substituted in place of all

formertreatiesandconventions,andallarrangementsand

agreements subsidiary thereto, which shall cease to be binding;

and in consequence,

(4) That the jurisdiction exercised by courts of the United States

in Japan, and all the exceptional privileges, exemptions, and

immunities enjoyed by citizens of the United States as a part of,

or appurtenant to, such jurisdiction shall absolutely and without

notice cease and determine.

(N—It would seem from the provisions of Article XVIII of the United

States treaty, and the corresponding articles of the other treaties, that

property rights in the former foreign settlements, e. g., buildings on lands

heldunderperpetuallease,insofarastheyarebasedonprevious

arrangementsorupontheapplicationofforeignlawunderconsular

jurisdiction, definitely terminate with the old treaties, and that the property

rights in question are now determined solely by the terms of the original

leases themselves, as provided in the new treaties, and by the application of

Japanese law.) The French treaty stipulates (Article XXI) that:

Leases in perpetuity in virtue of which foreigners actually possess property

in the settlements shall be confirmed, and property of that nature shall not

be subject to any imposts, etc., or conditions whatever other than those

expressly stipulated in the leases in question.

The German treaty provides further (Article XVIII) that: Leases to lands in

thesettlementsmayinthefuture,asinsomecasesinthepast,be

transferred freely, either to a Japanese or a foreigner, without the consent of

the consular or Japanese authorities.

The German note of April 4, 1896, provides that—

(1) AstheownershipofthesoilisvestedintheJapanese

Government, neither the holder of the lease nor his successors

shall be required to pay any charges on the said land other than

the stipulated ground rent.

(2) Rights acquired before or under the present treaty shall be

valid after the expiration of the said treaty.

III.What the Japanese Government has done.—By law No. 71 of March

18, 1899: Provided that matters relating to the registration of rights of

foreigners in immovables and ships, acquired before the operation of the

new treaties, should be determined by imperial ordinance.

Imperial ordinance No. 329, of July, 1899:

(1) A right in an immovable acquired by an alien or foreign

juridical before the operation of the new treaties, if not registered

before the date of the operation of the said treaties, can not be set

upagainstthirdpersonsunlessregisteredwithinoneyear

thereafter. (Amended by imperial ordinance No. 458, which see.)

(2) Special registry books for such rights were opened and a copy

of the registry book of a foreign consulate relating to such rights

given the same effect as a Japanese registry book. The provisions

of the law of registration of immovables are applied to such

registrations.

(NOTE.—The effect of this last provision is to give the consular registrations

so taken over the value, not only of claims of title, as before, but of the titles

themselves;and,moreover,undertheJapaneselaw(andpractice)of

registration, the title to the land carries with it presumptively the title to the

buildings thereon as well unless there is a specific agreement to the

contrary, very much as was formerly the case under consular jurisdiction.)

Imperial ordinance No. 333, of July, 1899:

Rights of perpetual lease, when acquired by a Japanese or a Japanese

juridical person, are converted into holdings in fee simple or ordinary

superficies.

Imperial ordinance No. 458, of December, 1899 (amending ordinance No.

329):

(1) The leases are termed “superficies (perpetual lease).”

(2) Transfers of title must be indorsed on the title deed by the

chihocho (kencho), which office must report the fact of such

transfer to the registry office. (This provision removes the one-

year limit of ordinance No. 329, as respects the registration of

these leases.)

(3) On receipt of the above notice the registry office must register

such transfers ex officio (i. e., without charge).

(4) The term for registration of existing real rights other than

perpetual leases is extended to December 31, 1900, and entries of

previous transfers by the kencho or consulates are confirmed.

Viscount Aoki’s notes of January and March, 1900, to the British and

French ministers, respectively, give an authoritative assurance that the

interpretationoftheJapaneseGovernmentisthatthesaidleases(in

perpetuity)wouldstillhavethesamevalidityasbeforeaftertheir

registration under ordinance No. 329, and that the words “perpetual lease”

inserted in brackets in ordinance No. 458 make it clear that the right is a

perpetual lease and not a superficies under the provisions of the civil code.

(See article 45 of the law for the operation of the civil code.) Mr. Kato’s

notes of December, 1900, and thereafter give an official assurance that the

terms of ordinance No. 458 do not cut off the right to register existing rights

in realty, other than perpetual leases, after December 31, 1900; that such

rights may be registered at any time, only that when registered after the said

date they follow the order of their registration and not of their establishment

as regards priority of rights.

IV.Points still requiring attention.—(1) That titles to settlement properties

be confirmed as “perpetual leases” without qualification or change of form.

(2) That imperial ordinance No. 458 be amended to harmonize with the

interpretation given by the Imperial Government and to avoid a possible

difference of interpretation by the Japanese courts.

(3) That ordinance No. 333 conform to the terms of the German treaty.

(4) That mortgages and subleases of property held on perpetual leases be

registered without charge, as their security was satisfactorily guaranteed in

the past by their registry or authentication at the consulates.

(5) That the value of the “bu” be again fixed by international agreement and

the rate of exchange of the Mexican dollar be determined in the same

manner.

(6)Thatthemeaningofthewords“propertyintheformerforeign

settlements” as used in the treaties be defined. As a matter of fact, a

considerable portion of the property in Japan held by foreigners under

perpetual leases lies wholly outside the limits of the foreign settlements,

properly so called—e. g., the Bluff lots in Yokohama, the Hill lots in Kobe,

and some lots at Nagasaki. Such outlying properties, though in reality

constituting what might be called “mixed zones,” have been treated by the

local authorities as if within the settlements, but acting under instructions

from the central Government and not wholly without question.

(It is interesting to note in this connection that the rental of the Hill lots in

Kobe, fixed by agreement in 1888, was determined on the basis of the

amount of taxes, imperial and municipal, the property would have paid

were it owned by Japanese, including taxes upon the buildings erected on

the lots, and that it is understood that the Japanese Government has no

intention of charging house tax on such buildings.) (7) In one or two places

therentwhichhasregularlybeencollectedandwhichisnowwell

established by custom is considerably less than that which, according to the

terms of the leases, could be claimed for example in Tokyo. It seems

desirable that the customary rate in such places be definitely guaranteed for

the future.

[Document 317]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram—paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Tokyo,March 26, 1901.

(Mr. Wilson reports, in connection with his dispatch of February 8, that a

new law has been passed by the Diet recognizing perpetual leases real

rights, applying to them code provisions relating to ownership. Provision is

made for unequivocal registration of leases free of charges, and for all

rights of which lease is the object. The exemption of houses in any way is

not indicated.)
[Document 318]
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,April 1, 1901.

No. 550.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s

instruction No. 338, of February 7 last, on the subject of the settlement

properties questions.

I have the honor, also, to confirm my telegram of the 26th ultimo.

An accurate translation of the law above mentioned is herewith inclosed.

Articles I, II, and VII of the law seem effectually to remove all grounds for

dissatisfaction as to the confirmation, past or future, of the titles. The law

further appears to guarantee to the property freedom from all charges other

than the rents, including free registration of transfers, subleases, mortgages,

bequests, etc.

I am quite sure that the law supposes the property held under the perpetual

leases to be the lands only. Article IV is designed, I believe, merely

definitely to connect these properties, unique in Japan—that is, lands held

under perpetual lease and, secondly, buildings standing upon such lands as

well as subsidiary rights in the perpetual leases—with the machinery of

registration. There is reason to believe that an imperial ordinance in that

sense will very soon be issued. It will probably provide for the registration

of transfers of perpetual leases at the kencho, and for that of subordinate

rights and of houses, when their registration is desired, at the courts of

registry. It will be noticed that there is to be indorsement of transfers upon

the title deeds themselves in addition to registration.

It has been observed that the application to these properties of the laws

relating to ownership makes them liable to be the object of servitudes, such

as right of way. Even if this is not a natural consequence of the termination

of extraterritorial jurisdiction, it could hardly have any practical importance

or be a disadvantage on the whole to the leaseholders in the settlements

proper. On the Yokohama Bluff, for instance, where there are also holdings

of Japanese, should there be objection, if the question were raised it might

possibly be claimed that the bluff was not within the settlements of the

treaties. The point seems to me to have no importance.

Recent consultation with some of the American holders of perpetual leases

in Yokohama, since the passage of this new law, leads me to believe that

they are entirely satisfied with the confirmation of their titles, and that they

find the condition of lands is quite free from objection; but that they adhere

on the other hand to their belief that buildings should likewise be exempt. I

invited any new arguments in support of that belief, and any possible

objections to the law in its other two bearings, but nothing has been

communicated.

I have, etc.,
H W
[Inclosure.—Translation.]

LAW RELATING TO RIGHTS OF PERPETUAL LEASE.
ARTICLEI. A right of perpetual lease established for a foreigner or a

foreign juridical person by a deed of perpetual lease from the

Governmentshallberegardedasarightinrem,andthe

provisionsofthecivilcoderelatingtoownershipshallbe

correspondingly applicable thereto.

A right of perpetual lease may be made the object of other rights

in accordance with the provisions of the civil code.

In cases otherwise regulated by the title deeds, treaties, laws, or

ordinances the provisions of the two preceding paragraphs shall

not apply.

ARTICLEII.Whenarightofperpetualleaseistransferred(or

transmitted), such transfer (or transmission) can not be set up

against third persons unless the fact has been recorded on the title

deed by the local government office (chihocho) within whose

jurisdiction the land is situated.

ARTICLEIII.Theregistrationtaxshallnotbeimposedonthe

registration of a right of perpetual lease, nor on the registration of

rights that have a right of perpetual lease for their object.

ARTICLEIV.Specialprovisionsmaybeenactedbyimperial

ordinance with respect to the registration of a right of perpetual

lease, or to the registration of rights that have a perpetual lease as

their object, or to the registration of buildings on lands held under

a perpetual lease.
A V.Thislawshalltakeeffectfromthedateofits

promulgation.

A VI. The provisions of article 45 of the law for the operation

of the civil codeshall be annulled from the date of the operation

of this law.

superficies as their object, respectively, shall have the same

validity as a right of perpetual lease, or rights having a perpetual

lease as their object, duly registered as such.
aReference: Article 45 of the law for the operation of the civil code reads as

follows: “45. As to a superficies created for an alien or a foreign juristic

person the provisions of the civil code apply only so far as it is not

otherwise provided by treaty or regulation.”

[Document 319]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,October 2, 1901.

No. 587.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that an imperial ordinance regulating

matters relating to rights of perpetual lease was promulgated on the 21st of

last month.

This ordinance was referred to in dispatch No. 550, of April 1, as likely

soon to appear, supplementary to the new law, a translation of which

accompaniedthatdispatch;buttheissuanceoftheordinanceand

regulations was delayed by a change of cabinet.

It will be observed that there is no pronouncement in the ordinance or

regulations respecting the tax on buildings erected upon property held under

leases in perpetuity; and it is supposed that the Japanese Government will

continue to hold that the matter of such tax is not covered by treaty

stipulations, and will continue to adhere to the law and regulations under

which that tax is to be levied, notwithstanding the opposition made by Great

Britain, Germany, and France.

I have, etc.,
AEB
[Inclosure.]
We hereby sanction the regulations relating to rights of perpetual lease and

order the same to be promulgated.

[Imperial sign manual, great seal.]

September 20, thirty-fourth year of Meiji.

Countersigned:

Baron UTSUMITADAKATSU,
Minister of State for Home Affairs.

KIYOURAKEIGO,
Minister of State for Justice.

SONEARASUKE,
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.
IMPERIAL ORDINANCE NO. 178.

Article 1. When an application for entry in the title deed of a transfer or

transmission of a right of perpetual lease or any notice relating to a right of

perpetual lease has been received at the local government office within

whose jurisdiction the land leased in perpetuity is situated, notice thereof

shall be given without delay to the registry office having jurisdiction over

the locality in which the land is situated.

In giving notice (to the registry office) of a transfer or transmission of a

perpetual lease a copy of the title deed shall be sent together with the

notice; but when notice to be given relates to a right of perpetual lease in

respect of which notice has already been given, it is not necessary that a

copy of the title deed should accompany the notice. In this case the

designation of the land leased in perpetuity, the names, nationalities, and

domicile of the parties concerned, the cause of the transfer or transmission

of the right, and its date should be given in the notice.

Article 2. For the land leased in perpetuity and the buildings erected thereon

special registry books shall be opened and kept at the respective registry

offices.

Article 3. The registry books shall be of two kinds, one for land leased in

perpetuity and the other for buildings erected on land leased in perpetuity.

Article 4. Each folio of the registry book for land leased in perpetuity shall

be divided into a registry number column, a caption space, and five

sections,marked A,B,C,D,E.Thecaptionspaceshallcontaina

designation column and a designation number column. Each of the five

sections shall contain a fact column and a rank number column.

In the registry number column shall be entered the order in which each

piece of land leased in perpetuity has first been registered in the registry

book.

In the designation column, land leased in perpetuity shall be designated, and

alterations of the same shall be entered. In the designation number column

shall be entered the order in which a matter registered in the designation

column has been entered.

In the fact column of section A shall be entered matters relating to a right of

perpetual lease.

In the fact column of section B shall be entered matters relating to

superficies, emphyteusis, and other rights having these rights as their object.

In the fact column of section shall be entered matters relating to servitudes.

In the fact column of section D shall be entered matters relating to

preferential rights, pledges, and mortgages.

In the fact column of section E shall be entered matters relating to leases.

In the rank number column shall be entered the order in which a matter

registered in the fact column has been entered.

Article 5. Each folio of the registry book for buildings erected on land

leased in perpetuity shall be divided into a registry number column, a

caption space, and four sections marked A, B, C, D. The caption space shall

contain a designation column and a designation number column. Each of

the four sections shall contain a fact column and a rank number column.

In the registry number column shall be entered the order in which a building

has first been registered in the registry book.

In the designation column the building and accessory building shall be

designated, and alterations of the same shall be entered. In the designation

number column shall be entered the order in which a matter registered in

the designation column has been entered.

In the fact column of section A shall be entered matters relating to

ownership.

In the fact column of section B shall be entered matters relating to

servitudes.

In the fact column of section C shall be entered matters relating to

preferential rights, pledges, and mortgages.

In the fact column of section D shall be entered matters relating to leases.

In the rank number column shall be entered the order in which a matter

registered in the fact column has been entered.

Article 6. When an application is made for the registration of a right having

as its object a right of perpetual lease which has not been registered, the

applicationmustbeaccompaniedbydocumentsprovingtherightof

perpetual lease.

Article 7. When a registry office has received a notice of the transfer or

transmission of a right of perpetual lease, registration of such transfer or

transmission shall be made ex officio by the registry office, whether such

rightofperpetualleasehasalreadybeenregisteredorhasremained

unregistered.

When,incasearegistryofficeisnotifiedofareceiptatthelocal

Government office of a notice relating to a right of perpetual lease, the

notice is of such a character as to necessitate alteration in the register, such

alteration shall be registered ex officio.

When an application is made for the registration of a subsidiary right

having as its object an unregistered right of perpetual lease, the right of

perpetual lease itself must be registered ex officio.

Article 8. Registration made at a foreign consulate in respect of land leased

in perpetuity or buildings erected thereon before the date fixed in the

imperial ordinance No. 251 of the thirty-second year of Meiji, shall have

the same value as registration made under this ordinance, in so far as the

registry book or copy thereof has been delivered by the foreign consulate to

the registry office.

Article 9. In case registration is to be made after the operation of this

ordinanceinrespecttoanimmovablewhichhasbeenregisteredin

accordance with imperial ordinance No. 329 of the thirty-second year of

Meiji, the registration made in the old registry book shall be transferred to

the registry book kept under this ordinance in the following manner: In the

registration-number column of the folio of the new registry book shall be

entered a new number following the order in which registrations are being

made in the same registry book, and the registration number appearing in

the old registry book shall be entered on the left side of the new number. In

the designation column of the new registry book shall be entered the

designation of the immovable appearing in the old registry book, and

registration made in the old registry book shall be transferred to the rank-

number column and fact column of the corresponding section in the new

registry book. The folio of the registry book from which registration has

thus been transferred shall then be closed.

Theprovisionsoftheforegoingparagraphshallbecorrespondingly

applicable to cases where registration is to be made after the operation of

this ordinance in respect to an immovable which has been registered at a

foreign consulate.

Article 10. In making registration in accordance with the provisions of the

preceding article aright of perpetual lease shall be entered as a right of

perpetual lease, even though it has been registered under a different name.

Article 11. If in registering a subsidiary right having as its object either a

right of perpetual lease or the ownership of buildings erected on a piece of

land leased in perpetuity, the right to be registered does not correspond to

the provisions of articles 4 or 5, it shall be registered in that section of the

folio of the registry book in which rights most similar to it are to be

registered.

Article 12. In respect to matters not provided for in this ordinance the

provisionsofthelawofregistrationofimmovablesshallapply

correspondingly.
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.

Article13.Thisordinanceshalltakeeffectfromthedayofits

promulgation.

Article 14. Imperial ordinance No. 329 of the thirty-second year of Meiji

(1899) is hereby repealed.
IMPERIAL ORDINANCE.

We hereby sanction the regulations relating to cases of acquisition by

Japanese subjects or Japanese juridical persons of rights of perpetual lease

created in favor of foreigners or foreign juridical persons by title deeds of

perpetual lease issued by the Government, and order the same to be

promulgated.

[Imperial Sign Manual, Great Seal.]

September 20, thirty-fourth year of Meiji.

Baron U T ,
Minister of State for Home Affairs.
K K,
Minister of State for Justice.
SA ,
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.

Article 1. When a Japanese subject or a Japanese juridical person has

acquired a right of perpetual lease created in favor of a foreigner or foreign

juridical person by a title deed of perpetual lease issued by the Government,

the acquirer shall without delay present the title deed of perpetual lease to

the local Government office within whose jurisdiction the land is situated

and ask for cancellation of the title deed.

A Japanese subject or a Japanese juridical person for whom the title deed of

perpetual lease has been canceled in accordance with the provisions of the

preceding paragraph shall acquire the ownership of the land concerned.

Article 2. When a title deed of perpetual lease has been canceled for a

Japanese subject or a Japanese juridical person, in accordance with the first

paragraph of the preceding article, the local Government office shall notify

the fact to the registry office within whose jurisdiction the land is situated.

Article 3. If, in the case provided for in article 1, there should be a third

party having aright which has as its object a right of perpetual lease, that

right of the third party shall continue to exist as a right having as its object

the ownership of the land.
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.
Article 4. This ordinance shall take effect from the day of its promulgation.

Article 5. Imperial ordinance No. 333 of the thirty-second year of Meiji

(1899) is hereby repealed.

Article 6. A right of perpetual lease created in favor of a foreigner or foreign

juridical person by a title deed of perpetual lease issued by the Government,

which has been acquired by a Japanese juridical person before the operation

of this ordinance, shall continue to exist as a right of perpetual lease except

in cases where the right of ownership has been registered in respect of the

landinquestion. This,however,shallnotpreventtheacquisitionof

ownership in accordance with article 1.
. 15

The undersigned minister of state for justice prescribes the following

procedure in regard to the registration of land leased in perpetuity and of

buildings erected thereon.

KIYOURAKEIGO,
Minister of Slate for Justice.
September 21, thirty-fourth year of Meiji.

Article 1. In regard to the registration of land leased in perpetuity or of

buildingserectedthereon,theprovisionsoftheregulationsforthe

enforcement of the law of registration of immovables shall correspondingly

apply, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance.

Article 2. Registry books for land leased in perpetuity and for buildings

erected on land leased in perpetuity shall be prepared in the chiho saibansho

in the form respectively prescribed in Schedule A and Schedule B.

Article 3. Copies of the registry book of foreign consulates and their

translations shall be kept in the registry office.

Article 4. When a document accompanying an application for registration is

written in a foreign language, the applicant shall supplement it with a

Japanese translation.

Article 5. In transferring registrations made at foreign consulates to the

registry books their transcription shall be made in accordance with Japanese

translations.

When a registration made at a foreign consulate has been transferred to the

registry book, the number of the volume and the folio of the registry books

to which it has been transcribed, the registration number and the date, shall

be recorded in the copy of the registry book of foreign consulates and also

in its translation, and the registry officer shall affix his seal.

Article 6. When the local Government office has notified the registry office

of the cancellation of a title deed of perpetual lease in accordance with

article 2 of imperial ordinance No. 179 of the thirty-fourth year of Meiji, the

registry officer shall close the folio concerned in the registry book for land

leased in perpetuity.

When, in the case provided for in the preceding paragraph, there are

registrations of subsidiary rights having as their object a right of perpetual

lease, the registry officer shall record in the designation column the fact that

the title deed has been canceled. When registration of cancellation has been

made in respect of all registrations relating to those subsidiary rights, or

when registrations relating to subsidiary rights have been transferred to the

ordinaryregistrybookinmakingregistrationforthepreservationof

ownership, then the registry officer shall close the folio concerned in the

registry book for land leased in perpetuity.

Article 7. When upon receipt of notice mentioned in the first paragraph of

the preceding article there are registrations relating to buildings erected on

land leased in perpetuity the registry officer shall transfer those registrations

to the ordinary registry book and shall close the folio concerned in the

registry book in which those registrations appeared.
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.
Article 8. This ordinance shall take effect from the day of its promulgation.

Article 9. Departmental ordinance No. 41 of the department of justice, of

the thirty-second year of Meiji, prescribing procedure in regard to the

registration of immovables which are the objects of rights of foreigners or

foreign juridical persons, is hereby repealed.

S A.

This registry book contains — folios.

— president of the — district court.

Registry book for land leased in perpetuity.

—local court.

No.—. Reg. N.

Section A. Right of
Caption space. Designation of land leased in

R. N. D. N.

Fact column. Designation column.

R. N. D. N.

Fact column. Designation column.

R. N. D. N.

Fact column. Designation column.

Reg. N.—Registry number column.

D. N.—Designation number column.

R. N.—Rank number column.

N. B.—This schedule also gives the forms for sections B (superficies and

emphyteusis),C(servitudes),D(preferentialrights,pledges,and

mortgages), and E(leases), which are exactly the same as for section A.

SCHEDULEB

This registry book contains — folios.

— president of the — district court.

Registry book for buildings erected on land leased in perpetuity.

— local court.

No.—. Reg. N.

Section A. Ownership. Caption space. Designation of building.

R. N. D. N.

Fact column. Designation column.

R. N. D. N.

Fact column. Designation column.

R. N. D. N.

Fact column. Designation column.

D. N.—Designation number column.

R. N.—Rank number column.

N. B.—This schedule also gives the forms for sections B (servitudes), C

(preferential rights, pledges, and mortgages), and D (leases), which are the

same as for section A.
DEPARTMENTAL ORDINANCE NO. 16OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
As regards the fees to be levied upon an application for a copy of or for an

extract from the registry books for land leased in perpetuity or for buildings

erected thereon, or upon an inspection of the registry books or documents

accessory thereto, the provisions of departmental ordinance No. 14 of the

department of justice, of the thirty-second year of Meiji (1899), shall

correspondingly apply.

This ordinance shall take effect from the day of its promulgation.

Departmental ordinance No. 42 of the department of justice, of the thirty-

second year of Meiji (1899), is hereby repealed.

KIYOURAKEIGO,
Minister of State for Justice.
September 21, the thirty-fourth year of Meiji (1901).
. 17
The following amendments are introduced into the regulations relating to

theenforcementofthelawofregistrationofimmovables,issuedas

departmental ordinance No 11 of the department of justice, of the thirty-

second year of Meiji.

K K,
Minister of State for Justice,

September 21, the thirty-fourth year of Meiji (1901).

The following article is inserted after article 46:

Article 46B. In applying for registration for the preservation of

ownership in cases where ownership has been acquired by a

Japanese subject or a Japanese juridical person in accordance with

paragraph 2 of article 1 of imperial ordinance No. 179, of the

thirty-fourth year of Meiji (1901), the fact that ownership has

been acquired through the cancellation of title deed of perpetual

lease must be stated in the letter of application.

The following two articles are inserted after article 71:

Article 71B. When upon receipt of application mentioned in

article 46Bthere are in a folio of registry book for land leased in

perpetuity registrations of subsidiary rights, having as their object

a right of perpetual lease, and such registrations have not yet been

canceled, then the registry officer shall transfer those registrations

of subsidiary rights to the ordinary registry book after he has

completed the registration of the ownership in the same book.

Article71C.Intransferringtotheordinaryregistrybook

registration relating to subsidiary rights, in accordance with the

provisions of the preceding article, or in transferring to the

ordinary registry book registration relating to buildings erected on

land leased in perpetuity, the registry officer shall enter in the

registration number column of the folio of the ordinary registry

book a new number following the order in which registrations are

being made in that book. He shall then enter on the left side of

that number the registry number appearing in the registry book

from which it has been transcribed.

In the case provided for in the preceding paragraph the registry officer shall

record at the end of registration transcribed in the designation column and

the fact column the folio, the volume, and the title of the registry book from

which the foregoing registration has been transcribed. He shall also enter

the date of the transcription and affix his seal.

SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATION.
This ordinance shall take effect from the day of its promulgation.
DEPARTMENTAL ORDINANCE NO. 24OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR HOME AFFAIRS.
When a Japanese subject or a Japanese juridical person, who was acquired a

right of perpetual lease created in favor of a foreigner or foreign juridical

person by a title deed of perpetual lease issued by the Govenment, has

obtained the cancellation of such title deed according to article 1 of imperial

ordinance No. 179, of the thirty-fourth year of Meiji (1901), and has thus

acquired ownership of the land concerned, the local government office must

notify the fact without delay to the taxation office having jurisdiction over

the place where the land is situated.

BARONUTSUMITADAKATSU,
Minister of State for Home Affairs.
September 25, the thirty-fourth year of Meiji (1901).
INSTRUCTION NO. 34OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR FINANCE.
To the revenue administration bureau(those at Hakodate,

Sapporo, Nemuro, and Nawa excepted):Upon receipt of notice prescribed

by the departmental ordinance No. 24 of the department for home affairs, of

the thirty-fourth year of Meiji, the taxation office shall make all necessary

entries in the cadastre (tochi-daicho) in respect of the land to which the

notice refers.
SA ,
Minister of State for Finance.
September 25, thirty-fourth year of Meiji (1901).

[Document 320]
NOTE VERBALE.
JAPANESELEGATION,April 30, 1901.

According to the information brought to the attention of Japanese minister

by Mr. Shimiza, His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s consul at Vancouver, it

appears that a party consisting of 13 Japanese subjects, who started from

Victoria on the 15th of March last for Seattle, State of Washington, arriving

there on the following day, was refused landing at the latter port, and after

havingbeenimprisonedinajailfromthedayofarrivaluntiltheir

reembarkation finally ordered to be deported on board the vessel which had

carried them thither to the place whence they came. It was not disputed in

any way that every one of the Japanese was in good physical condition,

holding a health certificate prepared by a licensed physician just before his

departure, and being in bona fide possession of the amount of money

required by law; and the only ground for the refusal of his landing and

subsequent deportation seems to be that he would be unable to support

himself. Another group of Japanese subjects of 7 in number who arrived at

Seattle from Vancouver on the 17th of the same month met the same fate,

consulate after their deportation, they were all found well clad, robust, and

of sound mind.

In view of the foregoing facts, the Japanese minister begs leave to say that

these Japanese subjects having possessed the necessary qualifications and

fulfilled all conditions requirid by law, he is at a loss to find the reason why

they should have been refused landing, inasmuch as no more qualifications

or conditions, by virtue of the treaty between the two countries, are to be

imposed on the Japanese subjects than those required of other alien citizens

or subjects for landing at the United States ports; and even admitting that

the Japanese now under consideration were refused to land at the port for

the lack of certain qualifications or conditions to meet the requirements of

law, he can not perceive any reason for the restriction of personal liberty

imposed upon them without due process of law by confining them in a jail,

where,accordingtoastatementmadebysomeofthem,theywere

compelled to share company in the same apartment with certain convicts

under the sentence of imprisonment.

Under these circumstances the Japanese minister has the honor to request

that the honorable the Secretary of State will have the goodness to cause

investigations to be made upon the matter to the end that proper measures

may be taken should the facts reported be found correct.

[Document 321]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Takahira.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 9, 1901.

No. 26.]

SIR: Referring to your note verbale of the 30th ultimo, regarding the

deportation from Seattle, State of Washington, of two parties of Japanese

immigrants arriving at that place on March 15 and 17, respectively, I have

the honor to inform you that the Department is in receipt of a letter from the

Secretary of the Treasury, dated the 3d instant, in which he says that the

matter has been referred to the collector of customs for the Puget Sound

district, with instructions to make report of the circumstances of the

deportations.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 322]
Mr. Mill to Mr. Takahira.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 27, 1901.

No. 28.]

SIR: Referring to your note verbale of the 30th ultimo, regarding the

deportation from Seattle, State of Washington, of two parties of Japanese

immigrants arriving at that place on March 15 and 17 last, respectively, I

have the honor to inclose herewith for your information a copy of a letter

and inclosure received by the Commissioner-General of Immigration from

the special deputy collector of customs at Port Townsend, Wash, containing

reports on the subject.

These reports were communicated to the Department by the Secretary of the

Treasury, with his letter of the 20th instant.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
Port of Port Townsend, Wash.,May 14, 1901.

S:Ihavethehonortoreturnherewithacommunicationfromthe

Department of State under date of the 2d instant and a copy of the note

verbaleoftheJapaneseministerthereininclosedcomplainingofthe

deportation from Seattle of two parties of Japanese immigrants arriving at

that place on March 15 and 17, respectively, referred to this office for report

and return. Replying thereto I beg to state that the examination of these

immigrants was conducted in an impartial manner in strict accordance with

the immigration laws and regulations. No appeal was taken from the

decision of the board of inquiry refusing them admission, and they were

fully informed of their right to appeal under the law.

In regard to their detention in jail, pending the decision of the board of

inquiry, the jail was simply used as a lodging house and no greater restraint

was placed on them there than at any other place, as they were certainly not

entitled to be at large until landed, and the jail was a more desirable place of

detention, in view of the inclemency of the weather at that season of the

year, than an exposed steamship dock. They were comfortably housed and

cared for, and at no time were they associated or confined with any

convicted prisoners. A communication of the sheriff of King County in

regard to the matter, addressed to Immigrant Inspector Lavin, under date of

the 11th instant, is respectfully transmitted herewith.

Respectfully,
HENRYBLACKWOOD,
Special Deputy Collector.
[Subinclosure.]
Mr. Cudihee, sheriff, to Mr. Lavin, immigrant inspector.
S O,
King County, Wash., Seattle,May 11, 1901.

DS: In regard to the complaint of the Japanese minister concerning

confinement of Japanese immigrants in jail at Seattle, beginning March 15

and 17, 1901, I desire to state that there were 24 Japanese immigrants in my

custody during the time mentioned.

Sixteen of them were kept in the apartment in the county jail where

prisoners awaiting trial are held. This apartment is spacious and clean; each

cell in it has a closet, two hammocks and blankets for same, and is heated

by steam.

The eight other immigrants were kept in the hospital ward or apartment

where prisoners awaiting trial and in delicate health are held. This room is

large and clean and is supplied with a cot and blankets for each occupant,

and has good water and closets.

At no time were any of the immigrants associated or confined with any

convicted prisoner.

Yours, respectfully,
EDWARDCUDIHEE,
Sheriff of King County, Wash.

[Document 323]
Mr. Takahira to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OFJAPAN,
Washington,June 7, 1901.

No. 13.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the communication of

the honorable Acting Secretary of State dated the 27th ultimo, and of the

two inclosures therewith, in reply to my note verbale of the 30th of last

April, regarding the deportation of Japanese immigrants from Seattle in

March last.

I beg that you will tender to the honorable the Secretary of the Treasury my

thanks for the steps he has taken to ascertain the facts in the case, as shown

by the letter of Mr. Blackwood, deputy collector of customs at Seattle, and

that of Mr. Cudihee, sheriff of Kings County, Wash., copies of which were

transmitted with the communication under reply. I regret to add, however,

that the statements made in those letters do not, in my opinion, completely

answer the questions suggested by my note verbale.

The points to which I desired to especially draw attention by that note were,

first, that a number of Japanese who appeared to be legally entitled to enter

the United States had been turned back without apparent cause; and,

second, that these persons, while awaiting the decision of their case, had

been confined in jail under circumstances, which, to say the least, were not

in harmony with the treatment ordinarily accorded to immigrants to the

United States. In connection with what Mr. Blackwood and Sheriff Cudihee

say on this latter point, I beg to state that His Imperial Majesty’s consul at

Vancouver made a careful personal investigation of the matter on the return

of the deported immigrants to that place. As a result he reports that while

undergoing detention at Seattle some of them were confined in small rooms,

other prisoners. Some of the latter, the immigrants believed, had been

convicted of crimes or offenses. That, however, is not particularly material,

since it is not denied that these Japanese subjects, although not accused of

any offense, were treated like ordinary criminals and confined with people

of that class. In addition they complain that they were supplied with poor

and insufficient food, of which, in some cases, they were robbed by the

other prisoners. And they assert also that from among the personal effects

which they were obliged to surrender on entering the jail, a watch and an

overcoat were missing when they were deported. The report of His Imperial

Majesty’s consul contains other details similar to the foregoing, but I have

no desire to dwell upon this disagreeable feature of the case further than to

call it to the attention of the honorable the Secretary of the Treasury, which,

I feel assured, is the most certain way of preventing the recurrence of

similar treatment of Japanese subjects resorting to this country.

Withreferencetothefirstpointmentionedinmynoteverbale(the

eligibility of the immigrants), I had the honor to state that according to the

information given to me these persons did not belong to any of the classes

whose immigration is forbidden by United States law, and that they were

healthy, well clad, and in possession of sufficient funds to provide against

their becoming public charges. Since, therefore, it appeared that these

Japanese subjects possessed the necessary qualifications and fulfilled all the

conditions required by law, I added that I was at a loss to discover why they

had not been permitted to enter the United States. The plain inference from

the admitted facts appeared to me to be that they were entitled to land under

the provisions of United States law, and, also, as I stated, by virtue of the

stipulations of the treaty between Japan and the United States.

I find in Mr. Blackwood’s letter the statement that “the examination of these

immigrants was conducted in an impartial manner in strict accordance with

theimmigrationlawsandregulations.”Withoutanyintentionof

questioning the accuracy of this explanation, I would respectfully submit

that, as it stands, it does not furnish a complete answer to the statements

contained in my note verbale.

A reasonable explanation of the failure of the immigrants to appeal from the

decision of the board of inquiry, to which Mr. Blackwood further alludes,

they had appealed they would have been compelled to submit for an

indefinite period to the humiliation and discomforts of confinements in jail,

and it was only natural that they should have preferred to take the quickest

way out of the dilemma.

In again calling attention to this case I beg to state that I have no intention

of asking for the Japanese subjects immediately interested, or for others

who may come to the United States, any special favor or immunity from the

operation of the United States laws relating to immigration. All that such

Japanesesubjectscanrightfullyexpect,andallthattheImperial

Government expects on their behalf, is the same treatment as is accorded

under similar conditions to the citizens and subjects of other foreign

countries. This measure of justice, I feel convinced, it is the purpose of the

United States Government to extend to them; and if in the present instance

it shall prove, as appears to be the case, that Japanese subjects have been

deprived of their right to enter this country by a construction of the law by

local immigration officers not justified by the facts, I trust that I may rely

upon the good offices of the honorable the Secretary of the Treasury to

prevent the repetition of such action.

Accept, etc.,
K.TAKAHIRA.

[Document 324]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Takahira.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 22, 1901.

No. 30.]

SIR: Referring to your note No. 13, of the 7th instant, in further relation to

thedeportationfromSeattle,StateofWashington,oftwopartiesof

Japanese immigrants in March last, I have the honor to inform you that the

Department is in receipt of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, dated

the 17th instant, in answer to the Department’s letter of the 12th instant,

sending to him for his consideration a copy of your said note.

In his letter the Secretary of the Treasury says:

Inresponsetothefurtherstatementoftheministerthe

Department can only reiterate its original averment to the effect

that, so far as it is aware, there is no discrimination made between

immigrantsfromJapanandthosefromothercountries,the

provisions of the law giving authority for no such discrimination,

and the Department itself having no justification to offer therefor

ifsuchdiscriminationisshownbyitsofficials.Itsubmits,

furthermore, that the accompanying note of the Japanese minister,

while it offered just cause of complaint upon other grounds, failed

toshowsuchadiscriminationwithrespecttothepoints

suggested.

Respecting the present grounds of complaint, further inquiry will

be made and the result thereof, in due course of time, will be

transmitted to the Japanese minister through your Department.

Accept, etc.,

JOHNHAY.

[Document 325]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Takahira.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 25, 1901.

No. 31.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 13, of the 7th ultimo, in further relation to the

deportation from Seattle, State of Washington, of two parties of Japanese

immigrants in March last, I have the honor to inclose herewith for your

information a copy of a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury inclosing

copies of reports in the matter from the immigrant inspector at Seattle, and

others.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Gage to Mr. Hay.
TREASURYDEPARTMENT,
Washington,July 13, 1901.

S: I have the honor to further acknowledge your letter of the 12th ultimo,

inclosing copy of a note from the Japanese minister at this capital with

reference to the detention and deportation of two parties of Japanese

immigrants arriving at Seattle, Wash., in March last.

I inclose herewith copy of report and certain correspondence concerning the

alleged irregularities in the treatment and hearing of the cases of these

immigrants, from which it appears that the reports which have been made to

the Japanese minister have failed to establish the real state of the case.

Respectfully,
L.J.GAGE,Secretary.
[Subinclosure 1.]
Report of immigrant inspector at Seattle to the collector of customs at Port Townsend, Wash.
CUSTOM-HOUSE,PORT OFSEATTLE,WASH.,
Deputy Collector’s Office,July 3, 1901.

SIRI have the honor to return, with my report thereon, the letter of the

Commissioner-General of Immigration and the Japanese minister.

I inclose letters from the agents of the S. S.Rosalieand the S. S.
Mainlanderwhich answer the inquiry of the Hon. T. V. Powderly. The

letters show that it was not only for the convenience of the steamship

companies but for the comfort of the immigrants; besides it was an absolute

necessity, in the absence of a suitable secure place for their detention.

The immigrants were treated no differently from any citizen of the United

States subpoenaed as a witness in a case and unable to give bond for his

appearance.

I also inclose letters from Sheriff Cudihee, Attorney Fred H. Petersen, and

our interpreter, Charles Sasahe, which explain themselves, and answer, I

believe conclusively, the charges of ill treatment and robbery.

I will also add my statement that I was present when the secretary of the

Japanese consulate at Seattle, the agent of the Oriental Trading Company,

and Mr. Petersen conversed with the immigrants at the custom-house, just

before they were removed to the Vancouver S. S.Mainlander, and at no

time did they complain of insufficient food or of being robbed. If they had

been so treated they would have reported it to some of the above-named

representatives before leaving here, instead of waiting until they returned to

the consul, who could do nothing but report the matter.

This omission is not only suspicious, but convinces me that their charges

are groundless. As these letters may be referred to the Japanese minister, it

may be proper to explain the character and standing in the community of

Sheriff Cudihee, Attorney Petersen, and Charles Sasahe, and Dr. A. P.

Mitten, president of the board of inquiry. Sheriff Cudihee was one of two

men elected by an overwhelming majority over the candidate of the

dominant party here, so he must be highly respected and reliable and

credible. Mr. Petersen’s standing as a gentleman and lawyer has never, to

my knowledge, been questioned. Charles Sasahe, a native Japanese, is a

successful business man of integrity. Dr. Mitten, besides being deputy

collector, was a practicing physician and at one time treasurer of this

county; so these gentlemen, being above suspicion, would not misinterpret

the case of excluded Japanese immigrants.

The other members of this board of inquiry are the customs inspectors who

may happen to be detailed for that duty when occasion requires it.

As I stated in my letter of April 8, 1901, that as we had no stenographer and

as there was no appeal, the oral testimony was not reduced to writing, so I

a
consideration. It will be shown, however, that on each manifest, with one

exception, all of the immigrants were farmers, had only about $30, and gave

their destination as Seattle.

The exception on theRosaliemanifest was a tailor, and he was admitted, as

he could probably support himself at his trade. This was also true of the

exception on theMainlandermanifest, because he was a coal miner. I

mention this to prove that the action of the board was not arbitrary; they

only excluded those whom they did not believe could earn a living here. In

March many of the Japanese were out of work; the boarding houses were

crowded, many having been discharged from the section gangs of the Great

Northern Railway, the place where hundreds had been induced to work

under contract. The court records will show that the wages of these men are

not drawn by themselves, but by contractors who receive a percentage of

their wages.

The Japanese were the dupes and victims of the steamship runners who

prevailed on them to come here under representations of plenty of work at

good wages. In the case of the Japanese from Victoria, they had to pay

$3.50 to a Japanese named Ohashi for a 25-cent ticket.

To prove that the board acted wisely in excluding these Japanese, I will

state that the sudden tide of immigrants that was started up without an

apparent cause immediately subsided, and the surplus Japanese laborers

have been returning to British Columbia for the past three months.

If this unnatural influx had not been checked much destitution would have

ensued.

Under section 5, act of March 5, 1893, I had no alternative but to hold for

special inquiry “every person who may not appear to him clearly and

beyond doubt entitled to admission,” so my discharge of duty is not “a

construction of the law by local immigration officers not justified by facts.”

I understand that the Japanese Government has recognized the evil of

induced and unrestricted immigration to this coast by limiting the number

of passports to be issued in each province. As a result a more intelligent

class of immigrants arrive direct from Japan by the Nippon Yusen Kaisha

steamships, and, with the exception of stowaways, no Japanese have been

deported to Japan in the past eight months. I only mention this to show that

no Japanese is excluded without cause, and there is no intention or desire to

discriminate against them. Only a very small percentage of Japanese even

fromBritishColumbia(wheretheyhavenosuchregulationsabout

passports) are excluded by an impartial, intelligent, disinterested board of

inquiry.

The deliberations of this board are surely judicial proceedings by sworn

officials, and their decisions, in the absence of any appeal, should be

presumed to be just and based on sufficient evidence, and to be preferred to

the garbled statements of irresponsible, humble, interested persons. I use the

word irresponsible advisedly, because the immigrants were not free agents,

but the dupes and victims of those who purchased their tickets, coached

them in the statements they were to make, and probably debtors to the

extent of $30 to those who undertook to land them legally and afterwards

collect their money and their wages, as has been done in other cases.

Owing to the conditions prevailing in Seattle in March, and considering all

suspicious circumstances of the two lots of Japanese who failed to secure

cards from the United States commissioner of immigration at Victoria and

Vancouver,BritishColumbia,andwhodidnotevenbuytheirown

steamship tickets, I think it was merciful of the board of inquiry to return

them to the place where they came from at the expense of the steamship

companies. Time has demonstrated the wisdom of this course, as hundreds

of Japanese have since voluntarily returned to Vancouver.

In conclusion, I wish to state that at my last official station, Key West, Fla.,

it is the custom to hold in jail for deportation Cuban contract laborers, even

those who hail from an island under the protection of the United States flag.

It is explained in my letter of the 8th of April that it was more humane to

detain the immigrants in a warm room in a jail than in the damp hold of a

ship or on an exposed steamship dock.

Hoping that the foregoing statements will be sufficient explanation, I am,

Very respectfully,
JAMESP.LAVIN,
Immigrant Inspector.
[Subinclosure 2.]
S W,July 3, 1901.

S: Regarding the reported loss of valuables by the Japanese immigrants

confined in jail last March, will state that I was present with you on both

occasions when you delivered the Japanese on board the steamshipRosalie
and the steamshipMainlander. I then, in your company, returned their

money to them. At no time did they complain that they had lost any

personal property.

In the case of the Japanese who were deported on the steamshipMainlander
to Vancouver, I will say that they were taken direct from the custom-house

after a conference with the secretary of the Japanese consul, the manager of

the Oriental Trading Company, and their attorney, Mr. Fred Petersen. I was

with the above-named in company of the immigrants, and they made no

complaint of being robbed.

Very respectfully,
CHARLESSASAHE,
Japanese Interpreter.
[Subinclosure 3.]
Mr. Cudihee, sheriff, to Mr. Lavin, immigrant inspector.
SHERIFF’SOFFICE,KINGCOUNTY,WASH.,
Seattle,June 29, 1901.

DEARSIR: In regard to complaint about treatment of Japanese in my custody

March 17, 1901, I desire to say that the Japanese were not placed with

convicted criminals, but were kept in the “hospital ward,” an apartment of

the jail given up to boys under commitment to the reform school, inmates of

the jail who are sick, and men charged with misdemeanors.

As to the food furnished them, it consisted of bread freshly baked every

day, mush, potatoes—the best in the market—beef soup, fresh boiled beef,

tea and coffee, with sugar, and pork and beans.

When these men were brought to the jail they were accompanied by

yourself and a Japanese interpreter, and you and the interpreter searched

them. Theinterpreterkeptthevaluablesfounduponthem,including

watches and money. When they were in jail and during all the time they

were in my custody, there was never any complaint made by them, or by

any of them, or by anyone else, of any missing coat or watch.

I believe the steamship company desired to have these people held in

custody, as upon presentation of the bill for their board and keep the

company cheerfully paid the same.

Respectfully, yours,
ED.CUDIHEE,Sheriff.
[Subinclosure 4.]
Mr. Petersen to Mr. Lavin, immigrant inspector.
SEATTLE,WASH.,July 1, 1901.

DEARSIR: As per your request of this date you are hereby informed that in

March, 1901, I was employed as attorney by a number of Japanese who had

been debarred from landing by the board of special inquiry at Seattle, and

pursuant to that employment I called at the custom-house and was present

when the Japanese consul’s secretary and the secretary of the Japanese

Association were present. We had a consultation with the immigrants and

they concluded that they would not go to the expense of employing an

attorney, and that they would prefer to return to British Columbia, and that

it was not to their interest to appeal their cases, and so stated to me through

a Japanese friend of theirs. Thereupon I informed the secretary of the board

that it was my clients’ wishes to abandon the appeal, and that no further

steps should be taken. The men stated that they would be glad to return on

theboatonthenexttriptoBritishColumbia,andIhavepersonal

knowledge of their returning by such boat. I am further satisfied that these

immigrants while at Seattle were properly treated, although there was some

objection made in that they had been confined in the county jail, but upon

inquiry I learned that there was no place whatever to have cared for them

properly except at the jail, and I explained this to my clients and they made

no further complaint.

I desire to say further that every courtesy was extended to me as their

attorney,andtotheaforesaidofficersoftheJapaneseconsulateand

association as well. The immigrants were also treated in a kindly manner,

and they were all informed through their interpreter by the officers what

their legal rights were, but they unanimously concluded that they would not

insist upon landing, but return to British Columbia. The interpreter chosen

was a countryman of the immigrants, and he explained to them their rights

and the law in my presence and also in the presence of the Japanese

officers, and I personally had a conversation with the Japanese consul and

his secretary concerning these immigrants. I remember distinctly that the

Government officers told the immigrants that if they had presented cards

from the commissioner of immigration at the port from which they sailed

they would then have had little difficulty, as such a card would have entitled

them to enter after passing a medical examination. In view of all that was

done concerning these immigrants, I fail to see why any complaint should

have been made, as the officers of the Government certainly did not

otherwise than their duty, and what annoyance may have been caused to

these immigrants could not have been avoided under the circumstances.

I remain, etc.,
FREDH.PETERSEN.
[Subinclosure 5.]
Mr. Chapman, agent for steamer Mainlander, to Mr. Lavin, immigrant inspector.
SEATTLE,WASH.,June 28, 1901.

consultation with Colonel Fisher, it was thought advisable to take them to

the county jail for safe-keeping, as well as for their own comfort, there

being no suitable place on the dock for them, as the weather was very cool.

We paid all bills for their care at the jail March 8, 1901.

Yours, very truly,
HPC ,
Agent Steamer Mainlander.
[Subinclosure 6.]

Mr. Peabody, manager Alaska Steamship Company, to Mr. Lavin, immigrant inspector.
SEATTLE,WASH.,June 28, 1901.

DEARSIR: Regarding the matter of proper and safe care of Japanese from

Victoria, British Columbia, per our steamerRosaliesome time ago, I beg to

state that as the accommodations on the wharf and the facilities for

furnishing them with meals are very limited we thought it advisable to take

them to the county jail, where they would be more comfortable and receive

proper attention. The expenses for their care were paid by us to the county

sheriff.

Yours, truly,
CHARLESE.PEABODY,Manager.
aNot printed.

[Document 326]
Mr. Takahira to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OFJAPAN,
Washington,June 13, 1901.

No. 14.]

SIR: Referring to the memoranda dated respectively the 4th and 13th of last

October, which passed between us in relation to the quarantine measures

enforced in San Francisco and Colorado last year, I have the honor to state

that I communicated the same to His Imperial Majesty’s Government, and

that I am now in receipt of a reply embodying its views upon the subject.

In conformity with the directions of his excellency the minister for foreign

affairs I beg to transmit herewith for your information a copy of the

instruction in question.

Accept, etc.,
K.TAKAHIRA.
[Inclosure.]

THEGAIMUSHO,
Tokyo,17th day of the 5th month of the 34th year of Meiji.

S: I have to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch of the 17th day of the

10th month of the 33d year of Meiji, inclosing copies of the memoranda

dated respectively the 4th and 13th October last, which were exchanged

between your legation and the Department of State in regard to the

measures of quarantine taken against Japanese subjects by the city of San

Francisco and the State of Colorado.

The position in which the correspondence now under examination has left

the question is not, I regret to say, entirely satisfactory to the Imperial

Government, and you are accordingly instructed to again approach the

Government of the United States on the subject.

The measures which gave rise to the recent discussion established, within

the circumscriptions indicated, a clear discrimination against Japanese

subjects in the matter of quarantine, and it has in consequence been the

contention of the Imperial Government that those measures were not only

subversive of the accepted principles of international law and comity by

which the equal intercourse between nations is regulated and the rights of

aliens are determined, but were at variance with those express provisions of

the treaty of 1894 which in reciprocity extended to Japanese subjects in all

parts of the territories of the United States both national and most-favored-

nation treatment in whatever relates to rights of residence and travel. In this

situationtheImperialGovernmenthadentertainedthehopethatthe

Government of the United States might see their way to take such action

against the persons responsible for the enforcement of the measures as

couldfairlyberegardedasanassurancethatsimilardiscriminatory

regulations would not again be put into operation.

Accordingly the announcement, contained in the memorandum of October

13, to the effect that for reasons of a purely domestic character, springing

fromthepeculiarrelationsexistingbetweentheFederalandState

governments, the United States were unable either to accord redress for the

past grievances or to give guaranties against the recurrence of similar

grievances in the future, was a source of disappointment to the Imperial

Government. If, as is firmly believed, the discriminations in question were

actually invasive of rights belonging to the subjects of His Imperial Majesty

in virtue of a just application of the principles of the law of nations, it can

hardly be said that reference to the distribution of power among the various

departments of national authority constitutes a satisfactory answer to the

complaint of the Imperial Government, which is based upon an alleged

disregard of such international rights.

As the Imperial Government in the present case are on the one hand denied

theopportunityofseekingadequateredressfromthesubordinate

administrative units which go to make up the supreme Government of the

United States, so they are on the other justified in looking to the Federal

Government for the fulfillment of the sum of the nation’s international

duties and obligations. And in advancing as applicable to this question the

proposition that in the presence of international rights and duties opposing

municipal rules and arrangements are silent, I find myself merely restating a

principle of public law which the Government of the United States have, on

more than one occasion, as frankly admitted on the one hand as they have

strenuously and conclusively maintained on the other.

In the Cutting case it was declared by the then Secretary of State, Mr.

Bayard, “that a Government can not appeal to its municipal regulations as

an answer to demands for the fulfillment of international duties.” A similar

rule was laid down by the United States before the Geneva Arbitration

Tribunal, and in the Van Bokkelen case, while in the case of McLeod, and

in other more recent cases, the Government of the United States have, with

a consistency which does equal credit to their sincerity and high sense of

justice, acknowledged the supremacy of the same principle.

If I have, in citing precedents, limited myself to cases in which the United

States were interested, it is not because the doctrine which they illustrate is

peculiar to that power, but because the Government of the United States

have enunciated the rule with a clearness and precision which leave nothing

to be desired.

The cases cited, especially those relating to McLeod and Cutting, seem to

suggest the manner in which causes of complaint such as those now under

discussion may be avoided, and the Imperial Government therefore indulge

the confident hope that the Government of the United States, upon further

consideration of the question in the light of what has been said, will adopt

the necessary legislative measures to effectually safeguard for the future the

rights of Japanese subjects who are lawfully within the territorial limits of

the United States, and to prevent any repetition of discriminations such as

those complained of.

In presenting these views to the Government of the United States, you are

authorized to deliver to the honorable the Secretary of State a copy of these

instructions.
T K

JAPANESELEGATION,November 14, 1901.
Explanatory statement presented in connection with a note of the Japanese

legation of the 13th of June, 1901, with a view to request an early answer to

the instructions therein inclosed.
“Defective or erroneous municipal legislation, by which a sovereign claims

to be unable to perform his international obligations, is no defense to a

demand by another sovereign for redress for a violation of international

duty. This position was taken by Great Britain against the United States in

the McLeod case; by the United States against France in respect to French

spoliations; by the United States against Great Britain in respect to the
Alabamaand other cognate claims; and by the United States against Mexico

and other States in denying their right to impose by statute restrictions or

disabilities not sustainable in international law on citizens of the United

States.” (Wharton’s Digest.) The McLeod case was that of a British subject

arrested and held for trial in a State court (New York) for an offense which

Government therefore contended that the case was one which could only be

settled directly between the Government of the United States and itself; that

consequently the State court had no jurisdiction, and that McLeod should be

released.

The case resolved itself into one of conflict of authority between Federal

and State jurisdiction as regarded an alien. On this head Mr. Webster, in a

dispatch to Lord Ashburton dated August 6, 1842, expressed the following

opinion: “It is for the Congress of the United States, whose attention has

been called to the subject, to say what further provision ought to be made to

expedite proceedings in such cases; and, in answer to your lordship’s

question toward the close of your note, I have to say that the Government of

the United States holds itself not only fully disposed but fully competent to

carry into practice every principle which it avows or acknowledges, and to

fulfill every duty and obligation which it owes to foreign governments, their

subjects, or citizens.”

In order to prevent complications like that which had occurred in this case,

753, and 754) which gave to Federal courts power to issue writs of habeas

corpuswherebysuchcasescouldbebroughtdirectlywithintheir

jurisdiction.

The Cutting case was that of a citizen of the United States arrested, tried,

and convicted in Mexico in violation, it was claimed by the United States,

ofthelawofnations.NotwithstandingthefactthatdieMexican

Government claimed “that the local or State jurisdiction over Cutting’s case

did not allow interference by the National Government of Mexico in the

matter,” the United States Government persisted in its demand, and Cutting

was finally released. It was during the discussion of this case that Secretary

Bayard declared that “citizens of the United States when abroad will be

protectedfromdiscriminationaimedatthemonaccountoftheir

nationality.”

It is a well-settled principle in American law and jurisprudence that treaties

are a part of the law of the land, and that, as such, they can not by

overridden by the laws or enactments of the several States. In the case of

McCulloch against the State of Maryland the Supreme Court held that “the

States have no power by taxation, or otherwise, to retard, impede, burden,

or in any manner control the operation of the constitutional laws enacted by

CongresstocarryintoeffectthepowersvestedintheNational

Government.” The same principle, as other decisions of the Supreme Court

show, has been held to apply to treaties negotiated with foreign powers

under the authority vested by the Constitution in the Federal Government.

The treatment accorded to Japanese subjects by the quarantine measures

adopted at San Francisco and in Colorado was manifestly in violation of

this principle. As regarded the San Francisco case, the United States circuit

court decided that the measures in question were unconstitutional because

manifestly discriminatory against certain classes of the population. In

respect to the Colorado case, no result of any kind has been reached except

that the governor of that State was invited to give appropriate consideration

to the representations of the Japanese legation in this matter. The obnoxious

regulations of the State government are no longer in force, but there is no

be put into effect there or elsewhere in the United States. If this case is

allowed to stand as a precedent, it may easily follow that municipal

legislation will have the appearance at least of having been permitted to be

paramount, not only to principles announced in the decision of the circuit

court above referred to, but also to the specific rights of travel and residence

guaranteed to Japanese subjects in accordance with treaty stipulations. It is

not believed that this result will be in harmony with the theory or the

practice of the United States, either as regards its own citizens abroad or the

subjects or citizens of friendly States within its territories.

The situation is clearly one which calls for a remedy whereby similar

violations of the rights of aliens may be prevented, or, if they occur, may be

susceptible of prompt and effective remedy. Such a remedy was afforded in

the McLeod case by the passage of an act of Congress. The case under

review involves principles sufficiently important to justify the hope that

some action of the kind may be taken to protect the rights of Japanese

subjects guaranteed both by law and by treaty.

[Document 327]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Takahira.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 26, 1901.

No. 43.]

SIR: Referring to your note of June 13 last in relation to certain quarantine

measures of San Francisco and Colorado, and to the explanatory statement

in connection therewith which you handed to me on the 14th instant, I

observe that, in view of the explanations heretofore furnished by the

Department, there remains apparently only one point on which you ask

further satisfactory assurances, namely: That some action may be taken to

protectJapanesesubjectsagainsttherecurrenceofdiscriminatory

quarantine measures. This assurance I am happy to be able to give you; not,

indeed, in the precise form in which it is requested, but in a way which will

substantially and effectually accomplish the end in view.

It is in the nature of things impossible to prevent by Federal legislation the

enactment of improvident and unconstitutional laws by local authorities,

whether State or municipal. But it is entirely feasible to afford prompt and

complete redress against such regulations whenever their enforcement is

sought to the detriment of personal rights. The individual affected may at

once avail himself of the writ of habeas corpus before the Federal courts

and obtain his deliverance from any illegal imprisonment, confinement, or

restraint. He may also avail himself in such cases of the writ of injunction to

prevent the enforcement of such illegal regulations. This was done in this

very affair in the case of Wong Waiv. Williamson (103 Fed. Rep., 1); and

the act of Congress, which was passed in consequence of the exigencies of

the McLeod case, was adopted, not with a view to prevent the passage of

illegal local legislation and regulations, but to nullify their effects by

empowering the Federal courts, on proper application, to deliver and

discharge from the operation of such laws all persons injuriously affected

by them, thereby nullifying them for all practical purposes. The remedy

thus afforded was and is equally applicable in all cases where quarantine

regulations restrain personal liberty (including freedom from interference

with the right of personal locomotion or the exercise of any restraint upon

the person) in breach of constitutional or treaty rights.

The remedies already afforded are, therefore, complete; and since it is

physically impossible by any act of legislation to prevent at all times and in

all places illegal action of local authorities, the demands of civil justice and

of national good faith are reasonably met when ample and speedy remedies

for the redress of such grievances or of wrongs of any kind are afforded by

the laws.

In case, however, of the passage of local regulations alleged to be in

violation of a treaty, the Department would, if the same would be brought

by you to its attention, cause the matter to be investigated, and if proper

would request the Attorney-General to cooperate in taking the necessary

legal steps to enforce the due observance of treaty obligations.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 328]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,July 20, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to report the coming to Yokohama of Rear-Admiral

Frederick Rodgers with his flagship, theNew York, accompanied by the

United States ships,New OrleansandYorktown, comprising a part of the

Asiatic squadron, and also to remark upon the courtesies extended to the

admiral and the officers of his ships.

Acting under instructions of the Navy Department to represent the United

States Navy upon the occasion of the ceremonies attending the unveiling of

a monument at Kurihama, erected by the Japanese “American Association

of Japan” in commemoration of the advent of Commodore Perry forty-eight

years ago, which ceremonies were to take place on the 14th instant, Rear-

Admiral Rodgers arrived at Yokohama with his ships on the 7th instant. He

with his officers have been most cordially received by the officials of the

Japanese Government and by the people, as also by their majesties, the

Emperor and the Empress, to whom I have had the honor to present them.

The governor of Kanagawa-Ken and the mayor of Yokohama have extended

courtesies of entertainments at banquets, as have also the governor and the

mayor of Tokyo, the minister of marine and several admirals of the

Japanese navy, and more of such entertainments are announced to be given,

to all of which the admiral is responding in like manner and spirit.

On the morning of the 14th instant the three United States war vessels

steamed to the harbor of Kurihama, where there were already live Japanese

war vessels.

I inclose herewith cuttings from the Japan Times (a Japanese publication),

on the 16th and 17th instants, giving a detailed account of the proceedings

incident to the unveiling of the monument.

The imposing monument of granite is itself a testimony of gratitude for

whatCommodorePerrydid,andtheextraordinaryandspontaneous

welcome accorded Rear-Admiral Rodgers and his officers and ships will

doubtless be appreciated by the people of the United States as significant

proof of the deep feeling of friendship of the Japanese Government and

people for the United States and our people.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure.—The Japan Times, Tokyo, Tuesday, July 16, 1901,]
THE UNVEILING OF THE PERRY MONUMENT.
Imagine a slightly sloping and open sand beach with a frontage of say 400

yards. Imagine intermittent showers coming down, now in torrents now in

drizzling mist with short intervals of what can only be called a suspicion of

sunshine struggling out through the thinner portions of the overhanging

clouds. Imagine, excepting a fairly wide pathway in the center ending

seaward in an improvised pontoon bridge, the whole frontage consisting of

a continuous wall of humanity standing 30 or 40 deep and consisting of all

ages and both sexes with the younger ones bathing their feet in the soft

rippling sea—this human wall being made picturesque by karakasa and

umbrellas of all shapes and shades overhead, and by a full display of the

rustic taste for striking and fantastic contrasts in the way of colors in the

dresses. Imagine once again thousands upon thousands of wondering eyes

all looking anxiously seaward where, a mile or so off, lie three white men-

boats and catchers, racing yachts and innumerable other small craft dot the

surface, looking smart with flags in full rig. Imagine all this and you have a

rough picture of how Kurihama looked for a good part of the morning of

the 14th at the particular part where the Perry celebration took place.

About 11 o’clock the good shipHakuai Maru, with some 300 ladies and

gentlemen, Japanese and foreign, from Tokyo and Yokohama, and which

had started from the Yokohama pier, hove in sight of the beach. The anchor

having been dropped soon after, landing by steam launches and steam-

towed junks began. It was raining then, and the proceedings were, to say the

least, tedious, even unpleasant. But good humor prevailed everywhere, and

nothing failed to provoke merriment, which was indeed the supreme feature

of the two hours’ voyage, and which was now prolonged for another hour,

during which time the landing was completed. From launches on to the

pontoon, then between the staring and wondering crowds, the landing

parties came to a big gate of evergreens, which was in the shape of a double

cross—one by the side of the other. Inside the gate they were most

courteously received by Baron Kaneke, president of the Beiyu Kyokai, and

other members of the association, who politely ushered them into the

curtain-fenced inclosure. The inclosure must have measured at least 100 by

100 yards or so, and in the center, and somewhat to the rear, rose the object

of the day’s celebration, still veiled in a piece of light white cloth. On the

right of the monument were-seen Rear-Admiral Rodgers and his fellow-

officers, in full uniform, and other American officials, seated under a tent.

Similarly to the left were the ministers of state, and high naval and army

officers. Then, leaving a good-sized hollow square in the center, rows of

tents formed the two sides where the guests were variously distributed, the

foreigners being all housed in the tents next to that of the American officers;

while fronting the monument, and with their backs to the entrance, a naval

band took up their post, behind which two companies of marines from our

warships formed guards.

A few minutes after 12, when the last man had taken his seat, Baron

Kaneko appeared in a little improvised green bowered stage at the foot of

the monument and announced the commencement of the ceremony. Then

walking up to Admiral Rodgers he led that officer to the monument, from

the top of which a white rope hung. In the midst of impressive silence the

admiral gave a pull at the rope and down came the white veil, and there

stood in full view a huge slab of granite with inscriptions in bright gold, cut

deep into it and telling in seventeen Chinese characters, chosen and penned

by Marquis Ito, what the stupendous rock pillar was for. The unveiling

formed a signal for loud and enthusiastic applause which took some time to

subside. Hardly had the hand-clapping ended when Baron Kaneko was

again on the stage and began to read an address from a scroll of paper. But

by this time the news of the unveiling had reached the United States and

Japanese warships out in the sea, and they now commenced to fire salutes.

While boom! boom! went on the guns, the Baron continued to read his

speech, and the scene did not fail to make a most thrilling impression on the

vast assembly. We give below a liberal translation of the baron’s address.
PRESIDENT KANEKO’S ADDRESS.

“Here it was at Kurihama in the district of Miura Kanagawa that on the 14th

of July, 1853, Commodore Perry, of the United States of America, by order

of his Government, first landed and opened negotiations with the special

commissioner of the Shogunate to conclude a treaty of amity and commerce

between Japan and the United States. It was at this spot that the modern

civilization of our Empire had its beginning. Rear-Admiral Beardslee, who

was a midshipman under Commodore Perry, came a second time to Japan

last year, and on that occasion he one day revisited this place led by the

memoriesofthepast.SubsequentlyatameetingoftheAmerican

Association of Japan he, giving his reminiscences of our country as it was

forty-nine years ago, said that he had found the Empire strictly maintaining

the policy of stern seclusion and forming by herself a world of her own.

But, he continued, his second visit had revealed to him an entirely different

country almost able to compete with the great powers of the world in the

onward march on the path of civilization.

The progress made by Japan during the half century had been so rapid and

vast that the admiral could but think that his two visits had been separated

by ages. The admiral also remarked that Kurihama was the gate through

which Western civilization was introduced into Japan, and that it was his

earnest wish that this important spot should have some lasting mark so that

it might be remembered by posterity. The members of the association then

present were greatly impressed by the narration and at once passed a

resolution to erect a monument marking the places of Commodore Perry’s

landing at Kurihama. But the association from the very beginning never

meant to erect a monument of great cost and grandeur, but on the contrary

we decided upon as simple and modest a design as possible to mark for the

future one of the most important places in the history of Japanese Empire.

Therefore only a small area of ground has been allotted for the purpose.

When, however, our intentions became public, the people of the United

States at once showed a most keen interest and moreover the Government

of that country ordered Rear-Admiral Rodgers, commander in chief of the

United States fleet in the East, to attend the unveiling ceremony with three

men-of-war.OurmostAugustEmperorhavingalsoheardofour

undertaking was most graciously pleased to make us a grant in money

toward the monument fund, a grant which the association acknowledged as

an unexampled honor.

“But the construction of a monument of a national event is necessarily a

national work, and should not, we thought, be carried out by a private

association, but by the whole country. Particularly so, when it was so

warmly taken up both at home and abroad. We therefore decided to enlarge

the scope of our original design so as to comprise all ranks and classes of

the Japanese people. But the time was too short to fully put in practice all

the ideas entertained by the association, and besides when we made the

change in our programme we found that the stone had already been cut and

engraved and did not allow any alteration, so we were compelled to adhere

as we have done to our original plan.

“To-day is the forty-ninth anniversary of the first landing of Commodore

Perry at this place. We have selected the day to unveil the monument. Four

decades and some years ago when Commodore Perry set his foot on this

shore, the Japanese Empire was enshrouded in the fogs of a seclusion of

nearly three hundred years and all intercourse with foreign countries was

strictly forbidden. But since the restoration of 1868, our Government has

introduced the laws and customs of Western nations and the nation has

undergone a complete and wonderful change, and to-day we behold the

Japanese Empire in a prominent position among the civilized powers of the

world, the country having concluded treaties on equal footing with the

Westernpowersandhavingalsoadoptedtheconstitutionalformof

government. All these marvelous changes have indeed flowed from the

enlightened policy wisely adopted by our most revered Emperor, yet

nobody will deny the great obligation we owe to the Government of the

United States, which, of all the Western powers, first induced us to open our

country to foreign intercourse. Moreover, the United States being the

nearest of our Western neighbors, there is reason why our diplomatic and

commercial relations with her should always be most amicable.

“Rear-Admiral Rodgers is the grandson of Commodore Perry. What a

delightful coincidence that the grandfather sowed the seeds of the modern

civilization at Kurihama and to-day the grandson unveils the monument

built to the memory of his grandfather. This monument is erected to

preserve on the stone our determination never to forget the friendship of the

United States that sent Commodore Perry to induce us in a peaceful way to

have intercourse with foreign powers and also to show to the whole world

that our amicable relations with the great powers so happily maintained and

all our Western civilization so securely implanted in our soil have had their

beginnings at this humble little spot.

“The presence of the distinguished naval officers from the country most

friendly to us, and of the ministers of states and of all the ladies and

gentlemen present here has given a great luster to the occasion to-day. We

only regret that the limits of space and time have prevented us from

extending an invitation to all whose presence would have been a great

honortous.Consideringthatthisplaceislackinginfacilitiesof

communication both by land and sea, that so many should have favored us

with their presence must be deemed a very great honor to us. On behalf of

the monument committee I have the honor of giving this brief history of the

facts and circumstances which led to the building of this monument, and, in

conclusion, I hereby beg to express my sincere thanks to all present.”

At the conclusion of the baron’s speech the guards of honor presented arms

while the band struck up the national anthem. Next followed the reading by

Mr. J. M. Ferguson, second secretary of the United States legation, the

address prepared for the occasion by Col. A. E. Buck, United States

minister, who, owing to illness, was unable to come.
.

“Had some wise man of prophetic vision, a half century ago, foretold that

Commodore Perry’s coming to Japan with his ships, landing at this place

and having intercourse with the Japanese Government would be followed

by so momentous consequences within fifty years as are now manifest, he

would have been treated with derision. Nothing would have been more

incredible. And yet, if the Commodore had never approached these shores

was opportune and conditions were favorable for such a departure from the

old and the beginning of a new era.

“That a nation with its peculiar civilization of more than two thousand five

hundred years, existing wholly within itself, with little if any contact with

the outside world, should have changed its feudal system of government to

a constitutional government, entirely by its own initiative and by the grace

of a wise Emperor within thirty-five years, is a marvel to the civilized

world.

“Since the advent of Commodore Perry the Empire of Japan has, within

herself and of her own volition, ceased to be a hermit nation; has made

treaties of amity and commerce with the nations of the world; has opened

the country to the people of all nations, welcoming them within her borders

and throughout the land, granting to them like immunities and protection as

given to native subjects. She has now become a world power, accepted in

full fellowship into the family of nations on an equality with Western

countries.

“In such a short period of time to have evolved an army so disciplined and

efficient as to command the admiration of the world; to have built a navy of

such strength as to force her recognition as one of the great sea powers,

speaks volumes for the wonderful enterprise and ability of this the youngest

in the family of recognized civilized nations.

“One can only understand this when he comes to know the people—their

mentalactivity,theirenergy,theirendurance,theirindependentand

progressive spirit, their ambition, their pride of country, and their loyalty to

their Emperor—then one will understand how it is, not only that such an

army has been created and disciplined and such a navy built, but also the

causesthathavebroughtintoexistencetheirconstitutionalformof

government; their modern educational system, so enlarged as to provide for

all the youth of the Empire; their modern financial system; their new

judicial system; their complete postal and telegraph systems; their extended

railway and light-house systems; their hospitals, so well equipped; their Red

Cross Society, so well conducted; their extensive textile manufactories and

other thousand and one new industries by which they are successfully

merchantshipstraversingtheseas,exchangingproductswithevery

country; and the many other evidences to be seen of changed conditions in

so short a time, so astonishing to the world.

“For her progress in the direction of a new civilization the Empire of Japan

has had no precedent. No conquering power has ever overrun this country

or devasted its coast cities. No foreign power has attempted to conquer her,

or has coerced or in any direction has shaped her course. She does not owe

her marvelous progress and prosperity and her constitutional form of

government to the control or direct influence of any other country. These

grand results have been wrought out by the evolution of a wise people with

inspiringimpulsesandgreataspirations,possessedofthatintelligent

conviction and masterful courage that overcome the greatest difficulties and

that insure to a people independence and power. Nowhere in the history of

the world can be found a parallel. No one can foretell or set the limit to that

degree of advancement the nation is yet destined to reach. The scroll of her

future is not yet open to moral vision. Of that one can only judge from what

her aspirations and ambition have already accomplished.

“As an American citizen I express my profound congratulations that these

andotherwonderfulandbeneficentconsequenceshavefollowed

Commodore Perry’s visit, and I am proud of the fact that from that time the

most friendly relations have existed between the United States and Japan,

and that the ties binding the two countries have been growing stronger the

passing years.

“Mr. President and gentlemen, this shaft of granite that marks the spot

where Perry landed, erected by your people in the honor of his memory, is

the strongest evidence, not only of the recognition of the benefits following

his coming, but of the friendship existing between your people and mine.

“I thank you and your people for this great tribute to the memory of that

heroic naval commander, an American citizen, a tribute unprecedented and

unaccountable to those not familiar with the character of your people and

the spirit which animates them.

“Under the beneficent rule of a wise sovereign may your people ever

continue in prosperity and happiness, and may everlasting peace and good

will exist between the United States and the Empire of Japan.”

Colonel Buck’s address over, Prime Minister Viscount Katsura stepped on

the stage and read an address, which was in substance as follows:THE PREMIER’S

ADDRESS.

“On this auspicious occasion, on which the Beiyu Kyokai carry out the

ceremonyofunveilingthePerrymonument,onenaturallyturnshis

thoughts to the coming of Commodore Perry, of the United States Navy,

fourdecadesandsomeyearsago.Sincethosedaysthecivilization

originally possessed by this country has greatly advanced under the benign

influenceofWesterncivilization,anditgivesmeboundlessjoyto

participate in this grand celebration at this moment when the light of our

progress is sending forth its rays with increased brightness. Furthermore,

we have to-day with us the United States fleet, dispatched hither for the

special purpose of taking part in the celebration. This act of friendship,

alwayscharacteristicoftheAmericannation,willbemosthighly

appreciated and will never be forgotten by our people, high and low.

“Considering it a matter of honor to be present on this felicitous occasion, I

have great pleasure in saying these few words of congratulation.”

After the premier, Rear-Admiral Rodgers was led to the stage and made the

following speech, a report of which we borrow from the Japan Mail:ADMIRAL

RODGERS’ SPEECH.

“As I stand here to-day, honored by this occasion, and representing,

together with the officers and men under my command, the Navy of the

UnitedStates,andappreciatingasIdothecourtesyandhospitality

extended to us by the Imperial Government of Japan, realizing also the

sentiments of good will and friendship which inspired, under the leadership

of Baron Kaneko and his committee, the generous originators of this event,

I feel for many reasons that it is for me an especially happy occasion.

Looking back for nearly half a century, I remember the departure from

home of my grandfather, Commodore Perry, upon his diplomatic mission to

Japan. I remember his return, bringing with him the first specimens of

Japanese handiwork and art that ever reached the United States, and many

of these are still treasured in my family. Naturally, the Perry family has

always cherished sentiments of affection for Japan and the Japanese, and I

have been impressed with them from childhood. I also remember the honor

tendered to Commodore Perry by his fellow-citizens upon his return to the

United States, including handsome presents, among others, a magnificent

service of silver plate, in recognition of his successful execution of a

delicate diplomatic mission. I believe it to be an interesting fact that Japan

in 1854 received the first fully accredited ambassador from the United

States.CommodorePerryhadthehonortobethefirstdiplomatic

representativeofourcountryempoweredwiththefunctionsofan

ambassador. The Navy of the United States has always cherished a warm

and cordial feeling for Japan and its people. My inclinations have led me to

know Japan, perhaps, as well as anyone could who never visited her shores,

and no one could be more impressed than I am with the characteristics

which have brought Japan with rapid strides to be the peer of the leading

military and naval powers of the world. The presence of my friend, Rear-

Admiral Beardslee, is a happy incident of this occasion. We all know of his

connection with it, and of the interesting fact that he is one of those who

landed here nearly half a century ago. May he long be a survivor of that

expedition. That the cordial feeling which exists and has always existed

between the United States and Japan may continue undisturbed is my

earnest hope, and I believe that from no country will Japan receive more

hearty good wishes than from that in which Matthew Galbraith Perry was

born.”

[Document 329]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Buck.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 30, 1901.

No. 358.]

SIR: At the instance of the Secretary of the Navy, as expressed in his letter of

the 20th instant, I have now to instruct you to express to the Government of

Japan the cordial appreciation and thanks of this Government for the

unusual courtesy shown by Japanese officials and subjects to the squadron

of United States ships which was present during the unveiling of the Perry

monument on the 14th instant.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 330]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Buck.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 21, 1901.

No. 362.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your unnumbered dispatch of the

20th ultimo reporting the arrival of part of the United States Asiatic

Squadron at Yokohama on the occasion of the ceremonies attending the

unveiling of a monument at Kurihama, erected by the Japanese “American

Association of Japan” in commemoration of the advent of Commodore

Perry forty-eight years ago. You state that Rear-Admiral Rodgers and the

officers of the squadron had been most courteously received by Their

Majesties the Emperor and Empress, by the officials of the Japanese

Government, and by the people.

The Government of the United States highly appreciates the courtesies

shown on this occasion to the representatives of the Navy Department, and

is much impressed by the friendly intention shown in the erection of the

monument to celebrate the entry of Commodore Perry into the ports of

Japan.

I am, etc.,
AAA,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 331]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Takahira.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

SIR: The pressure of public business attendant upon the death of President

McKinley has delayed until now an acknowledgment of the telegram from

the Japanese minister for foreign affairs (copy of which was left by you at

theDepartment),conveyinganexpressionofHisImperialMajesty’s

sympathy in view of that sad event.

I shall be obliged if you will assure his excellency, in the name of the

Government and people of the United States, as well as in the name of the

family of the late President, that this message of sympathy on the part of

His Majesty was received with sincere and grateful appreciation.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 332]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,September 30, 1901.

No. 586.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that Mr. Na Tung, special envoy of the

Emperor of China, to apologize for the murder by Chinese soldiers during

the Boxer troubles last year of Mr. Sugiyama, chancellor of the Japanese

legation at Pekin, arrived in Tokyo accompanied by a retinue of some

twenty persons on the 5th instant.

On the 13th the envoy, with his suite in attendance, was received in

audience by the Emperor of Japan and discharged his mission of apology.

The Japanese court bestowed upon Mr. Na the First Class Order of the

Rising Sun, and upon the members of his suite various lower orders.

During his sojourn in Tokyo Mr. Na has been entertained on several

occasions by bankers, business men, and others; and, in general, his

reception seems to indicate the hope that his visit may have the effect of

improving the commercial and political relations between Japan and China.

The envoy is to depart on his return to China on the 2d proximo.

I have, etc.,
AEB

[Document 333]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,November 26, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to report that on the 16th instant, on receipt of a

telegram from Capt. John Baxter, United States quartermaster at Nagasaki,

that the United States transportHancockwas aground near Moji, in the

Shimonoseki Strait, and requesting that I obtain immediate assistance of a

Japanese warship from Kure, if possible, I at once communicated with the

navy department, which promptly dispatched a ship equipped with the

necessary appliances for relieving the vessel.

ReceivingatelegramfromQuartermasterBaxteronthe17thinstant

announcing the floating of theHancockuninjured, and expressing his great

appreciation of the prompt action of the navy department in sending a ship

to her aid (copy of telegram herewith), I addressed through the minister for

foreign affairs a note of thanks to the minister of the navy (copy herewith).

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure 1.—Telegram.]
N ,November 17, 1901.

Advised that Japanese admiralty sent two warships with salvage appliances

to helpHancocknear Moji.Hancockfloated high tide 16th uninjured, and

sailed same day to relieveWarrenat Kobe. Action Japanese admiralty

greatlyappreciated. Thisofficewillpromptlypayadmiralty’sbillof

expense.
B

[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Komura Jutaro.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo,November 20, 1901.

Mr. MINISTER: I have the honor to express, through your excellency, to his

excellency the minister of the navy my high appreciation and thanks for his

greatkindnessinsopromptlydispatchingtwovesselswithsalvage

appliances to the assistance of the United States transportHancock, aground

near Moji a few days ago.

In pursuance of a telegram received from the United States quartermaster at

Nagasaki, I have the honor to express his grateful acknowledgments also,

and to say for him that his office will promptly pay the bill of expenses for

the two vessels when known.

I avail, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.

[Document 334]
Mr. Buck to Mr. Hay.
UNITEDSTATESLEGATION,
Tokyo, Japan,December 9, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to inclose a copy of a communication from the minister

for foreign affairs in response to the note, a copy of which accompanied my

dispatch of the 26th ultimo, on the subject of the steps taken by the

Japanese navy to assist the transportHancock.
In acknowledging the expressions of thanks for the sending of vessels to the
Hancock’sassistance, the minister for foreign affairs’ note is to the effect

that the minister of the navy, while appreciating the quartermaster’s desire

to reimburse the expenses involved, states that the expenses for the vessels

are not expected to be refunded.

The quartermaster has been informed accordingly.

I have, etc.,
A.E.BUCK.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
D F A ,
Tokyo,December 5, 1901.

Mr.M :Ihavethehonortoacknowledgethereceiptofyour

excellency’s note dated the 20th ultimo, expressing through me to the

minister for the navy your high appreciation and thanks for two Japanese

vessels having been dispatched to the assistance of the United States

transportHancock, aground near Moji, and at the same time desiring that

the bill of expenses for the two vessels be made known.

Having at once communicated to the minister for the navy upon the subject,

I am now in receipt of a reply from him requesting me to state that he

profoundly appreciates your excellency’s courtesy, but that the expenses for

the said vessels are not expected to be refunded.

I avail, etc.,
KOMURAJUTARO,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Korea
Contents

[Document 335]
Mr. Allen to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Seoul, Korea,March 5, 1901.

No. 318, Diplomatic]

SIR: I have the honor to hand you a statement in regard to the ill treatment of

two American missionaries at Taiku, the capital of the province of North

aKyung Sang, to which I alluded in my No. 306 of December 14, 1900.
The facts are briefly as follows:

Messrs.AdamsandJohnson,Americanmissionariesresidingunder

passport at Taiku, had some trouble over a contract for tiles to cover a house

they were preparing for themselves at that place in the name of a Korean.

The matter was brought to the attention of the local governor, who is

reported as being a man of conservative and rather independent ideas. Upon

the order of this governor the Korean writer employed by the Americans,

who had written the contract with the tile burner, was arrested, the police

forcibly entering the domicile of the Americans to make the arrest. The man

was taken before the governor and most inhumanly beaten. When the

Americans went to the governor’s yamen to inquire into the case, the

governor refused to see them, pronounced their official Korean passports

valuelesss and treated them with great indignity, compelling them to stand

in the courtyard with the rabble, and refusing to hear their explanations

though they were the principal parties to the transaction under discussion.

Mr. Adams telegraphed me upon December 5 and I sent him immediately a

long telegram en claire in which I stated that the governor was at fault and

that I would take up the matter with the Korean Government. I saw the

foreign minister as soon as possible and obtained from him an order for the

release of the Korean writer, Kim, which however did not reach Taiku for

some days, owing to a sudden break in the telegraph lines. The governor

had in the meantime presumably read while in transmission my telegram to

Mr. Adams, for he at once announced that his mother had died and left his

post to go into mourning. On December 17 I formally addressed the foreign

ministerasperinclosureNo.1,detailingthecaseuponinformation

received from the Rev. Mr. Adams by letter, and contending that the treaty

had been violated in four particulars. I saw the foreign minister several

times and insisted on his replying to my letter. On January 25 he replied by

quoting from a report of the acting governor, who was one of the chief

culprits. This reply was not satisfactory and was almost if not quite

discourteous. The principal points in this reply are included in a letter which

I prepared on February 1.

In 1890 a French priest was very badly treated at this same city of Taiku, his

property was stolen and he himself was imprisoned. This incident formed

the subject of a dispatch, No. 141, of April 2, 1891, from Mr. Heard, to

which Mr. Adee replied in No. 95 of May 19, 1891, instructing him to

demand equal rights and privileges for Americans. No such demand has had

to be made, as our people have kept “within the letter” of the treaties, but I

thought I might well use these instructions in this case. I wrote, therefore,

another letter, referred to above as having been prepared upon February 1,

replying to the chief points of the letter of the acting governor of Taiku and

inclosingamemorandumoftheFrenchcaseof1890–91.Inthis

communication I informed the foreign minister that I was compelled

reluctantly to fall back upon instructions my predecessor had received in

connection with the above-cited French case, and that in view of the fact

that the action of his Government had rendered practically inoperative the

treaty provisions restricting the residence of foreigners to the open ports, I

should inform my people that they were at liberty to live anywhere in the

interior where foreigners of other nationalities were sojourning. * * *

My object in writing this letter was that I might lay the whole matter before

His Majesty and have the position of the Americans at Taiku made more

comfortable. His Majesty has requested me to consult with him personally

before taking any decisive action with the foreign office. I wrote this letter,

therefore, with the intention of sending it informally to the Emperor to read

before delivering it. I felt certain that His Majesty would not permit it to go

officially to the foreign office, a surmise in which I proved to be correct

when the translation of the letter was returned me with the request that I

retain it for a few days while His Majesty had the foreign minister adjust

the matter to my satisfaction.

The foreign minister called upon me twice and arranged with me that he

should write a careful instruction to the governor of North Kyung Sang Do,

who had meantime succeeded the former one, and that he should send me a

polite and satisfactory letter on the subject. He offered to punish or dismiss

the chief culprit, Noh Chusa, but in discussing the matter he begged that I

wouldallowthenewgovernortoexaminefirstthesaidNoh.This

suggestion met with my approval, as I did not desire the man to be punished

without a hearing. I agreed to send the foreign minister an unofficial copy

of my withheld letter of February 1, that he might give it to the new

governor for his guidance.

On February 26 the foreign minister sent me, therefore, a letter, a translation

of which I inclose. It proved to be unsatisfactory, as it did not include a

copy of the instruction of the foreign minister to the newly appointed

governor of North Kyung Sang Province and said nothing in regard to the

examination and punishment of Noh Chusa. I had my interpreter return it in

person, with a verbal statement as to the omissions, and upon the same day

I received a satisfactory reply, a translation of which I inclose, handing me a

copy of the foreign minister’s instructions to the governor, a translation of

which instructions I inclose also.

I consider this settlement of the case to be satisfactory. The actual money

loss was made good finally by the local officials at Taiku. The Americans

themselves were not harmed, and for the violation of their treaty rights their

presence at Taiku is now officially recognized and sanctioned. I think they

will experience no further difficulty.

In the discussion of this case I have had to allude to the robbery by

highwaymen of the Americans near Taiku, which occurred on October 14

last, and which I have referred to in my No. 301, of November 25. This case

is also now in process of settlement. I have received one note from the

foreign minister upon the subject, and I think he will do all he can to secure

justice. I do not consider it necessary to ask for instructions in regard to the

matter, and I will report upon it at length when I have brought it to a

settlement or if I fail to obtain satisfaction.

I have, etc.,
HORACEN.ALLEN.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Allen to Pak Chai Soon, minister for foreign affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Seoul, Korea,December 17, 1900.

SIR: I have the honor to inform your excellency, that I am now in receipt of a

full report in detail from the Americans at Taiku with regard to the violation

of their domicile and arrest of their employee by the police under orders of

the governor of North Kyung Sang Province, in regard to which I saw your

excellency and secured your telegraphic instruction to the governor to

release the prisoner and stop proceedings pending a settlement of the case at

Seoul.

The report I have received is so long that I must content myself with

quoting extracts from it, touching only upon the main points.

In the first place I am entirely willing to admit that by the provisions of the

treaties the permanent residence of Americans in Korea must be at the ports

or places opened to trade or within the treaty limits thereof. At the same

time, by Article IV, section 6, of the British treaty (which is applicable to

the United States as well, by virtue of the “most-favored-nation clause” of

the treaty with the United States), it is expressly provided that Americans

may freely travel in the interior of Korea on passport, for purposes of

pleasure, trade, or the transport and purchase of goods. If my people are

thus able to travel and reside temporarily in the interior on passport, they

are certainly at liberty to secure food and lodging while so sojourning in the

country. I admit also the fact that, without special permission, they are not

at liberty to own real estate in the interior, and for that reason, when it has

become necessary to secure a dwelling house, owing to the absence of a

system of rentals in Korea, my people have always done this in the name of

a Korean, so as not to violate the treaty provisions. I have personal

knowledge that persons of other nationalities do not put themselves to this

inconvenience,butactuallyacquiresuchpropertyoutright,withthe

sanction of the local Korean authorities. This being well known to be the

case, I can not well forbid my people from following the harmless custom

of which the case in point is an illustration.

The whole matter of the residence of the Americans in the interior on

passport may be discussed separately, if you desire. I have alluded to it here

in this place as a preliminary to the following representation in regard to the

particular matter under discussion.

The facts in this case are that these Americans, Messrs. Adams and Johnson,

desiring to stop in Taiku on passport, and not being able to rent suitable

quarters, loaned money to a native Korean with which to erect a suitable

building for their accommodation.

I may mention that at this city there is a regular station of Japanese guards

under an officer who remain there permanently in connection with the

protectionoftheJapanesetelegraphline.ThereisalsooneFrench

establishment there, which has been maintained for some time and seems

not to be objected to by the local authorities.

There has been no opposition to the presence of the Americans at Taiku; in

fact, the people and most of the officials have seemed to welcome them. For

some reason they began to experience more or less official interference last

spring, which was currently rumored to be because the Americans did not

make it pecuniarily profitable for the officials to assist them. I have no

written proof of this latter, and my statement is based on verbal remarks

made to my people, which remarks I personally believe to be true.

This autumn the Americans experienced much trouble in buying some tiles

with which to cover the house they are about to occupy, and in trying to

enforce a contract they had made with a native tile burner, the matter came

to the ears of the governor. The tile burner, a man named Soh, seems to

have persuaded the governor that he himself was the aggrieved party, and

instead of interrogating the foreigners or their servants on the subject the

governor on November 25 sent his police into the quarters of the Americans

and arrested their employee, Kim Tek Yung, who had written the contract

for the tiles. The Americans tried to see the governor at once, but he

excused himself. They did see the prefect, and showed him the contract and

explained the circumstances; that Kim had only written from their dictation,

and was in no way responsible for the document; whereupon the prefect

discharged the man Kim.

On December 1, without any warning or permission, a policeman and a

runner from the governor’s yamen forced their way into the innermost

quarters occupied by the Americans in search of the man Kim, whom they

afterwards found and arrested. The next day he was beaten to compel him to

surrender the contract he had written for the tiles. He hadn’t it, and after

being beaten till he was all bleeding and exhausted he was thrown into jail.

As soon as possible next day the Americans called upon the governor, but

were refused admittance. They insisted that they would remain until the

governor should see them, whereupon he had them admitted. They offered

the governor the contract, for the possession of which he had so inhumanly

beaten their employee the day before, but he would not receive it from

them. He used them rudely and insultingly and told them that Kim was a

Korean and he would do with him as he pleased. He ridiculed their

passports when they called the next day and sent them in on his refusing to

see them. He sent the documents back, declaring that while Americans

usually carry such passports “they are of no value.” He refused to see the

Americans. This same day the governor again sent police to the quarters of

the Americans-to arrest another employee, but the man was out of town. My

people then telegraphed me, and I saw your excellency on the subject.

When this case was called for trial, the Americans attempted to be present,

as was their right, and also that they might give any evidence that might be

required. They were not admitted except upon great importunity and after

being kept outside for over half an hour. When admitted, they were

compelled to stand down in the courtyard with the coolies and runners. The

evidence, without anything from the Americans, was so damaging to Soh,

the tile burner, that the governor had him stripped and beaten. Instead,

however, of dismissing Kim on finding no evidence against him, he ordered

him bound and whipped for “writing the contract for the foreigners.” When

Kim was stripped his body was found to be so lacerated and his condition

so weak from his beating that even the governor was moved to let him off

because—to quote the governor’s language—“because of your pitiable

condition.” He was obliged to promise not to repeat the act of which he was

accused, namely, assisting foreigners in ordinary business transactions.

Your excellency will note that this prisoner was not released upon your

order, but before your telegram could reach Taiku. He was released in a

most pitiable condition because of the illegal application of torture to him

before his trial and in violation of the published laws of your country. No

case was proved against him and the other man was found to be at fault.

Furthermore, Kim would have been again beaten for serving an American

had he been able to stand another beating without dying in the act.

After the trial the governor did condescend to see the Americans and listen

to their case. The justice of their complaint against the tile burner was so

evident that he ordered the man to pay back to the Americans $120 out of

$210 remaining in his (Son’s) hands of an advance. He thus showed the

justice of the cause of the Americans even if he was unwilling to do them

full justice. He also admitted that he had arrested and inhumanly beaten

their servant for no cause whatever. The total money loss of the Americans

in this case has been $960.

But worse than all is the insult and humiliation caused by the governor’s

acts in thus violating the solemn treaty provisions. To quote from the letter

of the Rev. Mr. Adams: “Words fail me when I think of the humiliation and

indignities to which we have been subjected as Americans. To-day I asked

another employee to write a business letter for me and he refused, frankly

acknowledging that he was afraid to do so.”

Section 1 of Article IX of the British treaty says: “The British (American)

authorities and British (American) subjects in Korea shall be allowed to

employ Korean subjects as teachers, interpreters, servants, or in any other

lawfulcapacitywithoutanyrestrictiononthepartoftheKorean

authorities.”

In beating this servant of a foreigner for doing the latter’s bidding in

perfectly legal matters, and in forcing him at what was practically the point

ofdeathtopromisenottorepeatthe“offense,”thisgovernormost

flagrantly violated the above provision of the treaty upon which these

people are here in Korea.

By forcibly entering the quarters of the Americans without permission the

governor violated section 9 of Article III of the same treaty, which says:

(American) subject without his consent.” This term “premises” would apply

even to a room in a hotel which an American was for the time in possession

of. Not having permission from me, the governor should have asked the

consent of the Americans themselves. They would have assisted him in any

proper manner. He evidently did not want their consent, and cared not for

treaties any more than he did for passports.

Section 8 of Article III of the same treaty says: “In all cases, whether civil

or criminal, tried either in Korean or British (American) courts in Korea, a

properly authorized official of the plaintiff or prosecutor shall be allowed to

attend the hearing, and he shall be treated with the courtesy due his

position. He shall be allowed, whenever he thinks it necessary, to call,

examineandcross-examinewitnesses,andtoprotestagainstthe

proceedings or decision.”

I was not communicated with and my people were not allowed to be present

at the trial, and when they secured an entrance to the courtyard they were

treated with gross indignity. When they offered their official passports these

were treated with, great disdain and pronounced worthless, though they

were but recently obtained from your excellency’s office and bear the great

seal of the foreign office of Korea. The provisions of the treaty regarding

passports are as follows: Ibid., Article IV, section 6. “British (American)

subjects are also authorized to travel in Korea for pleasure or for the

purpose of trade, to transport and sell goods of all kinds, except books and

other printed matter disapproved of by the Korean Government, and to

purchase native produce in all parts of the country under passports which

will be issued by their consuls and countersigned or sealed by the Korean

local authorities. These passports, if demanded, must be produced for

examination in the districts passed through.” A penalty of a fine of $100 is

attached to this provision to be inflicted for the violation of the provision.

All Americans are provided with passports before going into the interior.

Now, a governor of one of the great provinces of the land pronounces them

worthless and declines to recognize them.

Imustrespectfullybutfirmlycallyourexcellency’sattentiontothe

unmistakable fact that this high officer of Korea has treated my people with

marked disrespect and insult. He has denied them their treaty rights in the

enjoyment of the services of Korean subjects. He has forcibly entered their

domicile and arrested their employee without their permission. He has

refused to see or hear them when trying a case in which they were the real

defendants, and he has violated your own published laws in inflicting

inhuman torture upon an innocent man, a servant of the Americans. By this

action he has published to the inhabitants that he is unfriendly to Americans

and has aroused a spirit that may well lead to serious results if not to the

endangering of the lives of my people in that region.

What I have related to you comes to me from two witnesses, both of whom

are American gentlemen of education and ability, and whose testimony I

have perfect faith in. I have not repeated to you the many Korean rumors

which have also come to me in this connection.

I shall be obliged to refer this matter in detail to my Government, and I

must ask for an early reply from your excellency with a statement as to

what sort of punishment shall be meted out to this official who has so

grossly violated solemn treaty rights, and what steps will be taken to show

to the natives of that region that the governor acted without the sanction of

the central Government.

MyGovernmentcannotpasslightlyoversuchabreachoftreaty

provisions, and I trust I may have some satisfactory proposition as to

measures to be taken for the satisfaction of this breach that I may report to

my Government when sending them the official account of the same.

I have, etc.,

HORACEN.ALLEN.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Allen to Pak Chai Soon, minister for foreign affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Seoul,February 1, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY:Ihavethehonortoacknowledgethereceiptofyour

excellency’s dispatch of January 25, replying to my dispatch of December

17, in which I complained of the treatment accorded certain Americans at

Taiku.

Your excellency’s letter is chiefly taken up with quoting a reply you have

received from the acting govornor of North Kuing Sang, to whom you

applied for a report, upon the sudden departure of the governor at the close

of the disturbances in question.

The acting governor devotes much of his letter to, first, an attempt to prove

that the Americans by going to Taiku and furnishing a Korean with the

money with which to build them a dwelling, which he falsely calls a church,

were violating the treaty; second, he appears to feel hurt by the accusation

repeated to my people by Koreans that this trouble was due to the fact that

they did not make it pecuniarily profitable for the officials to support them;

third, he accuses the Americans of falsehood in their statements as to the

violation of their domicile, the insulting manner in which they were left in

the courtyard of the yamen with the coolies, and the haughty manner in

which the governor refused to receive their passports; fourth, he tries to

prove that Kim, the employee of the Americans, was at fault in trying to

“force and threaten a poor fellow” in obtaining money from the tile burner;

fifth, he dismisses the whole statement of the Americans as “false and

without proof.” Your excellency’s letter, omitting the above-cited quotation,

is of little importance and is not satisfactory to me. You seem to disregard

my dispatch entirely and to base your few explanatory remarks wholly upon

the statements of the acting governor, whom I shall attempt shortly to show

to be a man whose unsupported word I can not accept.

In reply I will mention briefly the chief points brought up in the letter of the

acting governor, taking his last point first.

I assured your excellency that I had a written account of the matter of which

I complained as witnessed by two credible American clergymen. What

further proof can I be expected to bring? No Korean would dare risk

punishment from his local magistrate by giving testimony against the latter

and in favor of the foreigner. As I told you in my former dispatch, I base my

representations entirely upon the written statements I have. If you decline to

admit the truth of them and accept the challenge of this acting governor,

who is one of the culprits to bring proof, then I must take other measures to

secure redress.

The same holds true as to the third and fourth items. I claim and must insist

upon it that my people were insultingly treated; their passports were

scorned; they were long refused admission to a trial in which they were the

real defendants, and when admitted were treated with great indignity and

left standing with the rabble in the courtyard; their quarters were twice

forcibly entered by police from the governor’s yamen and their employee

was arrested and taken to prison, where he was most inhumanly beaten

before any evidence of guilt was found attached to him; when he was found

to be innocent he was ordered to be again beaten for serving the Americans,

but was excused when it was discovered that further torture would be likely

to result in his death; the governor forbade the people to serve or assist the

Americans, thus endangering their position and denying them their treaty

rights.Afterallthishadbeendoneandmypeoplehadopened

communication with me, the governor attempted to smooth the matter over

and have the Americans accept what they were denied by trial, in the way of

money payment, and failing in this he suddenly left his post on the plea that

his mother was dead.

That this is all true I must insist, upon the strength of the statement of these

two Americans. I have also the further evidence of the great anxiety of the

governor, who endeavored to induce the Americans to drop the matter, and,

failing in that, suddenly made what is considered by Koreans at Taiku an

excuse and left the place. I may add in explanation that, failing to find you

on the day upon which I was advised of the condition of affairs at Taiku, I

sent a long and very strongly worded telegram in plain characters to my

people, telling them that the governor’s acts, of which they complained,

were in gross violation of treaty rights, and that I should act vigorously in

the matter. It was this telegram which caused the governor to release the

man Kim and to attempt to smooth over the fact that he had already nearly

tortured him to death while awaiting a trial. I know definitely that my

telegram produced the release of Kim, because, on account of a break in the

telegraph line, your telegram to the governor did not reach Taiku until after

Kim had been released.

As to the second point of the acting governor’s letter, wherein he objects to

the suggestion that the use of money might have made matters move more

easily, I can not say more upon that without mentioning names, and by so

doing making it possible for him to abuse my informants. I will relate,

however, a circumstance which may well satisfy the gentleman and prove

the truth of his poetic quotation that “When the water goes out the stone

will appear.”

Somedaysaftertheaffairatthegovernor’syamentowhichthis

correspondence refers, namely, early, in January, a Korean, whose name I

shall not divulge, met the nephew of the tile burner Soh, who had been with

his uncle during the trial. Finding that Soh was disposing of all his rice

fields, this man inquired of the nephew why he was doing so. He was

informed that the sale was in order to raise $600 to pay off the debt he had

incurred at the trial—with a beating thrown in. When asked why he should

pay the officials three times as much as the amount of the original debt, he

said he had been induced to do so by the yamen runners, who had assured

him he should get off free and without cost. And yet the acting governor

complains that the man Kim was “trying to threaten and force this poor

fellow!”

If your excellency desires any further information upon this subject, I refer

you respectfully to the Noh Chusa, of whom I spoke privately to you and

whoyoumentionedinyourofficialdispatch.Icannowtellyou

authoritatively that this Noh Chusa, who appears to be the head Chusa, and

who has charge of the investigation of complaints and of the summoning

and examination of witnesses, is the official who actually superintended the

inhuman beating of Kim, and who afterwards came to the Rev. James E.

Adams from the governor (as he said) and passed an hour pleading the

governor’s case with the Americans in an attempt to induce them to accept

payment and say nothing of the matter. The nephew of Soh is reported as

having stated that Noh Chusa “ate $100 of the money.” Your excellency

claims that you have no proof against this man. I can only say that as the

man seems to be his own examiner and judge further proof will probably

continue to be lacking.

As to the first and most important part of this strange letter from the acting

governor, that relating to the so-called violation of the treaty by the

Americans, I may say simply that I have several times suggested to your

excellency that it would be wise not to bring this question to an issue, and I

am sorry that your present course forces me to declare myself.

Knowing the sensitiveness of the Korean Government in regard to this

matter, I have never encouraged my people to take up even temporary

residence in the interior. I could not forbid them, however, as the treaty

expressly provides for travel in the interior, and since you allow others to

reside in all parts of Korea, I must see that my people have equal rights with

those of other nationalities.

To be more explicit, as I informed you personally, your Government had

trouble in Taiku in 1890 and 1891 because of a similar outrage committed

upon a French priest. As a result of the settlement of this case, made in

March, 1891, among six clauses of an agreement arrived at, which the

records of your office will fully show, and of which I now inclose a full

memorandum, the right to domicile at that place was fully accorded the

French subject.

My predecessor referred this matter to my Government at the time it

occurred, and received explicit instructions, by virtue of the most-favored-

nation clause of article 14 of the treaty between the United States and

Korea, to demand the same on behalf of our own missionaries whenever the

occasion should arise.

To recapitulate, the facts are as follows: I have a written statement from two

responsible American clergymen of most harsh and unwarranted treatment

they have received at the hands of the governor and officials at Taiku,

whereby the treaty stipulations were violated in four separate provisions. I

wrote the matter fully to your excellency and have seen you personally in

regard to it. I made no official demand, but kindly asked you to give me

someevidenceofadesiretomakereparationfortheunfortunate

occurrence, so that in reporting the incident to my Government I might

show that your excellency’s Government had done its full duty.

Also upon October 11, 1900, at Mil-Yang, near Taiku, the wife and infant

child of one of the gentlemen cited in the present case, Dr. Johnson,

together with another American, the Rev. Mr. Sidebotham, who was Mrs.

Johnson’s escort, were set upon by robbers, some of whom were dressed in

the uniform of Korean soldiers and had guns. These Americans were

beaten, robbed, and otherwise grossly maltreated, but escaped with their

lives. I saw your excellency in regard to this matter at once, and I wrote you

officially upon November 24, and again upon December 15, citing in the

latter dispatch a quoted remark of one of the robbers to the effect that they

“had robbed no one but the Americans.” I have never been favored with a

reportuponthismatter,andmytwodispatchesabovecitedremain

unanswered in spite of the fact that I informed you in my dispatch of

December 15 that in the absence of satisfactory explanations I should be

compelled to hold the central Government responsible for this outrage,

since it was perpetrated by what seems to have been Korean soldiers, and

since the local authorities appear to have taken no steps of which I can learn

to bring the culprits to justice, or to secure the goods which were taken from

the Americans to the amount of some 600 yen, while, on the contrary, they

seem to condone any mere robbery of an American.

I intimated to you privately what you allude to in your dispatch of January

25, that as a basis of settlement I should be satisfied if you would secure the

issue of a decree to be published in that region instructing the people to

assist and support the Americans, who, I may add, were in more or less

distress, as I showed you in my dispatch of December 17, because the

governor had so intimidated the natives that they were afraid to render the

Americans the services which are allowed them by treaty; this decree to be

supported by the punishment of the persons chiefly implicated in the matter

complained of, and I particularly named the man Noh Chusa. I also asked

that the money losses be made good to my people.

Instead of granting my request, I am told that my people have sent me false

reports and I am censured for allowing them to go into the interior to live.

My propositions for a settlement are entirely ignored.

In my letter of December 17 I fully admitted that, according to treaty

stipulations, Americans were not allowed to own property in the interior, at

the same time taking pains to point out to your excellency the privileges of

travel and temporary residence in the interior accorded them by treaty, and I

showed you that through a desire to avoid giving offense my people, when

they found it necessary in the absence of hotels or any system of rentals to

secure a stopping place, were in the habit of doing so in the house of a

Korean, an inconvenience to which people of some other nationalities did

not put themselves.

I now beg to inform your excellency that the provision of the treaty

restricting the residence of foreigners to the open ports and immediate

vicinity has been practically set aside by your excellency’s Government in

the case of the French subject above referred to, as well as in other cases

that have come to my knowledge. You have allowed foreigners of other

nationalities to reside unmolested for a long time in most of the important

interior cities, and as you have forced me to declare myself on this subject

by your acceptance of the interested and false statement of the guilty

officials at Taiku, in opposition to that of the Americans, I must now inform

you that in lieu of a better settlement of this question I am compelled to fall

back upon the explicit instructions of my Government and to demand equal

rights for my people with those enjoyed by people of other nationalities.

In pursuance of this decision I shall inform Americans that they may freely

visit and reside in any Korean town wherein any other foreigners may be

sojourning, and I shall have to insist that the local authorities grant them

full protection.

Regretting that your excellency’s failure to treat my complaints with the

serious consideration they merit has compelled me to take a position which

I have been reluctant to assume, I have, etc.,H NA

[Subinclosure.]
Memorandum re difficulties of Americans at Taiku.
The following cases are detailed as bearing upon this case, as discussed

verbally with the foreign minister: September, 1890, M. Robert, a French

priest stopping at Taiku, was forced to seek assistance from the then

governor because of riotous Koreans. The governor refused to see or aid

him. M. Robert sent in his passport, which the governor tore up, and sent

the priest back to his home with a guard, as a prisoner. His house was found

to be looted and he had no food or clothes. A final settlement was made in

April, 1891, through the mediation of Bishop Mutel, who asked less than

the French representative demanded. The terms were as follows:

1. A dispatch of censure, drafted by Mr. de Plancy, was sent to the

governor.

2. A copy of this dispatch was sent to every governor in Korea as

a warning to them not to commit such acts.

3. The governor wrote an apology to Mr. de Plancy.

4. All petty officers and soldiers connected with the affair were

either banished or imprisoned.

5. An escort was given M. Robert to take him back to and protect

him in his home.

6. A royal proclamation was issued to the inhabitants of Kyung-

sang, warning them against a repetition of these acts.

All documents were first submitted to Mr. de Plancy. I believe the money

loss was also made good. (See Foreign Office Records, May 10, 1894.) The

servant of an American and an Englishman at Peng-yang was arrested and

beaten. He was released in a few days upon the verbal request of the British

and American ministers, and on July 26 the case was settled by the

punishment of the “chief offender” and the payment of the money loss,

$500. (See Foreign Office Records.)H NA

SEOUL,KOREA,December 26, 1900.

[Inclosure 3.—Translation.]
Pak Chai Soon, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to Mr. Allen.
FOREIGNOFFICE,
Seoul,February 26, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY: In regard to the matter of Taiku and the treatment by the

governor of Messrs. Adams and Johnson, American citizens, I have the

honor to say that I have already instructed the officer there to report the

entire matter, and I have written you what he reported, but that as the people

of a country friendly to Korea were treated discourteously by the former

governor, although he did not violate the treaty with intent, but through

ignorance, I am not in a position to say that his conduct was proper and

courteous toward the foreigners. Therefore I wrote a second instruction,

which I inclose herewith, to the officers at Taiku, quoting the clauses of the

treaty violated, rebuking them for their wrongdoing, and warning them that

they must hereafter in dealing with foreigners avoid a recurrence of such

conduct and do what is exactly right and proper toward them. I believe the

new governor and the other officials will act accordingly, and that the

Americans at Taiku will be undisturbed.

As to Noh Chusa, I will have the new governor, when he reaches his post,

investigate the case carefully and punish him properly.

I have, etc.,
PCS,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
[Subinclosure.—Translation.]
In dealing with foreigners business must be conducted on a basis of treaty

provisions.

Since the foreign treaty, article 4, paragraph 6, states that foreigners are

authorized to travel in Korea for purposes of trade under passport, therefore

any foreigner with a passport may so travel anywhere in the interior.

Although foreigners are not allowed to buy land, build houses, or engage in

trade except within the ports declared open to foreign commerce, it is

impossible to forbid foreign travelers from residing temporarily in the

houses of Koreans.

Should natives accused of wrongdoing or summoned as witnesses refuse to

obey the instructions of the local authorities, trusting that foreigners will

protect them in their disobedience, as Koreans ought not to trust, yet they

may not be arrested if they are in hiding in the dwelling of a foreigner.

In article 3, paragraph 9, it is stated, viz:

“If a Korean subject who is charged with an offence against the laws of his

country takes refuge on premises occupied by a foreigner, the consul of the

country to which the foreigner belongs, on receiving an application from

the Korean authorities, shall take steps to have such person arrested and

handed over to the latter for trial. But without the consent of the proper

consularauthoritynoKoreanofficershallenterthepremisesofany

foreigners without his consent.”

The interior is not like a port, and the local authorities are unable to inform

a consul of a contemplated arrest, but the owner of a house must be

informed before any Korean within a house is arrested.

Although an inn in which a foreigner stops while traveling can not be called

a dwelling, yet may not the habitation in which a foreigner stops for some

time be designated a dwelling?

The arrest of Kim Dok Kun in the dwelling of the American teacher has

caused trouble which is due entirely to ignorance of the provisions of the

treaty.

When foreigners request an audience they must at once be received and

treated politely. But are you not insulting and treating them rudely when

you leave them standing in the courtyard? In your report you admitted that

you permitted them to be present at the trial and afterwards received them

in your office, but said nothing in regard to having forced them to stand in

the courtyard. By failing to admit this fact, I can see what occurred on the

occasion. You did not allow the Americans to attend the trial; you sent

police to enter their homes to search for their servant; you did not treat them

politely, and you forced them to wait in the courtyard. If this is your method

of conducting business (with foreigners) how do you expect to avoid the

case becoming a difficult one? In trying a case you must be impartial to

both sides and endeavor to be entirely fair. Although in the employ of

foreigners, the man arrested was a Korean. Had you treated him exactly as

you treat other Koreans this difficulty would not have arisen.

In short, you should first have obeyed the provisions of the treaty. As to

details of the suitable manner in which to direct the affair I can not counsel

you. Foreigners must certainly be politely treated, and cases must be

decided fairly and upon the basis of the treaty provisions. If you do this no

contention will arise between natives and foreigners. Therefore, I instruct

you to act in the manner I indicate and to instruct the magistrates under you

to act likewise.
PAKCHAISOON,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Fifth year Kwang Mu, February 26.
Not printed.

[Document 336]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Allen.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 18, 1901.

No. 166.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 318, of the 5th

ultimo, reporting the violation of the domicile of Messrs. Adams and

Johnson, American missionaries, at Taiku, Korea, by Korean policemen

acting under the orders of the governor of North Kyung Sang Do, in order

to arrest a Korean writer of the missionaries.

The facts of the case as stated in your dispatch and its inclosures are as

follows: Messrs. Adams and Johnson desiring to stop temporarily at Taiku,

Korea, and not being able to rent suitable quarters, lent money to a Korean

with which to erect a building for their accommodation. In buying some

tiles to cover the house, and in trying to enforce a contract which they had

made (through their native employee) with a Korean tile burner, the matter

came to the ears of the governor. The tile burner persuaded the governor

that he (the tile burner) was the aggrieved party, and the governor, without

interrogating the Americans or their servant on the subject, sent his police,

who forcibly entered the domicile of the Americans and arrested their

Korean employee, who was taken before the governor and inhumanly

beaten. The Americans went to the governor’s yamen to inquire into the

case, but the governor refused to see them, pronounced their official Korean

passports valueless and treated them with indignity, compelling them to

stand in the courtyard with the coolies and runners, and refusing to hear

their explanations.

The Americans having reported the case to you, you saw the Korean foreign

minister and obtained an order for the release of the Korean employee of

the Americans. It seems that at the trial of the case before the governor, the

justice of the complaint of the Americans against the tile burner was so

evident that the governor ordered him to pay back to them $120 out of $210

of an advance remaining in his hands. The governor also admitted that he

had arrested and inhumanly beaten their servant for no cause whatever.

In presenting the matter to the foreign minister you contended that there had

been violation of treaty in the following particulars:

1. Article IV, section 6, of the British treaty with Korea (which by

virtue of the most-favored-nation clause of the treaty between

Korea and the United States is applicable to Americans) expressly

provides that British subjects may freely travel in the interior of

Koreaonpassports,forpurposesofpleasure,trade,orthe

transport and purchase of goods. You contended that if Americans

are thus able to travel and reside temporarily in the interior on

passports, they are at liberty to secure food and lodging while so

sojourning in the country. You admitted that they are not at

Liberty, without special permission, to own real estate in the

interior, but stated that whenever it became necessary to secure a

dwelling house, owing to the absence of a system of rentals in

Korea, they have secured dwelling houses in the name of a

Korean, so as not to violate the treaty provisions. You asserted

thatyouhadpersonalknowledgethatpersonsofother

nationalities do not put themselves to this inconvenience, but

actually acquire such property outright, with the sanction of the

local Korean authorities; that this being well known to be the

case,youcouldnotforbidAmericansfromfollowingthe

harmless custom referred to above.

2. Section 1 of Article IX of the British treaty says: “The British

(American) authorities and British (American) subjects in Korea

shallbeallowedtoemployKoreansubjectsasteachers,

interpreters, servants, or in any other lawful capacity, without any

restriction on the part of the Korean authorities.” You contended

that in beating this servant of a foreigner for doing the latter’s

bidding in perfectly legal matters, and in forcing him, at what was

practicallythepointofdeath,topromisenottorepeatthe

“offense,” the governor most flagrantly violated the above treaty

provisions.

3. You also contended that by forcibly entering the quarters of the

Americans without permission the governor violated section 9 of

Article III of the same treaty, which says: “But without the

consent of the proper British (American) consular authority, no

Korean officer shall enter the premises of any British (American)

subject without his consent.”

4. Section 8 of Article III of the same treaty says: “In all cases,

whethercivilorcriminal,triedeitherinKoreanorBritish

(American) courts in Korea, a properly authorized official of the

plaintiff or prosecutor shall be allowed to attend the hearing, and

he shall be treated with the courtesy due his position. He shall be

allowed, whenever he thinks it necessary, to call, examine, and

cross-examine witnesses, and to protest against the proceedings or

decision.” You stated that you were not communicated with, nor

were the Americans allowed to be present at the trial, and when

they secured an entrance to the courtyard they were treated with

gross indignity.

You presented the matter in writing to the Korean foreign minister, and

asked for an early reply, “with a statement as to what sort of punishment

shall be meted out to this official who has grossly violated solemn treaty

rights, and what steps will be taken to show to the natives of that region that

the governor acted without the sanction of the Central Government.”

The foreign minister replied, stating that the Americans were not treated

courteously and that the former governor had violated the treaty through

ignorance, and not with intent; that he (the foreign minister) had instructed

the officials at Taiku, quoting the clauses of the treaty violated, rebuking

them for their wrongdoing and warning them that they must thereafter, in

dealing with foreigners, avoid a recurrence of such conduct and do what is

exactly right and proper toward them.

This being unsatisfactory to you, as it did not include a copy of the

instruction of the foreign minister, and said nothing in regard to the

examination and punishment of the guilty official, you accordingly returned

the communication of the foreign minister with a verbal statement as to

together with a copy of the foreign minister’s instructions to the governor.

This reply of the foreign minister yields fully all the points made by you.

You conclude your dispatch with the statement that the actual money loss to

the Americans was made good by the local officials; that the Americans

themselves were not harmed, and that for the violation of their treaty rights

their presence in Taiku is now officially recognized and sanctioned, and that

you think they will experience no further difficulty.

I may say, in passing, that the British treaty does not appear to allow

missionaries to travel or reside in the interior of Korea (for the purpose of

preaching or teaching), but Minister Heard, in his dispatch No. 141, of April

2, 1891, in the Robert case; states that the French treaty with Korea omits

the words (contained in the English treaty) “for purposes of pleasure,

trade,” etc., and he asserts that this was done with a view of covering the

action of their missionaries. This view was acquiesced in by Korea in the

Robert case.

The Department approves your treatment of the case, which is characterized

by firmness and good sense.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 337]
Mr. Allen to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Seoul, Korea,June 7, 1901.

No. 359, Diplomatic]

SIR: Replying to your dispatch No. 166, of April 18, the receipt of which on

June 1 I have already acknowledged, in which I note with satisfaction that

my conduct in regard to the matter of the violation of the domicile of

Americans at Taiku met with the approval of the Department, I now have

the honor to acquaint you with the sequel to that action.

In the first place, on May 8 I received a complaint from the Korean foreign

office that two Americans, Reverend Whittemore and Dr. Sharrocks, were

erectinghousesatSunChun,inNorthPengyangProvince,nearthe

northwestern border of Korea. (See inclosure 1.) I at once called upon these

missionaries for a report on the subject, and received a reply on May 26

stating that the property in question was held in the name of certain

Koreans, and that the presence of the Americans had not been objected to.

(See inclosure 2.) On receipt of this report I addressed the minister for

foreign affairs, as per inclosure 3, taking much the same ground that I had

taken in regard to the Taiku matter.

On May 28 I received a long personal note from Rev. James E. Adams, of

Taiku, informing me that the governor of North Kyung-sang Province

disclaimed all knowledge of the instructions which the minister for foreign

affairs had informed me he had issued to him, a copy of which instructions I

forwarded to you in my No. 318 of March 5, to which your No. 166 is a

reply. The governor further declared to Mr. Adams that he had never heard

of the matter at all until mentioned by Mr. Adams. He had also had the

helper of the Americans rearrested, this time upon an ancient charge against

the man’s uncle of having misappropriated public moneys. The governor

frankly said he would “probably kill him.” This helper is the same one

whose arrest and inhuman beating caused the previous correspondence in

regard to the residence of Americans at Taiku.

I therefore addressed the minister for foreign affairs on May 29, as per

inclosed copy (inclosure 4), citing the circumstances and leaving it for him

to determine where lay the fault for the miscarriage of instructions. I also

took the opportunity to forward as an inclosure my withheld dispatch of

February 1, a copy of which I sent you with my No. 318 of March 5. I said

to him that I would not entertain further complaints of the mere residence of

Americans in the interior on passport such as that to which my inclosure

No. 4 is a reply.

* * * * * * *

When calling upon me on the 3d instant the foreign minister seemed greatly

chagrined over this matter, of which he had little to say except that he had

issued the instructions and was now reissuing them in stronger form.

It may be difficult for the Department to understand how such a miscarriage

could occur. The conditions, however, are much the same as those that exist

in China. The country officials purchase their offices at a heavy cost in

money paid in advance. They have not a very firm tenure of office and must

make good their outlay as soon as possible, and at the same time they must

instructions come from the palace and indicate that a noncompliance may

result in the loss of position. This governor, who is a favorite of the

Emperor, doubtless counted upon his court influence to carry him through,

and seeing a good opportunity to make money from harrying the industrious

native Christians, saw fit to disclaim any knowledge of the instructions. * *

*

My new representations may do some good, but at least the question of the

residenceof AmericansatTaikuisfavorablysettledbytheCentral

Government, which is perhaps all that could be asked. Each difficulty will

have to be treated as it arises.

In your No. 166, to which this is a reply, you refer to the fact that the

French treaty is more liberal in regard to missionaries than is the British

treaty which I quoted. I did not care to bring up the question of missionaries

particularly, as it had not been mentioned by the Koreans. The presence of

our people in the interior is not complained of on the ground of their

missionary character, and until they bring forward this question I have

thought best to diregard it. I will bear in mind your valuable suggestion in

regard to the liberality of the French treaty in this respect, and use it when

the necessity arises.

I have, etc.,
HORACEN.ALLEN.
P. S.—Since writing the above I have received a reply from the minister for

foreign affairs, attempting to explain the failure in the execution of the

instructions issued to the governor of North Kyung-sang. The letter is very

polite and entirely acceptable. I had expected no reply, since the minister

had spoken of the matter to me in the course of conversation. I inclose a

translation of this reply from the foreign minister.
H. N. A.
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]
Mr. Che Yung Ha, acting minister for foreign affairs, to Mr. Allen.
district of North Pengyang Province saying that two Americans, Messrs.

Whittemore and Sharrocks, were buying land and building houses there;

that he was trying to stop them from doing so, but they refused to take his

word, and that he wanted me to write to you about it and to ask you to stop

them.

I have the honor to say that the buying land and building houses by

foreigners outside of the limit of 10 li out of the foreign settlement is clearly

not allowed in the treaty, and now these Americans are buying land and

building houses in the interior in violation of the treaty, and the local

authority has the right and duty to stop them, but they would not listen.

I trust your excellency will see about the matter and stop them from doing

so.

I have, etc.,
CHEYUNGHA,
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Moffett to Mr. Allen.
PENGYANG,KOREA,May 20, 1901.

DEARMR.ALLEN: Your letter of May 8, concerning affairs at Sun Chun in North

Pengyang Province, was received a few days ago. I immediately requested

Mr. Whittemore and Dr. Sharrocks, who are now here, to prepare for you a

statement of the case, which statement I now send herewith.

My own understanding of the case is that they held the property in Sun

Chun, just as we held the property here in Pengyang for five or six years, in

the name of three Korean trustees. For full two years after purchase of the

property and practical residence there (on passport) no question was raised.

It seems that the new governor, not the magistrate nor the people, has raised

the question.

I think nothing in the situation violates the treaty, but with the full

explanation before you you will be able to judge as to that. I would mention

the fact that the French live in the interior, that a French priest built a house

which he occupies in a village in Sook Chun County not to mention many

other places, and that Japanese live for long periods in the interior, that one

has been and probably now is living in An Ju.

Also it may be well for me to state that the article which appeared in the

Seoul newspaper is not a correct statement of facts.

I think the essentially important fact in the case is now before you. Of

coarse we shall be glad to give you the very fullest and detailed statement in

reply to any questions you may ask. I trust the situation may not give you

much trouble and that nothing may arise which will necessitate a change in

our plans for the welfare of the work in and around Sun Chun.

With kindest regards, etc.,
SAMUELA.MOFFETT.
[Subinclosure.]
Statement as to the Sun Chun property.
Property was purchased for our use early in December, 1898. From the year

1898 to the present land has been purchased when a desirable piece was for

sale, being bought openly and undisputedly for our use, and always before

witnesses.

Taxes have been paid regularly since 1899.

The largest purchase, comprising nearly two-thirds of all that is held for us,

was made from the village school association, composed of about one

hundred men, many of whom are among the most influential citizens of

town. This purchase was made in October, 1900, and our intention to build

upon the site was known to those who sold it to us. We learned recently that

three weeks previous to this purchase the governor, who at that time was

visiting Syen Chyun, had spoken to the magistrate concerning our being

there.

At that time, October, 1900, Messrs. Whittemore and Sharrocks called upon

the magistrate then in the office, who entertained them with courtesy and

respect, and in speaking of Americans residing in Korea, said there were

certainly no objections to Americans coming into their country to live, for

they came with no intention of doing harm either to people or government,

in which respect they differed from the people of some nations. A residence

has been occupied by Mr. Whittemore since January, 1899. Taxes have

always been paid by the occupant.

During the time there have been three magistrates in office at Syen Chyun,

not one of whom has uttered a word of objection to our being there,

although opportunity for it has been given them by personal calls, etc.

Early in February, 1900, we began active preparation for the erection of a

suitable house in which we could stay while in Syen Chyun, as Mr.

Whittemore has occupied his house since January, 1899.

In March the lumber and other material began to arrive on the site, and from

that time to the present work has been in active process.

Up to date not a word has been said to us by any Korean official opposing

or calling in question our action, nor, so far as we know, have our Korean

employees received any complaint from them.

We did hear in April, by way of rumor, that the governor had inquired of the

magistrate concerning our doings and our names. We at once sent our cards

over with messages that we would be pleased to call upon him if he was at

leisure. Answer came back that he was busy.

We have used every care to win for ourselves a good name among the

town’s people, and have every reason to feel gratified at our success.

Even the present magistrate was reported to have said that our building a

house was a good work, and he had no objection to that, but tearing down

the people’s homes was not a good thing and must be stopped. We had not

destroyed a single house, but Mr. Whittemore’s kangs had been pulled

down and replaced by new ones. Since this reported utterance of the

magistrates an old vacated house (land and improvements valued at 7 yen)

had been carried off by the Koreans with our consent.
AWS

[Inclosure 3.]
Mr. Allen to Pak Chai Soon, minister for foreign affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Seoul, Korea,May 27, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY: During your absence on sick leave I received a letter from

Acting Minister Che Yung Ha, No. 27, of May 7, in regard to two

Americans, Messrs. Whittemore and Sharrocks, who were said to be buying

land and building houses at Sun Chun, in the province of North Pengyang,

the magistrate of that place having reported that he had tried to prevent

them from so doing, but that they would not heed his word.

I have the honor to inform you that at once upon the receipt of your

predecessor’s letter I called upon the Americans in question for a report on

the matter. I now have this report, and am able to inform you as follows:

Americans do not own any land in their own names at Sun Chun. For some

yearsAmericanmissionaries,whosepermanentresidencemaybe

considered as at Pengyang, have been traveling to and residing temporarily

in the town of Sun Chun, where they seem to have had the good will and

friendship of the people and the officials. Since 1898 they have secured the

use of land and houses in the name of certain Koreans, and are now about to

improve this property for their entertainment and use. They have never been

informed by the magistrate or other official that there was any objection to

their so doing; in fact they have been led to suppose that their presence was

desired rather than objected to.

No official has spoken to them or tried to have them stop the improvements

of the property. When the governor of North Pengyang, Ye Toh Chai, was at

Sun Chun some time ago, Messrs Whittemore and Sharrocks sent him their

cards and asked to be allowed to come to him for the purpose of paying

their respects, but they received a reply saying that the governor was busy.

After this they heard some rumors among the people that the governor was

not pleased with their presence, but they received no complaint, direct or

implied.

Now chat the matter has been brought to me, I can only quote from my

letter of December 17, No. 253, regarding the presence of Americans at

Taikoo.

“I am entirely willing to admit that, by the provisions of the treaties, the

permanent residence of Americans in Korea must be at the ports or places

opened to trade, or within the treaty limits thereof. At the same time, by

Article IV, section 6, of the British treaty (which is applicable to the United

States as well, by virtue of the most favored-nation clause of the treaty with

the United States) it is expressly provided that Americrns may freely travel

in the interior of Korea on passport for purposes of pleasure, trade, or the

purchase and transport of goods. If my people are thus able to travel and

reside temporarily in the interior on passport, they are certainly at liberty to

secure food and lodging while sojourning, in the country. I admit also the

fact, that without special permission they are not at liberty to own real

estate in the interior, and for that reason, when it has become necessary to

secure a dwelling house, owing to the absence of a system of rentals in

Korea, my people have always done this in the name of a Korean, so as not

to violate the treaty provisions. I have personal knowledge that persons of

other nationalities do not put themselves to this inconvenience, but actually

acquire such property outright, with the sanction of the local Korean

authorities. This being the case, I can not well forbid my people from

following the harmless custom of which the case in point is an illustration.”

I trust I have made it clear to your excellency that my people have not

violated the treaty provisions; they have not bought property in the interior

in their own names; they have not refused to listen to the objections of the

Korean officials; they are on friendly terms with the local officials, and they

tried to pay their respects to the governor, but were refused admission to his

presence.

I may add that Mr. Whittemore is a teacher, and I know he has refused to

takepartincontroversiesofhisKoreanfriendswiththeofficials,

counseling them to obey the laws of the land in all particulars. Dr.

Sharrocks is a medical man, whose gratuitous ministrations are for the

benefit of the people. The labors of these men for the good of the people

seem to be appreciated by the people themselves, and in some countries

similar services are paid for in money, while in this case they are freely

given without cost.

While I might base these representations upon even stronger grounds, I

think this will be sufficient to convince your excellency that no wrong has

been done and that none is intended by my people. I hope the matter may be

dropped.

I take this opportunity, etc.,
HORACEN.ALLEN.
[Inclosure 4.]
Mr. Allen to Pak Chai Soon, minister for foreign affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Seoul, Korea,May 29, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY: Referring to my dispatch, No. 253, of December 17 last,

regarding the ill-treatment of Americans at Taiku, in North Kyung Sang

Province, I beg to remind your excellency that on February 1 last I wrote

you a long dispatch detailing the whole case, showing how my people had

been wronged and their treaty rights violated, and intimating that as I had

been unable to obtain satisfaction for these acts of the officials at Taiku, I

wouldbecompelledtofallbackuponinstructionsissuedbymy

Government to my predecessor, and demand equal privileges for Americans

in the matter of residence in the interior as are enjoyed by people of other

nationalities,whichwouldamounttoarecognitionofthepractical

nullification by usage and established custom of the treaty provision against

residence in the interior.

When this letter was seen by His Majesty your excellency visited me and

assured me of your firm intention to adjust this matter in a manner

satisfactory to me. As a result of promises you made to me in the presence

of your vice-minister, I agreed to withdraw this dispatch upon receipt of a

copy of instructions you said you would send to the new governor of North

Kyung Sang. I left with you the Chinese translation of my dispatch that you

might hand it to the new governor for his instruction.

On February 26 you wrote me a dispatch announcing that you had issued

instructions to the Taiku officials, rebuking them for their conduct, warning

them against a repetition of the same, and ordering the arrest and trial of the

man Noh Chusah. You sent me a copy of these instructions, which, being

satisfactory to me, I withdrew my dispatch of February 1.

I have now received a report from the Americans at Taiku, dated May 18.

They say that as the new governor, YeYou In, had been in Taiku for over a

month and they had heard nothing of the matter in question, they called

upon him to pay their respects and to make inquiries. The governor

informed them that he had never heard of the matter until that moment. He

told them to say to me that he “had no instructions from the minister for

foreign affairs on the subject; that he had heard nothing of it before coming

down, and that my speaking of it was the first he had heard.”

I am also informed that nothing had been done to the man Noh Chusah,

whom you at first offered to punish severely and later agreed, with my

consent, to have his case promptly and carefully investigated first.

I now learn, also, that the man Kim Tek Yung, whose arrest and inhuman

beating caused the previous correspondence to which this refers, has again

been arrested, this time on the charge that an uncle of his in former times

made illegal use of Government funds. The new governor frankly remarked

to the Americans in regard to this man Kim, that he “would probably kill

him.” I need not go into the details of this arrest. The charges seem to be of

an absurdly trivial nature, and I must conclude that they are brought by the

underlings of the yamen in order to vent their spleen upon the man for

having secured foreign intervention last December.

It is very humiliating to me to have to address your excellency in this

manner and to be forced to the conclusion that I have been trifled with and

that your solemn official agreements have been disregarded or not carried

out.

Under the circumstances, I can only send a full official report to my

aGovernment on the subject and hand you my recalled dispatchof February

1 as an inclosure to this. I do so hand you that dispatch herewith.

I am compelled to abide by the resolution mentioned in that dispatch and

put into execution the instructions already received from my Government. I

shall not entertain any more complaints in regard to the mere residence of

Americans in the interior, on passport, such as that to which my dispatch of

May 27 is a reply.

I have, etc.,
HORACEN.ALLEN.
[Inclosure 5.—Translation.]
Pak Chei Soon, minister for foreign affairs, to Mr. Allen.
FOREIGNOFFICE,June 7, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of

the date of June 1 in regard to the matter of the Americans being ill treated

in Taiku by the Korean officers.

I beg to inform you that I instructed the new governor of North Kiung Sang

Province several times, and I handed him the copy of the translation of your

letter which you handed me in my office and an instruction of mine when

he started for his post, and I thought he would manage it very carefully and

properly in accordance with what I instructed him.

I am much astonished to hear that he said to the Americans that he had

never heard of the matter at all. I am wondering, although it is improbable,

that he may have lost all his papers.

I have instructed again the governor to treat the Americans very nicely and

politely, so there will not be any look of cool treatment, and that he must

investigate into the matter in question very carefully, and manage it fairly

and justly.

I have, etc.,
PAKCHEISOON,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
aPrinted ante, page 392[Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 335].

[Document 338]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Allen.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 24, 1901.

No. 175.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 359, of the 7th

ultimo, on the subject of the residence of American missionaries in the

interior of Korea.

In reply I have to say that the Department shares your views that it is

inexpedient to encourage American citizens to reside in the remote interior,

and that each individual case should be dealt with according to its facts as it

arises.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 339]
Mr. Allen to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Seoul, Korea,August 20, 1901.

No. 392.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 359, of June 7, in regard to the failure of

the Korean Government to carry out its instructions in regard to the matter

of the settlement of the case of the violation of the domicile of Americans at

Taiku, I now have the honor to hand you inclosed a copy of a letter I have

received from the Rev. James E. Adams, of Taiku, in which the writer

shows that upon receipt of new instructions as a result of my interview with

the minister for foreign affairs, mentioned in above-cited dispatch, the

governor at Taiku called him (Mr. Adams) in and began an investigation of

the matter.

The governor upbraided the official who had been chiefly instrumental in

causing trouble to the Americans, dismissed him from his office, and

ordered him to personally reimburse the Americans for their money loss.

The man, with his accomplice, fled to escape arrest and they have not yet

been captured.

This action on the part of the governor will have a most salutary effect, and

I anticipate no more trouble to the Americans in that locality.

I have, etc.,
H NA
[Inclosure.]
TK August 6, 1901.

MYDEARMR.ALLEN: I have been waiting a long time in order to see the end of

our business before writing to you, but as the end seems indefinitely in the

future, through the principal offender having run away, I have concluded to

write anyway. After your last communication to the foreign office they at

once sent down here and ordered the business settled up. The governor

called me in and asked me to give a full account of the whole affair, which I

did. He then called to Noh Chussa and questioned him. Noh denied taking

any bribe in the case. The governor upbraided him for treating us as he did

in the administration of the case; said that he was unfit for his office if he

knew no more than that about how to treat foreigners who were here under

definite treaty rights, and then dismissed him from his office. He further

adjudicated that, as Noh had been the instrument, either through his

ignorance of law or his corruption by bribes, which, was immaterial, of the

maladministration of justice and our failure to be reimbursed in our losses,

and as the tile burner, Soh, now was poor and unable to pay the bill, Noh

himself should reimburse us for the full amount for which we had sued Soh.

He issued an order for the arrest of Soh, in order to find out more definitely

about the bribery charge, and closed the case. That night both Soh and Noh

fledthecountry:Ihaveheardnothingmoreofthemattersince.I

understand that Noh went to Seoul and that the governor had dispatched a

policeman after him. So far as the governor’s adjudication of the case was

concerned, we could not have asked for more.

Hoping to see you personally in a month or so and then more sufficiently

thank you for the trouble you have taken in pushing this matter to a

conclusion, I remain, etc.,JAS.E.ADAMS.

[Document 340]
The Emperor of Korea to the President.
[Telegram.]

SEOUL,September 13, 1901.

The news of your excellency’s wound had greatly grieved and shocked us.

We wait with concern the news of your complete recovery. We assure your

excellency of our very warm friendship and deep anxiety.
YIHIUNG,
Emperor of Korea.

[Document 341]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Allen.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

ConveythroughforeignofficehighestappreciationoftheEmperor’s

solicitude and condolence.
HAY.

[Document 342]
Mr. Smith to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Monrovia,October 31, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies of official correspondence

between this legation and the Liberian Government, resulting from the

death of the Hon. William McKinley, late President of the United States.

I have, etc.,
OWENL.W.SMITH.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Smith to Mr. Gibson, acting secretary of state of Liberia.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Monrovia,October 23, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit to you the fact that intelligence has this day

reached me through the proper official channel too sadly confirming the

report of the attempted assassination of President McKinley at the Pan-

American Exposition, Buffalo, N. Y., September 6, 1901, which attempt

subsequently terminated in his death on September 14, 1901, at Buffalo, N.

Y. The honored remains were duly and appropriately interred at Canton,

Ohio, the home of the late President, September 18, 1901.

I have, etc.,
OLWS
[Inclosure 2.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Monrovia,October 23, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of even date,

informing me of the death of President William McKinley, information of

which has this day reached you. In reply I have to say that my Government

sincerely and deeply regret that the President of the United States should

have come to an untimely grave by the hand of a ruthless assassin, and as a

nation we deeply sympathize with the American nation, our foster mother.

With sentiments of the deepest sympathy, I have, etc.,W.V.GIBSON,
Acting Secretary of State.

Mexico
Contents

[Document 343]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Mc Creery.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 18, 1901.

No. 509.]

SIR: I inclose herewith for your information a copy of a petition from the

Chamber of Commerce of El Paso, Tex., praying that this Government take

suchmeasuresasmaybedeemedproperandeffectivetosecureto

American citizens arrested and imprisoned in Mexico on the charge of

criminal negligence in causing railway wrecks the protection of their

personal and civil rights guaranteed by the Constitution.

* * * * * * *

ThematterofthesearrestsofAmericancitizensshouldhaveyour

consideration, and may be the occasion of friendly conversation with Señor

Mariscal, with the view to ameliorating the condition which appears to

exist, and especially to securing the prompt disposition of the cases as they

arise, and the speedy release of any railway employee not liable, on ample

probable cause, to be held on a criminal charge; and, even in the latter case,

the proceedings should be expedited in every possible way and with the

fullest opportunity for defense.

A full report from you on the subject will have the Department’s attentive

consideration.

I am, etc.,
JH
[Inclosure.]

ELPASO,TEX.,April 11, 1901.

SIR:Ihavethehonortotransmitthefollowingresolutionsadopted

unanimouslybytheboardofdirectorsoftheElPasoChamberof

Commerce April 10, 1901: Whereas it is a common method of judicial

procedure in Mexico, in cases of accident involving fatal or serious injury

to Mexican citizens in connection with the running of railway trains, to

immediatelyarrestandimprisonAmericancitizens,employedas

conductors or engineers or in other responsible positions on such railways;

and Whereas American citizens thus arrested are in many cases held in

prisonfordays,weeks,ormonthswithoutreasonableandsufficient

opportunity to communicate with friends, or to take other measures for

securing fair and speedy judicial investigation of the charges preferred

against them; and Whereas such procedure is a substantial denial of the

right of American citizens to protection in the lines of employment in which

they have been permitted, and even encouraged, by the Government of

Mexico to engage: Therefore be itResolved, That the El Paso Chamber of

Commerce respectfully petitions the United States Government to take such

measures as may be deemed proper and effective to secure to American

citizens under such circumstances as above set forth the protection of their

personal and civil rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States

and recognized in civilized countries generally as reasonable and just.

I have, etc.,
ERNESTE.RUSSELL,Secretary.

[Document 344]
Mr. Clayton to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Mexico,June 27, 1901.

No. 998.]

document, viz, a copy of certain resolutions passed by the Chamber of

Commerce of El Paso, Tex., * * * relating to the matter of arrests of

American conductors and engineers employed on railways in Mexico, for

responsibility in railway accidents.

* * * * * * *

Referring again to the general question, I called Señor Mariscal’s attention

to the strength and influence of the different railway men’s organizations in

the United States, and that in my judgment they were agitating the question

in the interests of the members of their orders who had, in some instances,

been, subjected to great hardships. I remarked that it was not for me to

questionthewisdomoftheMexicanlawunderwhicharrestsand

imprisonments were made; that I had, in some instances in the past, notably

the Turner case, complained of the apparently unnecessary delay in bringing

the persons accused of such offenses to final trial. I said it would be an act

of great satisfaction to my Government and be highly appreciated by it if

his Government would adopt some plan by which, in the future, cases of

this character would be disposed of promptly by the courts.

Mr. Mariscal replied that he had in mind the issuance of a circular letter to

the different judicial officers under whose jurisdiction such cases would

come upon the subject; that he would give the matter his very careful

attention with the view of bringing about the expedition of such cases and

the prevention of just causes for complaint.

* * * * * * *

For the purpose of furnishing data to enable me to report upon the general

subject of the arrest and imprisonment, in Mexico, of employees on

railways, engaged in the movement of trains, I directed Secretary Heimké to

carefully examine the records of this legation, during my incumbency of

over four years, and report to me each case that has been brought to the

attention of the legation during that time, with information as to the

employmentoftheaccused,dateofcomplaint,dateandplaceof

imprisonment, accusation, when reported to the foreign office and State

Department, date of final trial, and final action upon the part of the courts.

This information Mr. Heimké has furnished in the succinct and well

aprepared tabulated statement,herewith inclosed.

From this statement I find that, during the period referred to, only twelve

complaints have been made to this legation, either directly by the person

seeking its good offices, or by other in his behalf. The facts concerning the

arrest, and action of the court, in each case, are as follows:

Anderson was not imprisoned, but only detained for a short time, and after a

preliminary examination was discharged.

Hohne was imprisoned April 18, 1899, and on May 8, 1899, was released

on bail. At his final trial, November 24, 1899, he was discharged.

Gaines was imprisoned April 18, 1899, and on May 8, 1899, was released

on bail. At his final trial, November 24, 1899, he was discharged.

LewiswasimprisonedSeptember26,1900,beingsodetaineduntil

December 20, 1900, at which time he was discharged.

Trask was imprisoned November 2, 1900, and remained in jail until

February9,1901,thedateofhisfinaltrial,atwhichtimehewas

discharged.

Jones was arrested and imprisoned March 13, 1901, and detained in prison

until May 11, 1901, at which time he was released on a $300 cash bond.

Case still pending.

Granville was arrested and imprisoned March 18, 1901. Case still pending.

Bradt and Preston were both imprisoned April 1, 1897, and after remaining

in prison until January 3, 1898, they were both convicted and sentenced to

one year’s imprisonment.

Pike was imprisoned May 5, 1899, and after remaining in prison until

August 4, 1899, was convicted and sentenced to one year’s imprisonment,

from May 9, 1899.

Clark was imprisoned April 1, 1899, and remained in prison until March 17,

1900,whenhewasconvictedandsentencedtofourteenmonths’

imprisonment. After serving six months of said sentence he was pardoned

by the President, and released.

Turner was imprisoned April 1, 1899, and remained in prison until January

28, 1900, awaiting trial, on which date he died in the prison hospital.

There being no just cause for complaint in the case of Anderson, it was not

brought to the attention of the foreign office nor reported to the Department.

Forthepurposeofobtaininginformationastowhatextentrailway

employeesofthebefore-mentionedclasseswerebeingarrestedand

imprisoned by the Mexican authorities, on the 8th of May last I addressed a

communication to all of the railway companies in the Republic of Mexico,

requestingtobeinformedofthenumberandnationality(Mexicans

included) of all of their employees engaged in the movement of trains, such

as engineers, firemen, conductors, brake-men, and switchmen, and a list

giving the name and nationality of each (Mexicans included) who had been

arrested and imprisoned during the past year, growing out of alleged

negligence, causing accidents, endangering the lives of persons or causing

destruction of property. To these communications I have received answers

from all of the companies, except the following: Mexican Mineral; Merida,

Progreso and Yzamal; Tehuantepec; Peninsular; San Marcos and Tecolutla;

Merida-Peto; and the Potosí and Rio Verde.

The mileage of the companies from which I have received answers is 7,365

miles. The mileage of those from which I have received no reply is 547

miles.

The information received, I think, is practically sufficient for the purposes

of this report, and has Seen condensed in a tabulated form by Secretary

Heimké, from which it will be seen that of the total number of Americans

employed as conductors, the percentage of those arrested and imprisoned is

greater than that of the Mexicans so employed; upon the other hand, of the

total number of Mexicans employed as engineers, the percentage of those

arrested and imprisoned is greater than that of the Americans so employed.

The information obtained also shows that the reports of the arrests and

imprisonments of these classes of employees have been greatly exaggerated

by the newspapers in the United States.

The trouble seems to lie in the law itself more than in its execution. In a

conversation with Mr. Mariscal upon the subject, he informed me that he

did not know of a single case, under Mexican law, where rail-, way

companies had been held responsible for accidents; that the policy of their

law seemed to be to hold their employees responsible. I explained to him

how, in the United States, the opposite principle obtained, resulting in the

railway companies exercising the greatest care as to the efficiency and

carefulness of their employees engaged in the movement of trains; that I

believedifthesameprinciplewereadoptedinMexicotherailway

companies would pursue the same policy, which would result in a higher

class of employees being employed, and less accidents.

Ihavebeengreatlydelayedintherenditionofthisreportawaiting

information from the various railway companies.

I have, etc.,
P C
[Inclosure.]
Condensed statement showing number, occupation, and nationality of men

in the service of Mexican railroads, representing 7,365 miles, employed in

the movement of trains from May, 1900, to June, 1901; and of arrests on

account of accidents during that period.
Conductors: 452 (70 Mexican, 379 American, 2 English, 1 Spanish), of

whom 12 were arrested (1 Mexican, 11 American).

Brakemen: 1,408 (1,309 Mexican, 99 American), of whom 5 were arrested

(2 Mexican, 3 American).

Engineers: 666 (161 Mexican, 477 American, 26 English, 2 German), of

whom 23 were arrested (8 Mexican, 15 American).

Firemen: 903 (772 Mexican, 129 American, 2 German), of whom 7 were

arrested (5 Mexican, 1 American, 1 other nationality).

Yardmen: 580 (540 Mexican, 39 American, 1 English), of whom 6 were

arrested 4 Mexican, 2 American).

Totals: Mexican, 2,852 employed, 20 arrested; American, 1,123 employed,

32 arrested; other nationalities, 34 employed, 1 arrested.
aEmbodied in letter to Chamber of Commerce of El Paso, printed page 411
[Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 345].

[Document 345]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Clayton.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 16, 1901.

No. 540.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch, No. 998, of the 27th

ultimo, containing a very exhaustive report on the arrest and imprisonment

inMexicoof AmericancitizensemployedonMexicanrailroadsfor

criminal negligence in causing accidents to the trains in their charge.

You will continue to remonstrate on all proper occasions against the delay

in discharging or bringing to trial Americans charged With responsibility for

such accidents, and you will lose no opportunity to impress upon Mr.

Mariscalthepropositionthatthepreventiveandremedialobjectsof

Mexican legislation in respect to railway accidents would be no less well—

and perhaps better—subserved by following the general rule of law in that

regard in other countries.

The policy of protecting the public against loss of life or physical injury in

railway travel, through the criminal negligence of railway employees, is

enforced by penal legislation in the United States, and we should not, of

course, indicate any opposition to that policy in Mexico, although keeping

on the alert to remonstrate against abusive procedure thereunder. But, while

not shifting criminal accountability from the shoulders of the employee, the

same laws hold the employing company responsible in damages for injury

to life, person, or property through the acts of its agents. As the case now

stands, it is not easy to see how the family of a person killed or the owners

of property destroyed in such cases may be materially benefited by the

prolonged imprisonment of a mere railway subordinate while the sufferers

remain without recourse against the company. An equitable division of

responsibility in such matters would, it is thought, tend to the prevention of

accidents and remove, to a considerable extent, the causes of complaint we

are so often called upon to make in view of the needless and protracted

confinement of our citizens in Mexico, besides distinctly inuring to the

benefit of sufferers by such accidents.

A copy of the Department’s letter to the El Paso Chamber of Commerce,

informing that body of the substance of your report and stating the action

taken thereon, is herewith inclosed for your information.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Hay to Chamber of Commerce, El Paso.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 16, 1901.

SIR: Referring to your letter of the 11th of last April, communicating certain

resolutions adopted by the board of directors of the El Paso Chamber of

Commerce on the 10th of that month, concerning the character of Mexican

judicial procedure in respect to accidents occurring upon railway lines in

Mexico, I have the pleasure to inform you that the ambassador to Mexico,

to whom the matter was appropriately referred, has submitted to the

Department, under date of June 27, 1901, a full and comprehensive report

on the subject.

It appears from Mr. Clayton’s statements that the publications upon the

subject which from time to time appear in the press of this country are

greatly exaggerated. * * *

Followinguptheinvestigation,Mr.Claytonaddressedletterstothe

presidents of all of the railway companies operating roads in Mexico,

requesting to be informed of the number and nationality (Mexican included)

of all of their employees engaged in the movement of trains, and to be

furnished with a list giving the names and nationality of each one who had

been arrested and imprisoned during the past year on charge of negligence,

causing accidents, endangering life or property. He had at the time of

writing received replies from the principal companies representing 7,365

miles of road out of a total Mexican mileage of 7,912.

From these it appeared that out of a total of over 400 employees of all

national ties, 20 Mexicans, 32 Americans, and 1 of unknown nationality

have been arrested or imprisoned during the year. Most of these appear to

have been soon released on bond, or on the guarantee of the company that

the man should appear to answer a charge whenever called upon. Others,

upon trial, have been acquitted. So far as these replies show, none of the

men so arrested was convicted. In some few instances prolonged delay and

detention had followed arrest. While nearly all companies disclaim all

ground of complaint touching the treatment of their employees by the

Mexican judicial authorities, their answers are not explicit as to the time of

detention, and the Sonora Bail way Company merely reports the names of

17 employees (8 Americans, 8 Mexicans, and 1 unknown) who had been

imprisoned on account of railway accidents from June 1, 1900, to June 1,

1901, a singularly large showing, it may be remarked, for a road having

only 268 miles in operation and but 62 men employed in the actual

movement of the trains. The eventual disposition of these cases is not

stated.

The embassy is accustomed to exert itself actively to secure the prompt

disposal of the cases of arrested American railway employees, but not all

such arrested are brought to its notice. During Mr. Clayton’s incumbency of

over four years, but 12 complaints of this character have been under

consideration.

They are as follows:

F. H. Anderson, engineer on the Sonora Railroad, charged in August, 1897,

with running over and killing a Mexican; detained on his own recognizance;

discharged after hearing August 23, 1897.

J. N. Bradt and Jack Preston, conductor and engineer, respectively, on the

Mexican Southern Railroad, imprisoned April 1, 1897, charged with the

death of a fireman and the injury of three or four others; sentenced January

3, 1898, to one year imprisonment.

E. Hohne and C. N. Gaines, conductor and engineer, respectively, on the

Inter-oceanic Railroad, imprisoned April 15, 1899, charged with slightly

injuring two or three persons in a collision; released May 8, 1899, on $800

bail; discharged November 24, 1899.

Edward Turner and G. S. Clark, engineers on the Mexican (Vera Cruz)

Railroad, imprisoned April 1, 1899, charged with negligence in causing a

needless collision that resulting in killing a fireman. Turner died in prison

January 28, 1900, before termination of his case. Clark was convicted and

sentenced to fourteen months’ imprisonment less the eight months spent by

him in prison during his trial; pardoned by President Diaz August 1, 1900.

Henry Pike, engineer on the Mexican Interoceanic Railroad, imprisoned

May 5, 1899, charged with causing a collision, resulting in no personal

harm, but damaging rolling stock; convicted and sentenced August 4, 1899,

to one year imprisonment from May 8, 1899.

T. W. Lewis, engineer on Mexican Central Railroad, imprisoned September

25, 1900, charged with running over a Mexican; acquitted December 8,

1900; discharged December 20, 1900.

AlbertTrask,conductorontheTehuantepecRailroad,imprisoned

November 9, 1900, charged with causing a collision, resulting in no

personal injury and causing but little damage to rolling stock; acquitted and

released February 9, 1901.

A. K. Jones, engineer on the El Oro and Mining Railroad, imprisoned

February 13, 1901, charged with causing a wreck, resulting in two deaths

and the injury of rolling stock; released May 11, 1901, on $300 cash bond;

case still pending.

L. L. Granville, brakeman on the Mexican National Railroad, imprisoned

March 18, 1901, for causing the death of a laborer by running over him;

trial of case still pending.

It appears from the foregoing statement that out of 12 Americans arrested, 4

were convicted of the offense charged and were sentenced to short terms of

imprisonment, 5 were discharged, 2 cases are still pending, and 1 man

(Turner, whose case occasioned protracted correspondence) died in jail after

nearly nine months’ imprisonment while still awaiting trial.

Although the period of detention of such arrested persons prior to release on

bail or discharge has in many instances been brief, there remain enough

cases of protracted imprisonment, especially when the accused is held for

trial, to warrant the repeated protests of this Government against the delays

of Mexican justice. In addition the ambassador has strongly pointed out that

the difference between Mexican and American laws in respect to railway

accidents works hardship to the employees in Mexico, in that the agent, not

the principal, is held responsible.

As to this, the ambassador says: “The trouble seems to lie in the law itself,

more than in its execution. In a conversation with Mr. Mariscal upon the

subject he informed me that he did not know of a single case, under

Mexican law, where railway companies had been held responsible for

accidents; that the policy of their law seemed to be to hold their employees

responsible. I explained to him how, in the United States, the opposite

engaged in the movement of trains; that I believed if the same principle

were adopted in Mexico the railway companies would pursue the same

policy, which would result in a higher class of employees being employed,

and less accidents.”

Mr. Clayton reports that Señor Mariscal has in mind the issuance of a

circular letter upon the subject to the different judicial officers under whose

jurisdiction such cases come, and that he will give the matter his very

careful attention, with the view of bringing about the expedition of such

cases and the prevention of just causes for complaint.

I have instructed Mr. Clayton to continue to remonstrate upon all proper

occasions against the delay in discharging or bringing to trial Americans

charged with responsibility for accidents on Mexican railway lines, and to

preventive and remedial objects of Mexican legislation in respect to railway

accidents would be no less well, and perhaps better, subserved by following

the general rule of law in other countries. The policy of protecting the

public against loss of life or physical injury in railway travel through the

criminal negligence of railway employees is enforced by penal legislation

in the United States, and we should not, of course, indicate any opposition

to that policy in Mexico, although keeping on the alert to remonstrate

againstabusiveprocedurethereunder.Butwhilenotshiftingcriminal

accountability from the shoulders of the employees, the same laws hold the

employing company responsible in damages for injury to life, person, or

property through the acts of its agents. As the case now stands, it is not easy

to see how the family of a person killed or the owners of property destroyed

in such cases may be materially benefited by the prolonged imprisonment

of a mere railway subordinate, while the sufferers remain without recourse

against the company. An equitable division of responsibility in such matters

would, it is thought, tend to the prevention of accidents and remove to a

considerable degree the causes of complaint we are so often called upon to

make in view of the needless and protracted confinement of our citizens in

Mexico, besides distinctly inuring to the benefit of sufferers by such

accidents.

Yours, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 346]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Clayton.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 1, 1901.

No. 551.]

SIR: Referring to your dispatch No. 998, of June 27 last, on the subject of the

arrest and imprisonment in Mexico of American citizens employed as train

hands on Mexican railroads, I inclose herewith for your information a copy

of a letter from the El Paso, Tex., Chamber of Commerce, expressing the

chamber’s cordial recognition and hearty appreciation of your efforts to

secureaccurateinformationinthematter,andsubmittingcertain

observations with the view of facilitating further inquiry in the matter.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
Chamber of Commerce of El Paso, Tex., to Mr. Hay.
EPT,July 23, 1901.

S: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of July 16, 1901,

containing the substance of the report of Ambassador Clayton concerning

Mexican judicial procedure in respect to accidents occurring upon railway

lines in Mexico, and also setting forth at some length your own views and

conclusions with regard to this matter.

I am instructed by the board of directors to express to you, on behalf of the

El Paso Chamber of Commerce, cordial recognition and hearty appreciation

of the interest that you have taken in this question and the efforts that have

been made by Ambassador Clayton, under your instructions, to secure

accurate information as to the grounds for complaint by American railway

employees in Mexico.

The El Paso Chamber of Commerce respectfully proffers its cooperation

and aid in securing further data, and will institute specific inquiry for the

purposeofverifyingorsupplementingthestatisticsandinformation

contained in your letter.

With a view to facilitating such further inquiry and pursuit of the facts, we

beg to submit the following observations, suggested by your letter of July

16:

1. It is conceded that some of the alleged cases of injustice can be

traced to sensational or highly exaggerated newspaper accounts of

unimportant incidents, or even to pure invention without any

basis of fact.

2. We respectfully submit that the statements of the railway

companies in Mexico are not to be taken as conclusive evidence,

for two reasons: (1) The railway companies are interested parties,

it being to their advantage pecuniarily that the present procedure

Mexico evidently do not make it the duty of their officials to

secureandpreserverecordsofsuchimprisonmentoftheir

employees. It is rather to the interest of the railway companies

that they should remain officially ignorant of matters an official

knowledge of which might imply obligation to assist employees

in distress or might embarrass the companies in their efforts to

securefresh Americanemployeestoreplacethosewhohad

suffered injustice in discharge of the duties incident to railway

service in Mexico.

Mexican judicial authorities,” as noted in your letter, since the

Mexican procedure relieves the company of responsibility for

accident and throws the responsibility upon the employee.

4. It is noted in your letter that the answers of the railway

companies to Mr. Clayton’s inquiries are “not explicit as to the

time of detention.” We respectfully submit that this is a vital

point. It is a fundamental principle of our law that justice shall be

not only sure, but speedy. It is highly important to know how

many days, or weeks, or months the imprisoned American citizen

must spend in the Mexican jail, enduring the conditions and

subsisting upon the food characteristic of Mexican jails; among

people of strange race and tongue, through whom he is powerless

to send any message that might bring to his relief the mighty

forces of the American State. You have noted the “singularly large

showing” of American railway employees imprisoned in the State

Sonora during the past year, with no account rendered as to the

eventual disposition of their cases, and with no assurance that

there are not to-day American citizens dragging out miserable

lives in unjust imprisonment in some of the jails of Sonora.

5. No one doubts that the American Government, through its State

Department and its embassy to Mexico, purposes to employ all

means deemed proper, practicable, and effective to protect the

rights of American citizens in Mexico. But, as noted in your letter,

“not all such arrests are brought to its notice.” It is this fact which

calls for further action by the American Government, to the end

that every American citizen employed in Mexico shall be assured

of opportunity to bring any case of alleged injustice to the

attention of the American embassy. The fact is significant that, as

noted in your letter, “during Mr. Clayton’s incumbency of over

four years but twelve complaints of this character have been

under consideration.” It is commonly believed in this part of the

United States that accidents leading to such imprisonment in

Mexico are much more frequent than is indicated by the statistics

received by Mr. Clayton from the railway companies. The fact

that, as noted by you, of the thirty-two reported cases of arrest

and imprisonment of American railway employees in Mexico

during the past year, eight cases are reported in connection with

268 miles of railway in Sonora, leaving but twenty-four cases

reported for over 7,000 miles of railway throughout the rest of

Mexico, and the further fact that out of a total of sixty-two

railway employees in train service in Sonora, seventeen were

arrested and imprisoned in one year, while but thirty-six arrests

arereportedfortheremainingfourthousandemployees

throughout Mexico—these facts are, if not conclusive proof of the

unreliability of the statistics, significant enough to warrant and

urge further inquiry.

We are gratified to note your conclusion, as stated in your letter, that “there

remain enough cases of protracted imprisonment, especially when the

Department in pressing upon the Mexican Government the propriety and

advisability, from every point of view except that of the pecuniary interests

of the railway companies, of amending the Mexican law so as to bring

Mexican procedure into conformity with that of the United States and other

nations with respect to the incidence of responsibility for accidents in

railway service.

We beg to suggest that more complete, accurate, and reliable information

can be secured through the organizations of railway employees than through

the reports of Mexican railway companies or Mexican officials regarding

cases of alleged unjust imprisonment of American railway employees in

Mexico. To invite reports through this suggested channel would probably

result in bringing a large number of cases of alleged unjust imprisonment

beforetheStateDepartment.Inmanyofthesecasesdoubtlessthe

imprisoned American would be accorded substantial justice by the Mexican

authorities without appeal to his Government. But the very fact that the

prisoner is assured of quick and easy appeal to his Government will be the

bestpossiblesafeguardagainstinjustice,andthestrongestpossible

guaranty of a speedy trial and disposition of his case. Moreover, if but one

American citizen out of a hundred thus arrested were by this means

protected against prolonged imprisonment or unjust sentence, the personal

right to life and liberty guaranteed by the American Constitution to every

American citizen fully establishes the obligation of the United States

Government to secure to this individual citizen both the protection of the

American Government and the opportunity to present his appeal for such

protection.

I have, etc.,
ERNESTE.RUSSELL,Secretary.

[Document 347]
Señor de Azpíroz to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

MEXICANEMBASSY,
Allenhurst, N. J.,September 15, 1901.

Mexican people and Government deplore your national calamity. I offer

you my personal profoundest sympathy.
DEAZPÍROZ,
Mexican Ambassador.

[Document 348]
Mr. Hill to Señor de Azpíroz.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

EXCELLENCY: The pressure of public business attendant upon the death of

President McKinley has delayed until now an acknowledgment of your

telegram of the 14th instant conveying an expression of the sympathy of the

Government and people of Mexico with the Government and people of the

United States in the loss they have sustained by that sad event.

IshallbeobligedifyouwillassureyourGovernmentthattheir

condolement is gratefully appreciated by the Government and people of the

United States, who are deeply touched by the innumerable manifestations of

sympathy which they have received from all parts of the world.

At the same time I beg to thank you for the expression of sympathy made

on your own behalf.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 349]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Newel.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 7, 1901.

No. 263.]

aSIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 353,of the 15th

ultimo, relative to the marriage of the Queen of The Netherlands.

You will make all necessary congratulations and participate in such manner

as may be expected of the diplomatic corps.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.
aNot printed.

[Document 350]
Mr. Newel to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

SGRAVENHAGE,February 7, 1901.

HerMajesty Wilhelmina,Queenof TheNetherlandsandPrincessof

Orange-Nassau, married Duke Henry of Mecklenburg-Schwerin at 12.30 to-

day. The streets filled with thousands of happy people in brilliant sunshine.
NEWEL.

[Document 351]
Mr. Newel to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
The Hague,February 9, 1901.

No. 376.]

bSIR: I have the honor to confirm herewith my cablegramof the 7th instant

announcingthemarriageofHerMajestyQueenWilhelminaofthe

Netherlands with Duke Hendrik of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.

The festivities in connection with the royal ceremony commenced on the

22d ultimo, at which date the formal notice of the purposed royal wedding

was given at the city hall. This event was hailed by a general display of

flags from all the Government and public buildings, the various foreign

legations and ministers’ residences, and a large number of private houses.

From last Monday, the 4th instant, the city has been en fête, all the principal

thoroughfares being gaily decorated during the day and illuminated at night.

On that day the soldiers donned their full tenue, and in the afternoon an

enormous band of musicians, representing music corps and societies from

all parts of the country, assembled before the palace with their varied-

coloredbannersandplayedthenationalanthemandpopularairs.

Immediately after they marched in procession through the town, while the

Queen received in audience delegates from the provinces who tendered the

felicitations of their respective districts. Early in the evening the Queen was

serenaded by a very large company of vocalists selected from the best

singers of The Hague and Rotterdam, the houses were lighted up with

illuminations and the thousands of people who thronged the streets were in

ecstacies in their rejoicing over the great coming event. While everything

was at its brightest the two Queens, accompanied by the Duke, proceeded to

the railway station to welcome the foreign princes and immediate relatives

on their arrival in The Hague.

On Tuesday, the 5th instant, the Queen granted an audience to the chiefs of

the foreign missions and the representatives of various corporations, that

they might present their last felicitations and wedding gifts. Early in the

afternoon other musical bodies greeted the Queen in song from the palace

gardens, and at the termination thereof the royal party drove through the

city and neighborhood in full state. At night there was a gala dinner at the

palace, to which were invited all the foreign ministers, the court officials, in

addition to all the royal guests, and immediately upon the close the whole

company attended at the opera house, where a special musical display was

given in honor of the occasion. After the theater the royal guests, the court

and some of the Dutch people were entertained at the German legation,

where the German minister had prepared an elaborate soirée. No member of

the diplomatic corps, except the Russian minister and two others, was

invited.

On Wednesday, shortly after noon, there was a large procession of a great

many trades and artisans before the palace and through the town, after

whichtheroyalpartyagaindrovethroughthestreetsandvicinity,

accompanied, as on the preceding day, by a full escort. That evening there

was a grand soirée at the palace, to which all the diplomatic corps, the élite,

and military were invited, and at which some of the leading members of

Dutch society gave a series of tableaux vivants, representative of graphic

pictures from the history of the houses of the Orange and Mecklenburg

families.

The wedding morning was an exceptionally fine one, the route to the church

was crowded hours before the ceremony took place with an expectant and

glad throng of people, and at every point of vantage eager spectators were

to be observed. The civil part of the ceremony took place at the palace, the

minister of justice, assisted by the secretary of the city corporation, being

the officiating functionaries, while the presidents of the States-General, the

court of justice, the council of state, the chief officer of the court, and an

important military officer acted as witnesses, the only attendants being the

nearest family relatives. From the palace the wedding party proceeded to

the church in a stately procession. The route was lined by soldiers and

police and an eager and exulting crowd. Long before the arrival of the

Sovereign the diplomatic corps in full force, the members of the States-

General, together with the élite of the whole country and a large press

representation had assembled to witness the public performance in the

church. From beginning to end there was nothing to mar the general gayety

and pleasure of the occasion.

Theceremonyinthe“GrooteKerk”wassingularlybeautifuland

impressive, and reached its climax when at the close of the marriage service

the officiating Dutch Reformed clergyman, Mr. van der Flier, made the

customary present of a Bible to the royal bride, who was standing radiant in

the sunlight, which for an instant streamed in at the windows. It seemed to

me as I looked around that there were no dry eyes in the church.

The return to the palace was as grand and enthusiastic as the procession

thither.

At 4 o’clock the royal pair started for the palace in the country, “Het Lee,”

wheretheypassthehoneymoon,makingtheirnextappearancein

Amsterdam at the beginning of March next.

The universal approval of this love match is very touching, and I am told

that the people believe that the “orange weather” (fine weather) during the

service is a sure sign of a happy married life.

A few days prior to the wedding Duke Hendrik was by royal order

appointed rear-admiral of the Netherlands navy, lieutenant-general of the

Netherlands army and of the Colonial army, all three appointments being a

la suite, and therefore honorary. Immediately after the marriage a special

issue of the Netherlands Gazette appeared announcing the marriage and

containing two royal orders, whereby the duke was proclaimed a prince of

the Netherlands, and conferring upon him the right to act as advisory

member of the Netherlands council of state.

At the audience of the 5th instant Her Majesty the Queen wishes me to

thank the President for his kindness and to express her gratitude for the

many evidences of good will and sympathy which she had received from

the American people.

I have, etc.,
STANFORDNEWEL.
bPrinted ante.

[Document 351a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 30, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF THE NETHERLANDS WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

A subject of the Netherlands is liable to military service from his nineteenth

to his fortieth year. He must register to take part in the drawing of lots for

military service between January 1 and August 31 of the calendar year in

which he reaches the age of 19. He is exempt, however, from service if he is

an only son or is physically disabled; and in the case of a family half of the

brothers are exempt, or the majority if the number is uneven.

No military service is required of one who became a citizen of the United

States before the calendar year in which he became 19 years of age, and a

Netherlands subject who becomes a citizen of the United States when he is

19 and between January 1 and August 31 may have his name removed from

the register by applying to the Queen’s commissioner of the province in

which he was registered. If he does not have his name removed from the

register, or if he becomes a citizen of the United States after the register is

closed (August 31) and his name is drawn for enlistment, his naturalization

does not affect his military obligations to the Netherlands, and if he returns

he is liable (1) to be treated as a deserter if he did not respond to the

summons for service, or (2) to be enlisted if he is under 40.

Former Netherlands subjects are advised to ascertain by inquiry from the

Netherlands authorities what status they may expect to enjoy if they return

to the Netherlands. This Department, however, uniformly declines to act as

the intermediary in the inquiry.

Passports are not required for admission to the Netherlands, but American

citizens are advised to carry them for purposes of identification and in

attestation of citizenship.

[Document 352]
Mr. van Roijen to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

NETHERLANDSLEGATION,
New London, Conn.,September 15, 1901.

I am commissioned to express to your excellency the profound sympathy

felt by my Government for the American people under these sorrowful

circumstances.
VANROIJEN.

[Document 353]
Mr. Adee to Mr. van Roijen.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 30, 1901.

SIR: The Secretary of State duly received your telegram of the 15th instant

by which you discharged the duty with which you were commissioned of

expressing to him the profound sympathy felt by the Government of the

Netherlands for the American people in view of the death of President

McKinley, an earlier acknowledgment of which has been prevented by the

pressure of official business attendant upon that sad event.

I shall be obliged if you will assure your Government that their sympathetic

message is gratefully appreciated by the Government and people of the

United States, who have been deeply moved by the manifestations of regret

and sympathy by the Government and people of the Netherlands reported

by the United States legation at The Hague.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Salvador
Contents

[Document 354]
Mr. Merry to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
San José, Costa Rica,January 31, 1901.

No. 519.]

SIR: I have the pleasure of advising the arrival on the 10th instant at

Acajutla, Salvador, of the United States shipsIowaandPhiladelphia, the

former bearing the flag of Admiral Kautz. ThePhiladelphialeft the same

evening for Panama. The admiral and his staff visited the capital city of San

Salvador, accompanied by United States Consul Jenkins, and were received

by the Government of President Regalado with every attention, a banquet

being given in honor of the American officers, to which were invited the

consular and diplomatic corps, the principal officials of the Republic of El

Salvador, and prominent citizens.

On the 13th instant President Regalado and his cabinet, accompanied by

manycitizensofSalvador,visitedtheIowaontheship’sboats,the

President being received with all the honors due his rank and leaving the

ship late in the afternoon having expressed himself as very much pleased

with his reception.

TheIowa, being the first modern battle ship that has visited Central

America, attracted much attention.

With assurances, etc.,
W L M

[Document 355]
Mr. Merry to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
San José, Costa Rica,April 18, 1901.

No. 551.]

SIR: May I respectfully request from the Department of State instructions in

regard to the nationality of Rafael Franklin Hine, 19 years of age, and a

native of Costa Rica The young man has been educated in the public and

private schools of the Republic, has never visited the United States, and is

entirely ignorant of the English language. His father was born in the United

States, and came here when 23 years old, married a native Costa Rican, and

died here after five years’ residence as a practicing physician, leaving this

one child and a widow, who has resided here since upon property of which

she is the owner.

I may state en passant that Mr. Hine, the grandfather of the young man, was

at one time United States consul at San José.

Young Mr. Hine now claims exemption from military service here on the

ground that he is an American citizen. I have requested of the Costa Rican

foreign office that he be excused therefrom until the question of his

citizenship has been passed upon by my Government.

I do not see how Mr. Hine can consistently claim that it is his intention to

hereafter make his home in the United States. He is now engaged in the

dairy business in this city.

With assurances, etc.,
W L M

[Document 356]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Merry.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 7, 1901.
No. 402.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 551, of the 18th

ultimo, in which you request to be informed as to the nationality of Rafael

Franklin Hine, 19 years of age, and a native of Costa Rica, the facts of

whose case, as stated by you, are as follows: The young man has been

educated in the public and private schools of Costa Rica, has never visited

the United States, and is entirely ignorant of the English language. His

father was born in the United States, went to Costa Rica when 23 years old,

married a native Costa Rican, and died there after five years’ residence as a

practicing physician.

Mr. Hine now claims exemption from military service in Costa Rica on the

ground that he is an American citizen.

You add that Mr. Hine is engaged in the dairy business in San Jose, and that

you do not see how he can consistently claim that it is his intention to make

hereafter his home in the United States.

Assuming that the father was an American citizen when the son was born,

the latter is an American citizen, according to section 1993 of the Revised

Statutes of the United States, which provides that a child born outside of the

limits of the United States, whose father was at the time of the child’s birth

a citizen of the United States, is himself a citizen.

Of course, “no sovereignty can extend its jurisdiction beyond its own

territorial limits, so as to relieve those born under and subject to another

jurisdiction from their obligations or duties thereto.” (Mr. Fish to the

President, August 25, 1873, quoted in The American Passport, page 141.)

Therefore, as an American citizen, the young man may be granted a

passport upon making satisfactory application therefor.

How far the right to protect him may be exerted depends to a considerable

extent upon the claims that Costa Rica has upon him under her law, upon

which point the Department is not advised.

The question of his intention to come to this country will be of more

consequence when he shall have reached the age of 21 years. Until that time

he is not competent to elect expatriation from the United States, and the

presumption is in favor of his conservation of the citizenship conferred

upon him by his birth as the son of an American citizen.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 357]
Under Secretary of Foreign Relations of Nicaragua to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram—Translation.]

MANAGUA,September 22, 1901.

I have the honor to inform your excellency that the President of the

Republic, as a tribute of homage to the memory of the most excellent

President William McKinley, and as a token of the profound sorrow felt by

the Government and people of Nicaragua for the death of that illustrious

citizen, has declared the loss suffered by the noble American nation to be a

national affliction, and has ordered the national flag to be hoisted with a

black crape draping in all the military commands, with the customary

honors.

With high consideration, I remain your excellency’s obedient, faithful

servant,M.BARRIOS,
Under Secretary of Foreign Relations.

[Document 358]
Mr. Hill to the Minister of Foreign Relations of Nicaragua.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 23, 1901.

I have the honor to acknowledge your telegram of the 22d of September.

The tributes of Nicaragua’s respect for the memory of President McKinley

are deeply appreciated by the American Government and people.
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 359]
President Iglesias to President Roosevelt.
[Telegram.—Translation.]

SANJOSÉ,COSTARICA,
September 14, 1901.

The people and Government of Costa Rica are profoundly moved by the

death of President McKinley, and renew, therefore, expression of their

sympathy to the people and Government of the United States.
RAFAELIGLESIAS.

[Document 360]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Merry.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1901.

In the name of President Roosevelt and the American nation you will assure

President Iglesias of deep appreciation of his messages of solicitude and

sympathy in the hour of suspense and affliction.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 361]
Minister of Foreign Relations of Salvador to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Translation.]

SANSALVADOR,September 15, 1901.

The people and Government of Salvador send through me to the American

Government the expression of their profound sympathy in the death of its

illustrious President McKinley.
FRANCISCOA.REYES,
Minister of Foreign Relations.

[Document 362]
Mr. Hay to the Minister of Foreign Relations of Salvador.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

ThesorrowingGovernmentandpeopledeeplyappreciateSalvadorian

sympathy.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 362a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 18, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF PERSIA WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Permission to be naturalized in a foreign country is not granted by the

Persian Government to a Persian subject if he is under charge for a crime

committed in Persia, or is a fugitive from justice, or a deserter from the

Persian army, or is in debt in Persia, or fled to avoid pecuniary obligations.

If a Persian subject becomes a citizen of another country without the

permission of the Persian Government he is forbidden to reenter Persian

territory, and if he had any property in Persia he is ordered to sell or dispose

of it.

There is no treaty between the United States and Persia defining the status

of former Persian subjects who have become naturalized American citizens.

Passports are usually required of foreigners desiring to enter Persia, and

they should, if possible, bear the visé or indorsement of a Persian consular

officer.

[Document 363]
Mr. Tyler to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
TEHERAN,September 16, 1901.

No. 67.]

SIR: On Saturday, the 14th instant, about half past 4 in the afternoon, I

received your telegram announcing that the President died at a quarter past

2 on the night of the 14th.

I immediately wrote out a notification and sent a copy to the foreign

minister with a request that he would lay it before His Majesty the Shah. * *

* The Shah sent one of his sons-in-law, a personage of high distinction, and

whom I have known some years. He was instructed to say that His Majesty

was greatly affected at the receipt of this sad intelligence, and that he

considered the grief and loss of the American Government and people was

his own, and that they had his truest and most-genuine sympathy. * * *

I have, etc.,
JOHNTYLER,
Vice Consul-General, in Charge.

[Document 364]
The Shah of Persia to President Roosevelt.
[Telegram—Translation.]

TEHERAN,September 20, 1901.

On the occasion of the accession of your excellency to the Presidency I

sincerely congratulate you, and express the best wishes that I make for your

happiness and the prosperity of the United States.
MOZAFFER EDDINE.

[Document 365]
President Roosevelt to the Shah of Persia.
[Telegram.]

EXECUTIVEMANSION,
Washington,September 23, 1901.

I reciprocate your friendly greeting with cordial wishes for your welfare and

the prosperity of Persia.
THEODOREROOSEVELT.

[Document 366]
Mr. Tyler to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Teheran,September 28, 1901.

No 70.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that in accordance with general custom I

attended this morning the diplomatic reception held by His Majesty the

Shah, at the palace in Teheran, to celebrate his birthday. This is an annual

function, and is made the occasion of some pleasant courtesies between the

Shah and the representatives of foreign countries.

He made inquiries about the President’s health, and told me that he had

been given to understand that he was a personage of great ability and force

of character. I replied that such was the general opinion.

In consequence of the legation being in mourning for the late President, I

did not attend the banquet given in the evening by the prime minister, and

on this account I was kindly excused.

I inclose a copy and translation of the usual note sent to the minister for

foreign affairs on the morning of the Shah’s birthday.

I have, etc.,
JT,
Vice Consul-General, in Charge.
[Inclosure.]
L U S,
Teheran,September 28, 1901.

YOUREXCELLENCY: I am instructed to present through you the most cordial

salutations of his excellency the new President of the Republic of the

United States of North America to his Imperial Majesty the Shah, on the

recurrenceofHisMajesty’sbirthday,andtoexpresstheprayerthat

Almighty God will preserve him in the enjoyment of health, happiness, and

prosperity for many years to come.

I also take this opportunity to repeat to your excellency my sincere esteem

andrespectfortheestimablequalitiesofyourcharacterandthe

distinguished honor of your exalted position.
JOHNTYLER,
Vice Consul-General, in Charge.

[Document 367]
Mr. Tyler to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Teheran,October 11, 1901.
No. 72.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose for your information a copy and translation

of a note from the minister for foreign affairs in reply to my letter of the

28th of September, 1901, tendering, on the part of his excellency the

President, congratulations to His Majesty the Shah, on the celebration of his

birthday.

The reply is rather belated, which is in most things rather the rule than the

exception here; but I am sure it is not less sincere.

I have, etc.,
JOHNTYLER,
Vice Consul-General, in Charge.
[Inclosure.]
The minister for foreign affairs of Persia to Mr. Tyler.
M F A ,October 10, 1901.

S: I have the honor to acknowledge with much pleasure and gratification

the receipt of your letter of the 28th of September, 1901, in which you

communicate the congratulations of the most excellent and most exalted

President of the Republic of the United States of North America on the

occasion of the recurrence of the birthday of His Imperial Majesty the Shah,

and to inform you that it was laid at the foot of the throne.

In reply, I beg to request that you will have the goodness to bring to the

notice of his excellency the President and the Government of the United

Statesthesincerepleasureandappreciationwhichthismessageof

friendship and good-will has given to His Majesty and myself as well.

I take this opportunity, etc.,
MUSHIR-ED-DOWLAH.

Peru
Contents

[Document 368]
Mr. Bayard to Mr. Buck.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington, D. C.,June 5, 1886.

No. 68.]

aSIR: I inclose with a reference to your No. 99a copy of “Report No. 210” in

the matter of the J. H. Hayball claimv. Peru, prepared by the Solicitor of

the Department.

I am, etc.,
T.F.BAYARD.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Wharton, Solicitor, to the Secretary of State.
LAWBUREAU,March 3, 1886.

Report No. 210.]

SIR: I have examined the papers which are hereto annexed and I have no

doubt that they present a case which will justify a grave demand for redress

from the Government of Peru. The facts on which the claim is based may be

briefly stated as follows: On July 20, 1885, a force of 16 armed and

uniformed men, of the party of General Cáceres, proceeded to Mr. Hay

ball’s farm, some 33 miles from the coast, seized that gentleman, and

demanded of him 20 horses, the same number of rifles, and a large amount

of ammunition. He did not possess the rifles or ammunition, and refused to

give up his horses, standing on his rights as an American citizen and

consular agent at Chimbote. His animals, to the number of 80, were then

seized, his store was pillaged, his orchard was laid waste, and he was forced

to provide for his captors for the night. Of his animals, all but 28 were

On the 4th of August following, 8 more horses were taken from him in a

similar manner. On the next day, Mr. Hayball went to Chimbote to complain

to the commander of the whole force. He was promised redress, but was

made to pay the land tax for the current year, $144. The promise was not

fulfilled. On the 15th of November last, Mr. Hayball was compelled to pay

the land tax again to the representative of the other party. This time he was

assessed $180. These repeated exactions and the seizure of his property

have nearly ruined the claimant, and he asks that Peru should make good to

him his losses.

He further states that during the ten years he has lived at Chimbote he has

never had anything to do with the political questions of the country, or

violated his neutrality as an American citizen.

I therefore respectfully report that our minister at Lima should be called

upon to demand from the Government of Peru a suitable redress, both for

the insult to this Government in the person of its consular agent and for the

personal injuries to the claimant.

All of which is respectfully submitted.
FRANCISWHARTON,Solicitor.
aNot printed.

[Document 369]
Mr. Dudley to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lima,May 26, 1901.

(Mr. Dudley reports the offer by Peru of 8,000 soles in settlement of the

Hayballclaim,andrecommendsacceptance.Theclaimantisquite

satisfied.)
[Document 370]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Dudley.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 28, 1901.

(Mr.HillauthorizesMr.DudleytoaccepttheofferofthePeruvian

Government in the matter of the settlement of the Hayball claim.)
[Document 371]
Mr. Dudley to Mr. Hay.
L U S,
Lima,May 28, 1901.
No. 480.

S: I have the honor to append copy of telegramI sent the Department on

the 26th, instant reporting Peru’s offer of 8,000 soles in settlement of the

claim of Mr. James H. Hayball, a citizen of the United States, for loss of

property suffered by him during the Cáceres revolution of 1885; and a copy

aof the Department’s telegramof to-day authorizing its acceptance.

I also inclose herewith a copy and translation of the note of Dr. Osma, the

Peruvian foreign minister, containing the proposal, and a copy of the

acceptance I have just sent him.

Preliminary to acting upon the foreign minister’s offer I had the claimant

come to Lima to give me his views. As often happens in such cases, the

valuation of the animals taken and of the damage to his garden proved to

have been exaggerated. Placing, at my request, a conservative valuation

uponthevariousitemsoflosscomplainedof,itappearedfromhis

statement that the total was between 8,000 and 9,000 soles. It is to be

remarked that the estimate omits from consideration all claim to interest

during the years indemnity has been withheld. Nevertheless, the claimant

expressed himself as highly pleased with the offer, and I accordingly cabled

the message above mentioned. It is pleasant to me to be able to add that the

present foreign minister treated the reclamation not only without evasion

but with candor and a fairness which is more or less apparent, eliminating

the interest question, from the near coincidence of his compromise offer

with the claimant’s present estimate.

I have, etc.,
IRVINGB.DUDLEY.
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]
F O,Lima,May 21, 1901.

MM : In reference to the interviews your excellency and I have had

regarding the claim of J. H. Hayball, supported by your legation, I have the

pleasure to state to your excellency that my Government has no objections

to adjust the matter by a payment of 8,000 soles.

Your excellency will please to consider this decision as a proof of the

sincere good feeling existing in the relations between the two Governments,

without this settlement being in any wise considered as a precedent for the

adjustment of other cases.

I avail myself, etc.,
F. DEOSMA.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Dudley to Señor de Osma.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lima,May 28, 1901.
Mr. MINISTER: It affords me much pleasure to acknowledge the receipt this

afternoon of your excellency’s esteemed note of the 21st instant, wherein an

offer of 8,000 soles is made in settlement of the long-pending claim of Mr.

James H. Hayball against the Government of Peru. I beg to express to your

excellency my very sincere appreciation of the spirit in which the offer is

made and the allusion to the cordial good feeling which happily subsists

betweenourrespectiveGovernmentsandwhichItrustnevertosee

diminish.

Your excellency’s proposal is respectfully accepted.

Congratulating myself, as well as your excellency, upon the conclusion

reached, I embrace the opportunity, etc.,I BD
Printed ante.
Printed ante.

[Document 372]
Mr. Dudley to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lima,July 31, 1901.
No. 496.]

SIR:

* * * * * * *

I inclose herewith copy and translation of the note from the Peruvian

foreign office transmitting check for 8,000 soles in settlement of the claim

(James H. Hayball), and a copy of the legation’s acknowledgment of its

receipt.

I have, etc.,
IRVINGB.DUDLEY.
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]
Señor de Osma to Mr. Dudley.
F O,
Lima,July 5, 1901.
MM : In conformity with my note addressed to your legation on the

21st of last May, in consequence of your excellency’s acceptance of the

proposal I made in the said note to arrange the claim of Mr. J. H. Hayball, I

have the pleasure to inclose you a check, No. 448011, drawn by the public

treasury on “El Banco del Peru y Londres,” for the sum of 8,000 soles, in

full settlement of the said claim.

I avail myself, etc.,

F. DEOSMA.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Dudley to Señor de Osma.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES.
Lima,July 9, 1901.

MR.MINISTER: I am pleased to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s

kind favor of July 5, inclosing a check of the public treasury, No. 448011,

on “El Banco del Peru y Londres,” for the sum of 8,000 soles, payable to

my order, in full settlement of the claim of Mr. James H. Hayball.

Thanking your excellency for the prompt remittance of this sum, I beg that

you will accept, etc.,IRVINGB.DUDLEY.

[Document 373]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Dudley.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,November 21, 1898.
No. 152.]

aSIR: I have received your despatch No. 187,of October 24 last, transmitting

a copy of the certificate of the United States consular agent at Tumbez to

affidavits submitted by William Fowks in support of his claim against the

Peruvian Government, this certificate having been omitted from the papers

previously transmitted. This completes the evidence which the Department,

in its instruction of August 27, 1896, indicated should be furnished.

The facts in this case, as they appear from the memorial and the affidavits

presented in support thereof, are as follows: William Fowks, a native-born

American citizen, engaged at Tumbez, Peru, in the mercantile business as a

member of the firm of Edward Fowks & Co., was imprisoned December 28,

1894, for twenty-four hours, by the commander of a revolutionary force

opposing the regular Government, at the time in possession of the city of

Tumbez. The insurgent commander demanded of Mr. Fowks 400 soles for

the use of the insurgents. The money was refused, and thereupon the

insurgent commander cast Mr. Fowks into prison and kept him there

without food, water, or bed, until after the expiration of twenty-four hours,

the severity of the treatment compelling Mr. Fowks to comply with the

demand made upon him. Fearing further pecuniary exaction, Mr. Fowks,

after his release, left Peru and abandoned the mercantile business in which

he was engaged for himself and his partners, who were also, according to

his statement, citizens of the United States. In 1896, Mr. Fowks presented to

the Department a claim asking for the return to him of the 400 soles

extortedbytherevolutionarycommanderasabovedescribed,also

indemnity for his imprisonment and his personal suffering while in prison,

and finally, damages to reimburse himself and his partners for the loss

sustained by the enforced abandonment of their business in Tumbez.

It appears from the sworn statements of Consular Agent Baldini, and the

other witnesses, submitted in your dispatch No. 134, of May 28 last, that at

the time of the revolution Tumbez was held by the regular Government

forces under the command of the Subprefect Munoz, numbering from 30 to

150 men, regular troops; that upon the approach of the insurgent forces,

numbering about 80 men, Munoz abandoned Tumbez. The revolution,

whichlastedaboutsixmonths,wassuccessful,andresultedinthe

establishmentofthepresentGovernment.Fromthedateofthe

imprisonmentofFowksuntiltheinaugurationoftheprovisional

government, the revolutionary forces occupied Tumbez, the department of

Piuria, in which it is located, being in the hands of the Government forces,

numbering about 600 men. The commander of the insurgent forces which

occupied Tumbez and imprisoned Fowks was Colonel Seminario, a nephew

or the present second vice-president of Peru, and a member of the Peruvian

Congress. The insurgents had not been recognized by this Government.

Article 15 of the treaty of 1887 between the United States and Peru, which

was in force at the time of the occurrence above recited, contains the

following provision: “The high contracting parties promise and engage to

give full and perfect protection to the persons and property of the citizens of

each other of all classes and occupations who may be dwelling or transient

in the territories subject to their respective jurisdiction;” also, “that the

citizens of one contracting party within the territory of the other shall not be

liable to imprisonment without formal commitment under a warrant signed

by a legal authority, except incases flagrantis delicti.” Also, “said citizens,

when detained in prison, shall be treated during their imprisonment with

humanity, and no unnecessary severity shall be exercised toward them.”

Article 2 of the same treaty provides that “they (said citizens) shall not be

called upon for any forced loan or extraordinary contribution for any

military expedition * * * without being allowed therefor a full and sufficient

indemnification, which shall be in all cases agreed upon and paid in

advance.”

For the treatment to which Mr. Fowks was subjected, in violation of express

provisions of treaty and of the principles of international law, the Peruvian

Government is responsible (see the correspondence in the MacCord case, to

which you have access). You are accordingly instructed to present a claim

in behalf of Mr. Fowks for reimbursement of the money extorted from him,

with interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum from December 28, 1894,

and for a reasonable indemnity—say $5,000—for the imprisonment and ill-

treatment.

In the opinion of the Department the claim for damages for interruption of

the business of Fowks & Co. is not a valid one, and you will not present the

same.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
aNot printed.

[Document 374]
Mr. Dudley to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lima,March 18, 1901.

(Mr. Dudley reports that the Peruvian Government has offered 3,000 soles

in settlement of the claim of Fowks, with the proviso that such action is not

citable as a precedent; that he considers the offer equitable, and that the

claimant is anxious to accept it.)
[Document 375]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Dudley.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 18, 1901.

(Mr. Hay authorizes Mr. Dudley to accept 3,000 soles in settlement of the

Fowks claim, with the proviso mentioned in the preceding telegram.)
[Document 376]
Mr. Dudley to Mr. Hay.
L U S,
Lima,April 8, 1901.
No. 466.]

S: I have the honor to report that I have to-day received from the Peruvian

Government its draft for 3,000 soles in settlement of the claim of Mr.

William Fowks, a citizen of the United States, who suffered at the hands of

several months ago to accept an employment at Pittsburg. Before going he

gave to his father, Mr. Edward Fowks of Paita, a general power of attorney

to act for him in securing settlement of the claim. The power, duly executed

before a notary public and witnesses at Paita, and there recorded, was

deposited at this legation by the senior Mr. Fowks while in Lima several

weeks ago. The amount of the collection, therefore, will be transferred to

him as the claimant’s authorized representative, and his receipt therefor

forwarded in due course to the Department.

The Peruvian foreign minister made his offer of settlement on the 16th

ultimo at the last of a number of conferences I had had with him upon the

subject.

Theamountofthecontributionextortedfromtheclaimantwasthe

equivalent of about $200, so that the indemnity paid on account of his

imprisonment for twenty-four hours under the circumstances of aggravation

detailed in his memorial is about $1,300. He was one of a number upon

whom small contributions were levied at the same time and place. His case,

as I have learned verbally from his father, differs from the others in that he

did not, like them, deliver upon demand; but, attentive to word sent him by

his father in anticipation of the action of the revolutionists, stood upon his

rights until he had reached the limit of physical endurance under the

coercion employed.

On the whole, I believe that the principle herein involved, classifying the

case as a lesser MacCord claim, has been again vindicated, and, in my

telegram to you, I did not hesitate to pronounce in favor of the fairness of

thesettlement,whichIregardasafriendlymanifestationfromthis

Government as well as an act of justice.

I have, etc.,
I BD
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]

FOREIGNOFFICE,
Lima,March 22, 1901.
Mr. MINISTER: In reference to the communications which your excellency has

addressed to this ministry in support of the claim of William Fowks, an

American citizen, by reason of events occuring in Tumbez during the year

1894, I have the pleasure to inform you that without entering into any

discussion as to the bases of said claim, or performing any act which might

serve to establish a precedent either for or against analogous cases, I beg to

submit to your excellency the following arrangement of this question: To

pay to the claimant, Mr. Fowks, the sum of 3,000 soles silver, in virtue of

which payment his claim will become totally and definitely canceled, not

only as regards the ill-treatment and imprisonment which he declares

having suffered at the hands of the forces which occupied Tumbez under the

orders of Col. Felipe Seminario, but also as regards the forced loan of 400

soles, the repayment of which with interest has been solicited by the

claimant.

I trust that your excellency’s Government will not fail to see in the

preceding proposal a new proof of the interest taken by the Government of

Peru in its endeavors to contribute toward the maintenance of the cordial

relations now existing between Peru and the United States of America, and I

have the honor to reiterate, etc.
FELIPE DEOSMA.
[Inclosure 2.]
L U S,
Lima,March 27, 1901.
MM : I have the pleasure of acknowledging the receipt of your

excellency’s esteemed note of the 22d instant, containing an offer of 3,000

soles in settlement in full of the pending claim of Mr. William Fowks, a

citizen of the United States, for wrongs suffered by him at Tumbez in 1894.

It is noted that this settlement is proposed subject to the proviso that it shall

not hereafter be deemed to have established a precedent applicable to

analogous cases.

In reply I have the honor to notify your excellency that I accept the offer,

subject to the proviso wherewith it is coupled. It will also afford me unusual

satisfaction to inform my Government of the conclusion herein reached,

though differing in an unimportant sense from its own proposal, and of the

friendlyandequitablespirittowarditwherewithIwellknowyour

excellency’s Government, and no less your excellency personally, has been

actuated in the present accord and satisfaction.

I trust that your excellency will accept my acknowledgment of indebtedness

for your unvarying courtesy in the discussion of this and all other questions

which have arisen in the course of our official relations, permitting me to

add renewed assurance, etc.,IRVINGB.DUDLEY.
[Inclosure 3—Translation.]
Señor de Osma to Mr. Dudley.
FOREIGNOFFICE,
Lima,April 6, 1901.
MR.MINISTER: In fulfillment of the offer I had the honor to make to your

excellency on the 22d of last March for the definite settlement of the claim

of the American citizen, William Fowks, and which your excellency saw fit

to accept, I herewith inclose a check, No. 434532, of the public treasury for

3,000 soles, national money, on the Bank of Peru and London.

Thus ending this affair, I take the opportunity to renew, etc.,F O
[Inclosure 4.]
L U S,
Lima,April 8, 1901.

MR.MINISTER: I have the pleasure of acknowledging the receipt this afternoon

of your excellency’s note of the 6th instant, inclosing a check of the public

treasury for 3,000 soles in settlement of the claim of Mr. William Fowks,

pursuant to the offer made on the 22d ultimo. Under my instructions from

thehonorableSecretaryofState,ithasbeenmyaimtomeetyour

excellency’s friendly advances in a like conciliatory spirit, and I am glad to

believe that the conclusion herein reached will be equally satisfactory to

both Governments.

Thanking your excellency for the remittance, permit me once more to

renew, etc.,IRVINGB.DUDLEY.

[Document 377]
President Romana to President Roosevelt.
[Telegram.]

LIMA,September 14, 1901.

Accept expression of condolence in my own and country’s name for the

loss of the great President McKinley.
ROMANA,President.

[Document 378]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Dudley.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 20, 1901.

Please convey, through proper channel, in the name of the President and

people, sincere appreciation of President Romana’s message of condolence.
JOHNHAY.

Portugal
Contents

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, February 4, 1901.

[Document 379]
Mr. Thieriot to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lisbon,November 26, 1900.
No. 55.]

Government has decided to refuse permission for the sale of Ayer’s Cherry

Pectoral, Sarsaparilla and Ague Cure.

I take the liberty of inclosing a copy of my last letter to the minister of

foreign affairs, dated 20th of November, 1900, as well as a translation of the

last letter to me from the foreign office.

Messrs. James Cassels & Co., Oporto, have been informed of this news.

I have, etc.,
J.H.THIERIOT.
[Inclosure 1.]
L U S,
Lisbon,November 20, 1900.
In addition to the petition made to your excellency on the 22d of October,

1900, I have the honor to say that I am requested by the firm J. C. Ayer &

Co. to state that they have no objection to show the formula of their

Sarsaparilla, which is not a patent medicine, but approved of by all medical

men.

The composition of Pink Pills was made known to the “Conselho de Sande

e Hygiene,” but not to the public. The three medicines which the firm in

question now begs permission to offer for sale are, then, the following:

First, Sarsaparilla; second, Cherry Pectoral; third, Ague Cure.

These three medicines have been admitted for sale by all nations, and the

Sarsaparilla has the largest sale of any medicine in the world.

Requesting of your excellency the favor of a speedy decision in this matter,

I avail, etc.,J.H.THIERIOT.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]
Mr. Arroyo to Mr. Thieriot.
FOREIGNOFFICE,
Lisbon,November 23, 1900.

With reference to the permission asked for by the firm J. C. Ayer & Co. for

thesaleoftheirpharmaceuticalpreparations,andinreplytoyour

excellency’s notes on the subject, I have to acquaint your excellency that

the general board of public health has informed this department that by a

Sarsaparilla, Ayer’s Ague Cure.

I avail, etc.,
JMA

[Document 380]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Thieriot.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 20, 1900.

No. 29.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 55, of the 26th ultimo, I inclose copy of a letter

from the J. C. Ayer Company, of Lowell, Mass., urging that one more effort

may be made to obtain authorization for the sale of certain of their

medicines.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
J. C. Ayer Company to Mr. Hill.
LOWELL,MASS.,December 15, 1900.

SIR: We beg to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of the 13th instant,

advising that before the Department’s instructions of the 23d ultimo reached

the United States chargé d’affaires at Lisbon the Portuguese authorities had,

according to the chargé’s statement, refused a market for our medicines. We

are in receipt of advices to the same effect from our resident agents.

We have to thank you most sincerely for your many kindnesses in this

matter, and trust you will pardon us if we trespass on your attention a little

further as follows: Our preparations affected by this arbitrary decision of

thePortugueseauthoritiesareAyer’sCherryPectoralandAyer’s

Sarsaparilla. These medicines have been, sold in Portugal for fully thirty

years. During this time a large demand has been created, the medicines

having been recommended by a large number of Portuguese physicians and

medical men, and they have gained considerable acceptance among the

Portuguese people. It is, therefore, a serious blow to our business in

Portugal to have these goods shut out of the market there at this late date.

Our resident agents at Oporto, Messrs. James Cassels & Co., inform us that

the reason given by the council of health for refusing their approval of

Ayer’s Cherry Pectoral and Ayer’s Sarsaparilla is that they are secret

medicines. This is not true. The formulas are always available to the

members of the medical profession, to whom same are freely sent on

application. Messrs. James Cassels & Co. further report to us that in

November, 1899, “Dr. Williams’s Pink Pills,” a British preparation, was not

approved of by the council of health of Lisbon, but the British minister

requested that it should be approved of, and the Portuguese Government

ordered the council of health to reconsider their decision, with the result

that “Dr. Williams’s Pink Pills” received approval, although the formula is

actually kept a secret.

Messrs. Cassels & Co. say that if the United States minister at Lisbon were

politely, but firmly, to request the Portuguese Government to approve of our

medicines, stating the fact of their having been sold for so many years in

Portugal, and of their being recommended by a large number of Portuguese

medical men, and that our medicines are not secret medicines, the formulas

being supplied to medical men on application therefor, then, even now, it is

probable that the Portuguese Government would ask the council of health to

reconsider their decision.

If we may trespass on your kindness to this extent we shall esteem it a great

favor;andhopingthatyouwillinstructourministeratLisbonin

accordance with the above, We have, etc.,

JCAC

[Document 381]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Thieriot.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 21, 1900.

No. 30.]

SIR: Referring to the Department’s instruction of yesterday’s date, I inclose

copy of a later letter from the J. C. Ayer Company relative to the “exclusion

of their medicines from Portugal.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
J. C. Ayer Company to Mr. Hill.
LOWELL,MASS.,December 17, 1900.

SIR: We had the honor of addressing you on the 15th instant in the matter of

our preparations in Portugal, and to-day are in receipt of your esteemed

favor of the 14th, covering copy of a note addressed to the United States

legation at Lisbon by the Portuguese foreign office stating that permission

has been denied for the sale of Ayer’s Cherry Pectoral, Ayer’s Sarsaparilla,

and Ayer’s Ague Cure. In this note is not stated the ground on which the

permission has been denied, but our resident agents at Oporto inform us that

the decision has been made on the ground that the preparations in question

are “secret” medicines. As stated in our respects to you of the 15th instant,

this is not true.

In any event the decision is a most arbitrary one and has no just basis, the

motivethereforbeing,infact,thedesireofthePortuguesenative

manufacturers to prevent the importation and competition of American

medicines.

The exclusion of our Ague Cure is of small moment, as we have made no

particular demand in Portugal for that medicine, but we beg that you will be

kind enough to exert your influence in favor of a reversal of the decision of

the Portuguese ministers in so far as the same affects Ayer’s Cherry Pectoral

and Ayer’s Sarsaparilla.

Again expressing our thanks for your good attention, and hoping for your

further assistance in the way indicated herein and in our letter of the 15th

instant, We have, etc.,

J.C.AYERCOMPANY.

[Document 382]
Mr. Thieriot to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lisbon,December 24, 1900.

No. 58.]

SIR: Referring to my No. 55, of November 26, with reference to the sale of

Ayer’s medicines, I have the honor to state that I have just received a letter

from the J. C. Ayer Company on the above subject, of which the inclosed is

a copy. I await Department’s instructions how to proceed further in this

matter.

I have, etc.,
J.H.THIERIOT.
[Inclosure.]
J. C. Ayer Company to Mr. Thieriot.
OFFICE OFJ.C.AYERCOMPANY,
Lowell, Mass.,December 8, 1900.

S: We regret exceedingly to learn from Messrs. James Cassels & Co., our

resident agents at Oporto, that in the Diario do Governo of 20th ultimo

notice was given that Ayer’s Sarsaparilla, Ayer’s Cherry Pectoral, and

Ayer’s Ague Cure had not been approved of by the conselho de saude

becausetheyweresecretmedicines.Thisannouncementisastrong

disappointment to us, as we had confidently anticipated, despite the long

delay on the part of the Portuguese authorities in considering the case, that a

favorable decision would be given. On the 27th ultimo we were advised by

the Secretary of State at Washington that cable instructions had been again

sent requesting you to use your influence to obtain the authorization of our

medicines. We beg that, despite the notice referred to in the Diario do

approve of our Cherry Pectoral and Sarsaparilla (the Ague Cure is not of so

muchimportance),onthegroundthattheyhavebeenapprovedof

elsewhere; that they are recommended by very many Portuguese physicians

and medical men; and particularly that these medicines are not secret

medicines, because the formulas are sent to all medical men requesting

same. In fact, we have no objection whatever to the publication of our

formulas,andourmedicinescannotproperlybeclassedassecret

medicines.

We are informed that Williams’s Pink Pills, a British preparation, had not

met with the approval of the conselho de saude, but the British minister

used his influence in favor of their approval with the result that the

Portuguese Government ordered the conselho de saude to reconsider its

decision,andtheoutcomewasthatDr. Williams’sPinkPillsfinally

received the approval of the conselho de saude, despite the fact that the

formula of this medicine is actually kept a secret.

Wehaveinvestedlargecapitalandhaveexpendedmuchenergyin

establishing our business in Portugal, which has been in existence now for

some thirty years. It is, therefore, a great injury to our interests to come

under the ban of the conselho de saude in this arbitrary fashion, and we

sincerely hope that you will oblige us by acting as strongly in the matter as

may be possible.

Thanking you in anticipation,

We have, etc.,

JCAC

[Document 383]
Mr. Thieriot to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lisbon,January 14, 1901.
No. 62.]

SIR: In accordance with the Department’s instructions Nos. 29 and 30, and

accompanying copies of letters from the Ayer Company, I have had a

special interview with the minister of foreign affairs, with the view of

prevailing upon him by the most forcible representations to use his best

influencetoobtainfromtheboardofhealthauthorizationforthe

importation and sale of at least the two medicines of most importance to the

Ayer Company, and his excellency has promised me that he will do all in

his power to bring the board of health to this decision.

I have, etc.,
J.H.THIERIOT,
Chargé d’Affaires.

[Document 384]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Thieriot.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 19, 1901.

No. 32.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 58, of the 24th

ultimo, inclosing copy of a letter from the J. C. Ayer Company, of Lowell,

Mass., relative to the sale of their medicines in Portugal.

Referring to the Department’s No. 29, of the 20th ultimo, which crossed

yours, I have to say that you may use your good offices in the direction of

one more effort to obtain authorization for the sale in Portugal of certain of

the medicines of this company, although it would seem to the Department

that the efforts of this Government in its behalf had been well-nigh

exhausted.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 385]
Mr. Thieriot to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Lisbon,February 4, 1901.
No. 65.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s

instruction No. 32, of the 19th ultimo, to hand this day.

In compliance with the Department’s No. 29, of December 20, 1900,

instructing me to make one more effort to obtain authorization for the sale

of the Ayer Company’s medicines, I beg to say that since its receipt I have

made,bothverballyandbyletter,renewedeffortsinthisdirection,

resulting, however, I regret to say, in a reply from the minister of foreign

affairs which, I suppose, must be regarded as final, and of which I beg to

inclose a translation.

I have, etc.,
J.H.THIERIOT.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
F O,February 1, 1901.

In reply to your excellency’s note of January 28 last, accompanied by a

letter addressed to you by the Ayer Company, I have to apprise your

excellency that the proper department, to which the said documents were

made known, informs me that the decision come to with respect to the

preparations Cherry Pectoral and Sarsaparilla was based upon the opinion

of technical experts, and in harmony with the provisions of the decree of the

10thofMay,1899,whichregulatesthesaleofmedicinesofsecret

composition, in which category the medicines referred to are comprised,

for, according to the terms of the minister’s order of the 17th of March,

1865, all medicines are to be considered secret which are not to be found

mentioned and sanctioned in the legal pharmacopoeia of the Kingdom.

I embrace this opportunity to renew, etc.,
JOAÕM.ARROYO.

[Document 385a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 11, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMER SUBJECTS OF PORTUGAL WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

qualifications as such.

On returning to the Kingdom with the intention of residing in it he may

reacquirePortuguesesubjectionbyrequestingitfromthemunicipal

authorities of the place he selects for his residence. Not making this

declaration he remains an alien and is not subject to military duty.

If a Portuguese leaves Portugal without having performed the military duty

to which he was liable and becomes naturalized in a foreign country, his

property is subject to seizure, and that of the person who may have become

security for him when he left the Kingdom is equally liable. There is no

treaty between the United States and Portugal defining the status of former

Portuguese subjects who have become naturalized American citizens.

Passports are not required to enter Portuguese dominions. Travelers are,

however, required to establish their nationality when they depart, and for

this purpose a passport is the most effective document.

[Document 386]
The King of Portugal to the Vice-President of the United States.
[Telegram.]

LISBON,September 15, 1901.

I share with the American people in the mourning that so sorely afflicts

them.
KING OFPORTUGAL.

[Document 387]
Mr. Hay to the minister for foreign affairs of Portugal.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 17, 1901.

In the names of Mrs. McKinley and of President Roosevelt I am directed to

ask your excellency to convey to His Majesty sincere appreciation felt by

the President and the American nation for His Majesty’s messages of

condolence.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 387a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 20, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF ROUMANIA WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

All male inhabitants of Roumania except those under foreign protection are

liable to military duty between the ages of 21 and 30 years.

American citizens formerly Roumanian subjects are not molested upon their

returntoRoumania,unlesstheyinfringedRoumanianlawbefore

emigrating. One who did not complete his military service in Roumania,

and can not prove that he performed military service in the United States, is

subject to arrest, or fine, or both, for evasion of military duty.

There is no treaty between the United States and Roumania defining the

status of naturalized Americans of Roumanian birth returning to Roumania.

Passports are absolutely necessary in Roumania, and must be viséed by a

Roumanian consul. If they are not so viséed the holder may be sent back

from the frontier to the nearest place where there is a Roumanian consul.

An American who intends to remain in Roumania for a longer period than

eight days must have his passport viséed by the United States consul at

Bucharest and obtain a permit of residence, valid for one year, from the

prefecture of police.

[Document 388]
Mr. Stourdza, president of the Council of Roumania, to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Translation.]

BUCHAREST,September 15, 1901.

It is not without keen emotion that the Royal Government of Roumania has

received the news of the tragic death of President McKinley. Please receive

the most sincere condolences of the president of the Council.
D.STOURDZA

[Document 389]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Stourdza.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,Washington,September 16, 1901.

Pray accept on behalf of the American Government and people grateful

thanks for Roumanian sympathy in their deep affliction.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 390]
Mr. Breckinridge to Mr. Olney.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
St. Petersburg,February 23, 1897.

No. 489.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith copy of a letter, without date, from

Mrs. Louisa Lassonne, who wishes a renewal of her passport, and to request

the ruling of the Department upon the case.

This is a case where the lady, the widow of a naturalized American citizen,

confesses to having no identity with the United States or purpose of going

there. Upon the other hand, she pleads inability to go, from poverty and the

infirmities of age; but it does not appear that the necessity of her stay

abroad has arisen from any vocation such as the Department usually accepts

as sufficient ground for protracted absence. The case is a sympathetic one,

but I feel that I can not accede to her application without special authority

to do so.

I have, etc.,
CLIFTONR.BRECKINRIDGE.
[Inclosure.]
S: I heard from Mr. Billhardt, the American consul at Moscow, that you

refuse to give me a new passport on the plea that you wish to know a little

more about me.

Well, I, Mrs. Louisa Lassonne, a native of Switzerland, born in Vevey,

Canton de Vaud, was married in the year 1874, on the 9th of May, to Mr.

Charles Lassonne, a naturalized citizen of the United States of America, at

St. Petersburg, at the United States legation, by R. I. Hall, in the presence of

Marshal Jewell, then ambassador of the said legation.

I am an old woman, weak and sickly, a widow; I earn my bread by teaching;

in the winter I give lessons, in the summer I travel about with families at

whom I engage as governess.

I never was in America, and can not go there if I wished, having no means;

and what should I do there, I being a stranger, rather to say, foreign to the

country; in which way could I get my existence; and should I say it frankly,

I thought that I had a right to the aid and protection from the country I

became a citizen by legal rights, and instead of that I am refused a passport.

I ask for it lawfully, by appellation, as I have been told to do by Mr.

Billhardt. I will hope, sir, that after this explanation you will not refuse to

issue me a passport; if in a contrary case, please teach me what I have to do

in future.

With high respect, etc.,
L.LASSONNE.

[Document 391]
Mr. Sherman to Mr. Breckinridge.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington, D. C.,March 15, 1897.

No. 379.]

SIR: Your No. 489, of the 23d ultimo, in relation to the application of Mrs.

Louisa Lassonne for a passport, has been received. From the statement of

your dispatch and Mrs. Lassonne’s letter it appears that the applicant, being

a native of Switzerland, was married in St. Petersburg in 1874 to Mr.

Charles Lassonne, stated to be a naturalized citizen of the United States.

She is now a widow. She has never been in the United States and has no

apparent intention of coming hither.

No question appears to be raised as to the nationality of the applicant’s late

husband, and it is presumed that you have satisfied yourself that he was a

duly naturalized citizen. The only question for the Department to consider is

whether, under the circumstances, Mrs. Lassonne is entitled to protection as

a citizen of the United States.

Mrs. Lassonne’s claim can, of course, be no better than her husband’s

would be were he alive; and it would seem that at some time in or prior to

1874hevirtuallyabandonedhis AmericanresidenceforaEuropean

domicile. The widow’s case is even weaker, for, during nearly a quarter of a

century since her marriage, she has never enjoyed an American domicile.

Moreover, a somewhat peculiar aspect exists in this case. By our statute an

alien wife of an American citizen shares his citizenship. By the usual rules

of continental private international law a woman marrying an alien shares

his status, certainly during his life; but thereafter on widowhood reverts to

her original status unless she abandons the country of her origin and returns

tothatofherlatehusband. WereMrs.Lassonnenowsojourningin

Switzerland, it would probably be claimed that she had on widowhood

reverted to her character as a Switzer; and the converse claim that she had

become a citizen of the United States by operation of the laws of the United

States, without ever having been within their jurisdiction, would probably

be contested by Switzerland. As the lady, however, is not in her native

country, but in a third state, this point is not material to the question

whether she is or is not entitled to protection as an American citizen. It is

merely mentioned by way of suggestion that, as she is certainly not a

Russian so far as appears and is not entitled to protection as an American

citizen, her Swiss character may be found to remain intact, entitling her to a

Swiss passport.

The Department’s conclusion is that it can not authorize you to grant Mrs.

Lassonne a passport upon the facts as stated by you.

Respectfully, yours,
JOHNSHERMAN.

[Document 392]
Mr. Tower to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
St. Petersburg,November 20, 1901.

No. 499.]

SIR: I beg leave to inclose to you herewith a copy of a letter, dated at

Moscow the 21st of October, 1901, from Mrs. Louisa Lassonne, who seeks

an American passport for identification and protection in Russia.

It appears that Mrs. Lassonne was born in Switzerland, in the Canton de

Vaud, and that she is now a widow. She was married in 1874 to Charles

Lassonne, a naturalized citizen, with whom she lived in Moscow until his

death some years ago.

She applied to the United States legation in St. Petersburg for a passport in

1897, and her application was submitted to the Department of State by the

Hon. Clifton R. Breckinridge in his dispatch No. 489, of the 23d of

February of that year.

The decision of the honorable Secretary of State, given in Mr. Sherman’s

dispatch No. 379, of the 15th of March, 1897, was that the application of

Mrs. Lassonne could not be granted, and an American passport could not be

issued to her because, as her husband had died and she had never been in

America, she was held to have lost the American citizenship acquired by

her in her marriage with him.

The honorable Secretary expressed his decision as follows:

By the usual rules of continental private international law a

woman marrying an alien shares his status, certainly during his

life; but thereafter on widowhood reverts to her original status

unless she abandons the country of her origin and returns to that

of her late husband. Were Mrs. Lassonne now sojourning in

widowhoodrevertedtohercharacterasaSwitzer;andthe

converse claim that she had become a citizen of the United States

by operation of the laws of the United States, without ever having

been within their jurisdiction, would probably be contested by

Switzerland. As the lady, however, is not in her native country,

but in a third state, this point is not material to the question

whether she is or is not entitled to protection as an American

citizen. It is merely mentioned by way of suggestion that, as she

is certainly not a Russian so far as appears and is not entitled to

protection as an American citizen, her Swiss character may be

found to remain intact, entitling her to a Swiss passport.

The Department’s conclusion is that it can not authorize you to

grant Mrs. Lassonne a passport upon the facts as stated by you.

The only new matter presented by Mrs. Lassonne in her present appeal,

which I have the honor to lay before you, is the decision of the Swiss

Federal Council, a copy of which is hereto attached, that she lost her Swiss

citizenship by her marriage with a foreigner, and that she can not resume

her original nationality upon the death of her husband. Therefore she asks to

be recognized as an American.

Mrs. Lassonne, who is 54 years of age, supports herself in Moscow by

teaching. She is too poor to go either to America or to Switzerland, and she

has sent me a certificate issued by Dr. Kramoreff, of Moscow, declaring that

she is physically too weak to travel far. A copy of that certificate is also

hereto attached.

In submitting this case I beg leave to ask for further instructions in the

matter.

I have, etc.,
C T
[Inclosure 1.]

MOSCOW,October 21, 1901.

SIR: The first thing I will do is to beg pardon for intruding upon you, but I

feel duty bound to let you know what my next step will be concerning my

claims to an American passport. You have returned the papers sent you

through our United States consul resident in Moscow, Mr. Smith, saying

that you could not issue a new passport to me, as the same had been refused

to me four years ago.

Well, sir, allow me to explain my circumstances to you: In 1874, at the

legation of the United States at St. Petersburg, I was married to Mr. Charles

Lassonne, a citizen of the United States of America, city and county of New

York. My husband had at the time a temporary domicile in Moscow, and

never had the intention of remaining here in this country, but he got ill, and

during many years has been ailing, incapable of earning anything, or

working to maintain wile or family. I had to work to keep him. All these

facts I can prove by witnesses, certificates, records of hospitals, etc.; even

the Rev. Henry Bernard, former chaplain of the British church in Moscow,

could certify the truth of my assertions. When my husband died his papers

were sent to Washington. I had my own passport delivered to me at the

embassy in Constantinople. As the new American law came out I was told

that the passports were issued only for the term of two years. I immediately

made an application to the minister in St. Petersburg and I received my

document. I changed it again when the time came; and four years ago what

was my astonishment to learn that my passport had been kept by the

minister and a new one refused to me, under the plea that my husband

having willfully abandoned his American residence, I, his widow, had lost

my right to an American passport, being no longer a citizen, and that

according to a certain international law that should exist (sic) any European

woman married to an American lost her rights at his death and became what

she was before—that is to say, for me, aSwiss citizen. Well, sir, I took a

Swiss advocate, Mr. Magnin, in Geneva, sent all my papers to him. He

submitted them to the American consul in Geneva, who said about the same

thing to him. Then Mr. Magnin, acting for me, applied first to the cantonal

council, then to the Federal Council of Switzerland, and you will find

inclosed a copy of the decision of both councils. So, now, sir, I would like

to know what I am. The American minister says I am a Swiss; the Swiss

Government says I am an American by marriage. Mr. Breckinridge sends

me to America to fulfill my duties as an American citizen. Sir, I am an old

woman, a great invalid; here I send you the certificate of my physician; I

can not undertake such a voyage, and if I were to break my home, my

connections, my livelihood to start a new life, should I land there to go to

the workhouse?

I have said all; now remains me to ask you, sir, to take my state into

consideration, to grant me that paper, as it is the only means of living quiet

the few days that are left to me. Should you find it impossible to grant me

my requirement I will write to Mr. John Hay, in Washington, and lay the

wholecasebeforehim. Youmustsee,sir,thatIsufferthroughthe

incapacity of some officials.

With best respect, etc.,
L.LASSONNE.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]
Certificate.
MOSCOW,October 7, 1901.

I certify hereby that Madame Louisa Ivanovna Lassonne, an American

citizen, aged 54, is, suffering from chronic arteriosclerosis, together with

myocarditis, in consequence of which it is impossible for her to undertake a

long journey.
N K MD,
Court Counsellor.
[Inclosure 3.—Translation.]
The State council of the Canton of Vaud decides:

“That the community of Chessel is absolutely in the right in refusing to

grant a certificate of origin to Madame Lassonne, widow.

“That in conformity with the civil rights of the Canton of Vaud a woman of

that Canton who marries a foreigner takes the nationality of her husband;

she therefore loses her nationality and her right to citizenship of the Canton

of Vaud.”

The State council of Vaud refers us, however, to the political federal

department, to whom we have applied immediately.
MAGNIN,
Attorney-at-Law.
[Inclosure 4.—Translation.]
FEDERAL COUNCIL.
In the matter of the appeal from the decision of the community of Chessel

and the State council of the Canton of Vaud, the Federal Council decides:

“That the authorities of the Canton of Vaud are justified in refusing a

naturalization certificate to Madame Lassonne, a widow, by birth Schulz,

who through her marriage with a foreigner has lost her original citizenship.”

[Document 393]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Tower.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 6, 1901.
No. 264.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 499, of the 20th ultimo,

inclosing copy of a letter from Mrs. L. Lassonne, appealing for a United

States passport.

YourefertotheDepartment’sNo.379,ofMarch15,1897,toMr.

Breckinridge, in which the Department declined to issue a passport to Mrs.

Lassonne.

The opinion of the Department that Mrs. Lassonne was not entitled to a

passport was not based on the hypothesis that she would be claimed as a

Swiss citizen by Switzerland. This was merely mentioned as a suggestion

that she might possibly secure a Swiss passport. The decision of the

Department was based upon her abandonment of the citizenship which she

acquired by her marriage to a citizen of the United States.

I quote from the instruction:

It appears that the applicant, being a native of Switzerland, was

married in St. Petersburg in 1874 to Mr. Charles Lassonne. * * *

She is now a widow. She has never been in the United States, and

has no apparent intention of coming hither. * * * The only

question for the Department to consider is whether, under the

circumstances, Mrs. Lassonne is entitled to protection as a citizen

of the United States. Mrs. Lassonne’s claim can, of course, be no

better than her husband’s would be, were he alive; and it would

seem that at some time in or prior to 1874 he virtually abandoned

his American residence for a European domicile. The widow’s

case is even weaker, for, during nearly a quarter of a century since

her marriage, she has never enjoyed an American domicile.

While the Department’s sympathies are with Mrs. Lassonne, it thinks that

she is not entitled to a passport as an American citizen.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 394]
Mr. Tower to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
St. Petersburg,January 10, 1901.

No. 381.]

SIR: I have the honor to report to you the case of a naturalized American

citizen, named Giovanni J. Margolin, who has recently come to Russia and

now asks this embassy to secure for him the privilege of remaining here for

an indefinite time.

The subject of this gentleman’s request was brought to my attention by the

United States consul at Riga, a copy of whose letter, dated the 3d of

December,aswellasoftheentirecorrespondence,isrespect-fully

submitted herewith.

This Mr. Margolin is an Austrian by birth, 32 years of age, who emigrated

to the United States in 1895, and was naturalized before the district court of

the United States for the southern district of New York, on the 2d day of

October 1900. He has come to Russia with every apparent intention of

remaining here; having, as he says, “a great number of relations in Russia,

and which are all connected with business houses of influence.” As he is a

Jew, however, he has been granted a limited permit, which as you well

know is required under the provisions of the Russian law, by which he is

authorized to reside within the Empire for three months. But not content

with this, he calls upon this embassy to exert the influence of the United

States Government in his behalf to the end that he may secure “permission

to stop in this country as long as my passport.” The passport which he

presents is dated at Berlin the 1st day of November, 1900, and was issued

there by the Hon. Andrew D. White, United States ambassador.

Upon the receipt of this communication through Mr. Bornholdt, United

States consul, I replied that I should require some further details as to Mr.

Margolin’s origin and nationality before I could take up his case, and that I

wished to know more clearly what his connection is with America and upon

what ground he calls upon the Government of the United States to serve

him.

Thereupon Mr. Margolin wrote me the letter of the 17th of December, from

Whitebsk, which forms part of the correspondence hereto attached.

It appears from the details which I have been able to obtain that this man

was naturalized only last October and left America at once, for we find him

already in Berlin equipped with an American passport on the 1st day of

November. He has no interest in the United States that I can discover; he

has never paid any tax there; has never served upon a jury. In fine, he has

rendered no service of any kind to the country.

Immediately upon coming to Europe, however, he seeks to employ his

newly acquired citizenship, not for protection against personal injury, but

for the acquirement ofprivilegein the furtherance of his own aims.

In order to ascertain definitely whether Mr. Margolin intends in good faith

to return to the United States and perform there his duties as an American

citizen or not, I wrote to him on the 2d of January asking him whether he

wished a permit to live in Russia for two years, the period for which he

holds his present American passport, and whether he sought also to remain

here permanently.

By his reply, dated the 6th of January, to which I have the honor to refer

you, he informs me that he intends to live permanently in Russia if the

Imperial authorities will allow him to do so.

There is nothing to show that this man had any interest in becoming an

American citizen beyond the purpose of using the advantages of citizenship

in order to obtain privileges abroad which certainly would not have been

asked for in his behalf by his own representatives if he had come to Russia

directly from the country of his origin. Nor is it unreasonable, from his own

presentationofthecase,toassumethathehasalreadysubstantially

abandoned his duties and obligations as an American citizen.

It is true, he declares in his letter to me of the 17th of December, “I expect

by importing different American novelties exclusively for Russia to approve

as well with the interest of my country as I think it will provide convenient

for my share.” A statement which I incline to regard rather as an appeal to

sentiment than an indication of a serious purpose to develop American

industry. And I have not been willing to comply with Mr. Margolin’s

request because, if we have on the one hand his unsupported declaration

that he intends to introduce American wares into Russia, I respectfully

submit that we have on the other a plain attempt to abuse an American

certificate of naturalization.

I have, etc.,
CHARLEMAGNETOWER.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Bornholdt to Mr. Tower.
UNITEDSTATESCONSULATE,
Riga,November 20, December 3, 1900.

No. 16.]

SIR: According to the inclosed United States passport with Russian visé, the

bearer of the same, Mr. Giovanni Margolin, has obtained the permission to

stay in Russia for a period of three months on account of his being of

Hebrew origin.

Mr. Margolin informs me that he has come to Russia with the intention of

forming commercial relations here, and that for this purpose he deems it

necessary to prolong his stay here for about two years.

Although this seems to be rather a long time, I make free, at the request of

Mr. Margolin, to submit the matter to your appreciation in case it might be

possible to obtain for the petitioner the desired permission.

I have, etc.,

N.P.BORNHOLDT,
United States Consul.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Bornholdt to Mr. Tower.
UNITEDSTATESCONSULATE,
Riga,November 20, December 3, 1900.

SIR: Mr. Margolin, concerning whom you will receive simultaneously an

official letter from this consulate, referred to a similar case, which, he

asserted had taken place some time ago.

In this case, he said, the permission (to stay in Russia) had at first been

refused by the Imperial Government, but had been granted later on, in

consequence of a direct appeal from the Hebrew in question to United

States President.

You are of course the best judge concerning the attention which this tale

deserves.

However, as I understand that Mr. Margolin intends, in case of refusal, to

address a similar appeal to the President, I have considered it not quite

superflous to mention to you what he told me.

I have, etc.,
NPB
[Inclosure 3.]
E U S.
St. Petersburg,December 6, 1900.

S: I have duly received your letter of the 3d of December, and your

personal letter of the same date, in regard to Mr. Giovanni Margolin, who

wishes to have a permit which he has received from the Russian authorities

to reside for three months within the Empire extended for a period of two

years.

Before taking up this case I shall require some further details as to Mr.

Margolin, the country of his origin and his connection with America. As he

is a naturalized citizen of the United States, I wish you would ask him to

state to me where and when he was born, when he emigrated to America,

where he lived, and what his occupation was while there, when he left

there. Ask him also to state whether he pays any taxes in the United States;

and if so, how much and where. I wish further to know whether he has ever

served upon a jury there; and in general what American interest he may

have, if any, to strengthen his claim for protection as an American citizen.

I return to you herewith the certificate of naturalization of Giovanni J.

Margolin, before the district court of the United States for the southern

district of New York, on the 2d day of October, 1900; and the passport of

Giovanni J. Margolin, No. 2386, issued by the Hon. Andrew D. White, at

the United States embassy in Berlin, on the 1st day of November, 1900.

I am, etc.,
CHARLEMAGNETOWER.
[Inclosure 4.]
C U S,
Riga,November 25/December 8, 1900.

No. 17.]
S: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of you letter of the 6th instant

I wrote simultaneously to the said person, requesting him to furnish you the

desired information on the direct way.

I have, etc.,
P.N.BORNHOLDT.
[Inclosure 5.]
Mr. Margolin to Mr. Tower.
VITEBSK,December 4/17, 1900.

YOUREXCELLENCY: A few days ago I received a letter from the United States

consul at Riga, where I applied for kind assistance to protect my sojourn in

Russia as an American citizen, with the instruction to furnish the embassy

on the direct way with some further details in regard to my person. I hereby

take the liberty to comply with the order of the consul, and I venture to

hope that the honorable embassy will convey my petition. The origin of my

country is Austria, and I was born on the 10th of October, 1868, at

Stanislau, Austria, of Jewish parentage. After finishing different colleges of

education in Austria and Germany, I went to New York with the purpose of

entering a business career. I landed in New York on the 4th day of January,

1895, and lived there all the time until October 4, 1900, when I sailed for

Europe. I was employed there for several years in prominent commercial

houses as a bookkeeper. After acquiring some of the important methods

how to transact and own business, and possessing partly the American

language, I represented in partnership with another gentleman under our

own firm a large concern in “American novelties” for the State of New

York. Finally I was engaged in the real estate and insurance business for

myself until my departure with a success capable of being named. I have

never been taxed there and I have never served upon a jury. My intention

and good will are to stay a citizen of the United States. Under the

circumstances that I have a great number of relations in Russia and which

arewellconnectedwithbusinesshousesofinfluence,Iexpect,by

importing different American novelties exclusively for Russia, to approve

as well with the interests of my country, as I think it will provide convenient

for my share. Therefore I request of the highly esteemed embassy to secure

for me the permission to stop in this country at least as long as my passport,

which I presume was sent to the embassy with my citizen paper by the

consul at Riga, is entitled to his rights. Trusting that my petition will find a

a favorable assistance with the honorable embassy, I have, etc.
G.J.MARGOLIN.
[Inclosure 6.]
Mr. Tower to Mr. Margolin.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
St. Petersburg,January 2, 1901.

SIR: I have received your letter, dated at Whitebsk the 4–17th of December,

1900, in which you reply to the questions which I asked of Mr. Bornholdt,

United States consul, in regard to your nationality and your naturalization in

America.

You now request me to secure for you a permit to reside in Russia “at least

as long as your passport.” By this I judge that you would like a permit for

two years with the privilege of having it renewed when you renew your

passport. Is this not so, or do you wish a permanent residence in Russia?

Yours, etc.,
C T
[Inclosure 7.]
V ,January 6, 1901.

YE : I have received your letter of January 2, with which your

excellency had the kindness to honor me, and I hasten to submit to your

excellency an obedient reply. It will deign perfectly to my satisfaction if

your excellency shall favor me with the grace to secure for me a permit to

reside as long as my passport, as issued by the esteemed embassy of the

United States at Berlin for two years, is current. In case my enterprises

should exhibit a favorable result, in every respect, I would prefer, if

possible, having the privilege of renewing your excellency’s, for me, kind

obtained permit, together with my passport, after its expiration. I presume

that to secure a permanent residence in Russia will be connected with many

difficulties, therefore I have decided to aim at that idea. Finally, I take the

liberty of mentioning the fact that the permission of my sojourn in Russia,

originally granted to me by the Russian minister, as your excellency will

kindly notice of my passport, will soon lose its validity, in consequence of

which I hereby request of your excellency to relieve my case, to your

excellency’s earliest convenience, with an affirmative success.

I have the honor to be, etc.,
G.J.MARGOLIN.
[Inclosure 8.]
Mr. Tower to Mr. Margolin.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
St. Petersburg,January 9, 1901.

SIR: I have received your letter of the 6th of January. You tell me, in reply to

my inquiry, that you wish to obtain a permit to remain in Russia at least for

two years, and, if possible, the right to live here permanently.

I have submitted your case to the Department of State, at Washington, and

shall inform you immediately upon the receipt by me of its decision.

In the meantime, I say to you that, in view of the fact that you lived in the

United States barely long enough to become a citizen; that you never

performed any service there whatever, or paid any taxes; and that you left

Americaimmediatelyuponhavingobtainedyourcertificateof

naturalization, you are not likely to be looked upon as one in a position to

call upon the United States Government to interest itself in securing

privileges for you abroad.

Yours, truly,
CHARLEMAGNETOWER.

[Document 395]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Tower.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 30, 1901.

No. 216.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 381, of the 10th instant,

reporting the case of Mr. Giovanni J. Margolin, an Austrian by birth, Jewish

faith, who emigrated to the United States in 1895, was naturalized October

2, 1900, then went to Europe, secured a passport dated November 1, 1900,

at the United States embassy in Berlin, entered Russia with a permission, as

a Hebrew, to stay three months, and who now asks the good offices of this

Government, in order to secure the extension of that permission on the part

of the Russian Government to the full term of the passport, or indefinitely.

The Department approves your view of the case. More satisfactory evidence

should be forthcoming than is now submitted of Mr. Margolin’s actual

conservation of his acquired citizenship before the intervention of this

Government should be exercised to procure for him the continued privilege

of residence in Russia for which he applies.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 396]
Mr. Tower to Mr. Hay.
EMBASSY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
St. Petersburg,July 27, 1901.

No. 454.]

SIR: I have the honor to report to you for your information that Mr. George

Kennan, an American citizen, recently visiting St. Petersburg, was directed

day before yesterday by the Russian police authorities to quit the Empire.

Mr. Kennan arrived here about three weeks ago, by way of Finland, and has

since been staying at the Hotel d’Angleterre in this city. His criticisms of

the Russian Government in a book which he published some years ago in

relation to the penal institutions of Siberia have not been considered either

just or fair by the Russians themselves, and his presence here has not been

looked upon with favor by the official community of the Empire.

Although Mr. Kennan reported himself to the police authorities of St.

Petersburg upon his arrival here, as all travelers are required by law to do,

he has not been disturbed until now. He has been treated with entire

courtesyandconsideration;though,havingvoluntarilyplacedhimself

within the jurisdiction of the Russian law, he has become, as he himself

admits, amenable to its provisions and is consequently ordered beyond the

frontier.

Mr. Kennan wrote to me last evening as follows:

A very courteous officer from the department of police called at

my room this afternoon to inform me that, by direction of the

minister of the interior, and in accordance with chapter 313 of

Volume II of the laws of the Empire, I, as an “untrustworthy”

American citizen am to be sent out of the country by the train

leaving here for Germany at 10.30 to-morrow night. Meanwhile I

am under close arrest in my room.

Of course they are acting within their right, and I have no

complaint whatever to make, nor do I ask any interposition on the

part of the embassy.

Mr. Kennan requested that Mr. Morgan, secretary of this embassy, should

go to him to assist in having some books packed which he could not carry

in his trunk. At my request Mr. Morgan called upon Mr. Kennan yesterday

to ask whether he was in need of any assistance. Mr. Kennan replied that he

had nothing to ask for, and that he met with politeness from all the officials

of the Imperial police. He left St. Petersburg last evening at 10.30 o’clock.

The chapter 313 of Volume II of the Russian law, under which this

expulsion has taken place, reads as follows:

Governors of provinces shall have supervision of all residents

within their jurisdiction, and also of all foreigners who may be

temporarily sojourning therein either for purposes of business or

otherwise. They shall secure to such foreigners the benefits to

which they may be entitled under the law, and shall protect them

in the pursuit of their several occupations.

But they shall require the passports of all foreigners to be in due

conduct, actions, and mode of life of all such foreigners.

Foreigners who have come into Russia with passports may be

expelled from the Empire only upon the decision of a court of law

or by order of the higher police authorities.

Those foreigners whose behavior is suspicious and those who are

not desirable as residents within the Empire may be expelled by

order of the minister of the interior.

I have the honor to inclose to you herewith a copy of Mr. Kennan’s letter to

me under date of the 25th of July, 1901.

I have, etc.,

CHARLEMAGNETOWER.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Kennan to Mr. Tower.
HOTEL D’ANGLETERRE,
July 25, 1901, 7 p.m.
DEARMR.TOWER: A very courteous officer from the department of police called

at my room this afternoon to inform me that by direction of the minister of

the interior and in accordance with chapter 313 of Volume II of the laws of

the Empire, I, as an “untrustworthy” American citizen, am to be sent out of

the country by the train leaving here for Germany at 10.30 to-morrow night.

Meanwhile, I am under close arrest in my room.

Of course they are acting within their right, and I have no complaint

whatever to make, nor do I ask interposition on the part of the embassy. I

merely wish you to know why it is impossible for me to make a farewell

call upon you.

If, however, without inconveniencing or compromising the embassy in any

way, you could request Mr. Morgan to call upon me to-morrow (Friday) I

should like to ask him to give some directions for me with regard to the

shipment of some (perfectly innocent) Russian books, which, owing to my

arrest, I can’t get packed. I shouldn’t put him to so much trouble if I could

help it, but I presume I shall not be allowed to see any other person.

I shall go directly through to London, and will advise you by telegraph of

my safe arrival there.

With sincere respect and esteem, I am, faithfully yours,G K

[Document 397]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Tower.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 13, 1901.

No. 247.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 454 of the 27th ultimo,

reporting the arrest and expulsion from the Russian Empire of Mr. George

Kennan, an American citizen.

In reply I have to say that the incident attracted little attention in this

country,theexpulsionnothavingbeenattendedwithanyaction

occasioning complaint on Mr. Kennan’s part.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 397a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 1, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF RUSSIA WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

A Russian is enrolled for military service at the beginning of the twenty-

first year of his age, and remains on the rolls to the end of his forty-third

year; but at the age of 15 he is considered to be among those who are liable

to perform military service, and he can not, after reaching that age, ask for

permissiontobecomeacitizenofaforeigncountry,unlesshehas

performed his military service. A Russian who becomes a citizen of another

country without Imperial consent is liable under Russian law to the loss of

all his civil rights and to perpetual banishment from the Empire. If he

returns he is liable to deportation to Siberia. When a Russian emigrates

before he is 15 years old, and subsequently becomes a citizen of another

country, he is equally liable to punishment, unless when he attained the age

of 21 years he took steps necessary to obtain the consent of the Emperor to

his expatriation.

Naturalized Americans of Russian birth, of the Jewish race, are not allowed

to enter Russia except by special permission. For this, they may apply to the

minister of the interior, but the Department can not act as intermediary in

making the application.

There is no treaty between the United States and Russia defining the status

of American citizens of Russian birth upon their return to Russia.

No one is admitted to Russia without a passport. It must be visaed by a

Russian diplomatic or consular representative. Upon entering Russia it

should be shown at the first Government house, and the holder will be

given another passport or permit of sojourn. At least twenty-four hours

before departure from Russia this permit should be presented and a passport

of departure will be granted and the original passport returned. A fresh

permit to remain in Russia must be obtained every six months.

[Document 398]
Mr. Wollant to Mr. Say.
[Telegram.—Translation.]

RUSSIANEMBASSY,
Narragansett Pier,September 15, 1901.

Prince Oblensky, acting Imperial minister, profoundly afflicted by the sad

news of the demise of President McKinley, desires me to transmit to the

FederalGovernmenttheexpressionofthekeenestandmostsincere

sympathy of the Imperial Government in the great calamity which has

befallen the Government and the people of the United States.
G. DEWOLLANT.

[Document 399]
Mr. Hay to Prince Oblensky.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

I have received through Mr. Wollant your excellency’s touching message of

condolence on the part of the Imperial Government. In the name of the

American people and their Government I thank you for this fraternal proof

of sympathy from a nation so long friendly and so highly esteemed.
JOHNHAY,
Secretary of State.

[Document 399a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 10, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF SERVIA WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Ordinarily all subjects of Servia are expected to perform at least two years’

military service after they attain manhood.

nationality made without the consent of the King, and upon his return he

may be subject to molestation.

If,however,heperformedhismilitaryservicebeforeemigrationhis

acquisition of naturalization in the United States is recognized by the

Servian Government.

There is no treaty between the United States and Servia defining the status

of naturalized Americans of Servian birth returning to Servia.

Passports are rigorously required of all persons who desire to enter Servia.

[Document 400]
Mr. Francis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Belgrade,September 25, 1901.

No. 14.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that I was accorded a special audience to-day

by King Alexander, upon which occasion His Majesty presented me to Her

Majesty, Queen Draga. They both declared in strongest terms their horror at

the murder of President McKinley and their sympathy for the American

people in the great loss they have sustained by the death of a chief so wise

and so good. Their majesties inquired particularly about Mrs. McKinley,

andexpressedforherthetenderestsolicitude.KingAlexanderwas

evidently much gratified when I informed him that I had been requested by

my Government in a cable dispatch received last evening to convey to His

MajestyMrs.McKinley’ssincerestappreciationofhismessageof

condolence.

I am, etc.,
CHARLESS.FRANCIS.

[Document 401]
Prince Devawongse, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

BANGKOK,September 16, 1901.

His Majesty was deeply grieved to hear of the death of President McKinley,

and commanded me to express through your excellency to the American

nation his profound sympathy and that of his Government at this irreparable

loss.
DEVAWONGSE,
Minister Foreign Affairs.

[Document 402]
Mr. Hay to Prince Devawongse.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

PleaseassureHisMajestythatthesorrowingAmericanpeopleand

Government appreciate his sympathetic message.
JOHNHAY,
Secretary of State.

[Document 403]
The President to the King.
[Telegram.]

EXECUTIVEMANSION,
Washington,November 15, 1901.

I congratulate Your Majesty on this auspicious anniversary.
THEODOREROOSEVELT.

[Document 404]
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,December 20, 1900.
No. 363.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Department instruction

aNo.244,bearingdateNovember9,andcontainingthereadingof

cablegrams exchanged between this legation and the Department on the

subject of evidences of citizenship presented by natives of Cuba, Porto

Rico, and the Philippine Islands.

While the final sentence of the instruction does not seem to be entirely in

accord with the telegrams, so specific, which preceded that instruction upon

the same subject, I have presumed that it was not intended to repeal or

modify the purport of those telegrams, and have not, therefore, in any way

informed the consular officers in this country of any instruction later than

that of your telegram.

The importance of this subject and the complications continually arising,

both at this legation, at our various consular offices, and in the Government

of Spain itself, leads me to lay before you as clearly as possible the

problems presented. I do this also at the suggestion of more than one

consular officer in Spain, who are of opinion that the Department may not

be exactly advised of the details of the system recognized in your circular

letter of May 2, 1899, and the changes that have been made, either by the

authority of the War Department or of the provisional authorities, in the

islands of Cuba and Porto Rico since the date of that circular letter.

The theory, as it has been gathered by all the consular officers to whom it

has been sent, as well as this legation, on which was based that instruction,

was that the “cedula de vecindad” presented by natives of these islands,

would be one issued by the authority in these islands. That, of course, was

the case on my first arrival, and that equally, of course, by lapse of time has

ceased to be the case at present. The “cedula de vecindad,” under Spanish

law which heretofore governed in all her colonies and still remains the law

in Spain, is that a cedula of this character must be applied for by every

citizen or native, of either the home country or of the colony, in which the

applicant was resident at the time of the expiration of his former cedula.

These papers have been and are issued for one year only, and the Spanish

law has been quite severe, apparently, in punishing, both by fine and by

indirect legal consequences, the failure to procure a new one at the end of

the life of the old one.

During the first few months of my stay there were presented to me for visé

and registration, pursuant to your circular letter of May 2, 1899, only

cedulas issued by what purported to be the competent authority in Cuba and

in Porto Rico. Sometimes these persons presented also their birth certificate

as the best identification, or had presumably done so at the time of granting

the original cedula; and all subsequent cedulas were granted, as in our own

passport system, on the presentation and surrender of the former. At divers

times these cedulas were presented, in some cases without the addition of

further evidence, and in some cases together with other evidence, after the

lapse of one year from their date. In all these cases I have endeavored to

exercise my best judgment to carry out the instruction of the Department to

exercise the good offices of the legation for the protection of bona fide

applicants, and refused to register or visé cedulas expired already, except

where they were accompanied by satisfactory evidence of some other kind.

The excuse was universally made by these people, and I have no doubt

generally with entire accuracy, that this was all the cedula they could have,

as they had been absent more than a year from Cuba or Porto Rico, as the

case might be.

After the lapse of a few months the applications began to come in to

register and certify cedulas issued to persons described as natives of Cuba

or Porto Rico, but issued here in Spain by the competent authority, which,

generally speaking, are the municipal authorities of the various wards of a

city like Madrid, the mayor of smaller cities, or the civil administration of

provinces. I never have seen any cedula or other certificate of any kind

issued to such people by any bureau or official of the Spanish General

Government.

I at first declined to recognize these, and even after I consented to allow

them to be registered and noted I have always insisted on the production of

other evidence, either written or oral, as to the real nativity of the applicant.

The pressure was always brought to me that the applicant desiring to go

either to Cuba or to Porto Rico had been or would be refused passage on

any Spanish steamer without the visa of the cedula by some officer of the

Government of the United States authorized for that purpose. I refused to

believe this, as I could not understand why any paper issued by any

authorityoftheSpanishGovernmentinSpainshouldrequirethe

certification of the officer of any other nationality; but I was personally

assured by Mr. Dupuy de Lome, when he was under secretary of state, that

it was some maritime regulation of each port with which the General

Government had nothing to do, and out of compassion for these people

presenting these cedulas, who were helpless, having generally left the

matter of visa until a day or two before they intended to sail, I have dealt

with this matter liberally.

From reports of consular officers, as well as inquiries made at the legation

of applicants presenting these cedulas, I am convinced that there is a

curious entanglement in all this procedure. The General Government of

Spain informed me that so far from compelling any foreigner residing in

Spain to pay for and receive a cedula de vecindad each year, that in their

point of view no need exists for such foreigner either to demand or receive

any such cedula. The authorities of the foreign office take the ground that

the cedula de vecindad is intended only as a method, long recognized, of

identification and protection in Spain of Spanish citizens or subjects, and

also an indirect means of taxation for municipal and provincial purposes.

They say that the Spanish Government neither asserts the right, nor is

willing to assume the duty, to demand such revenues from foreigners

residing in Spain, or afford them of its own motion either the means of

identification or protection; that, they say, should be extended only by some

certificate, answering to a passport, issued by the proper authority of the

country to which such foreigners owe allegiance—as, for example, the

certificates of nationality which consular officers of Great Britain are

authorized to issue in all parts of the world to citizens of that Empire.

The question is full of difficulty, and I do not intend to go deeper into it

than I can help in laying this subject before you for consideration; for the

Spanish law authorizes, in theory, the issuance of such certificates by

foreign consular or diplomatic officers to foreigners resident in Spain only

for a certain length of time, after which time if they remain they are

supposed to have elected to become Spanish citizens. This consequence,

very like many parallel cases in Spain, practically never follows very

rigidly, as the condition in practice of such persons seems to be left very

much at loose ends. Thus the Spanish Government, so far as the foreign

office speaks, holds that these Cubans and Porto Ricans are under no

obligation to obtain these cedulas which they offer for registration. On the

other hand, as I have said, the steamship companies refuse to give passage

without the exhibition of such a cedula, or embarkation on one of their

vessels without the visa from some authority of our Government. Many of

these Cubans and Porto Ricans have already taken out a cedula of a year

ago, which they say they are informed by the local authorities, municipal

and provincial, they must have for their identification, to show at any time it

is asked of them. It is a fact always stated to me, which I presume to be

true, that it is necessary to show such a cedula at a bank, as identification, at

arrival at any city in Spain, should it be demanded, and generally at all

times to have that or something similar to prove the official existence of the

bearer of it if that be officially put in question, which in this country may be

a matter of very frequent occurrence, though with equal probability it may

never be asked for.

InBarcelonaandinMadrid,withtheutmostfranknessandentire

innocence, people have come to obtain passports from this legation or the

consulate, representing that they are natives of Cuba or Porto Rico, and

asking some kind of a certificate to enable them to embark on the steamer.

But being informed of the restriction put upon your officers by our circular

instruction, they are perfectly willing to go and apply to some Spanish

officer, without any proof whatever to identify them, and as a matter of

course, they tell me, obtain a cedula stating that the bearer is a native of

Cuba or Porto Rico or the Philippine Islands, as they may desire to have

inserted in this document. This I am assured is done without any inquiry or

evidence for identification on the part of any official of Spain, and this

cedulaisthenbroughttousasofficialconclusiveevidenceofthe

nationality of the bearer, which we are supposed to accept and verify. In

such cases the consul-general, as well as this legation, have refused to have

anything to do with such a cedula unless supported by either oral or

documentary evidence tending to show that the person carrying it was really

entitled to it; and yet, as I have observed, under special law and custom

such a cedula presupposes the presentation of evidence before it has been

issued, and to all the rest of the world except ourselves must be considered

conclusive as to what it recites.

I may add that not only the foreign office claim that no necessity exists and

no urgency should be given of any kind to the taking out of such cedulas on

the part of persons not citizens of Spain, but also reprehend in very strong

and decided terms the visaing or certification of any such paper by any

consular officer of any foreign power. Their ground is, that once taken out

under special authority, be that authority one from the General Government

or one vested in provincial or municipal officers, it becomes something that

can not be made any stronger by the addition of any certification from any

foreign power, and that any attempt so to make it is in the nature of a

discourtesy. I am informed by our consuls that the local authorities in their

places of residence are quite disposed to resent the affix of any visa or

cedula on any official paper issued by any Spanish authority, be that general

or provincial; and yet, as I have said, there is no doubt that the regulations

of the steamship companies are in direct contradiction to this theory, held

by the officials of Spain. It would seem if a decided ruling was once given

claiming our good offices, into direct and formal collision, and some

solution might be hoped for.

I have inquired of the Department several times what was to be done, and

what instructions given consular officers regarding this question, which

some time or other must be met and explained, and I now beg to ask again,

on consideration of the facts that I have stated, whether your instruction of

May 2, 1899, is intended to cover the present existing state of affairs, as

would seem to be the idea of the Department from its instruction No. 244.

Since the occupation of Cuba and Porto Rico by our authority no cedulas

appear to have been issued in either of those islands, but during the last six

or seven months there have been brought to this legation and various

consular officers entirely different forms of paper, which purport to be

passports or certificates of identity.

These papers, of which I have already transmitted copies to the Department,

asking instructions, are issued, so far as we have seen them, by the

“alcaldes” in Porto Rico, and by provincial governors of provinces in Cuba.

Those from Porto Rico do not contain any personal description, give no

recital of citizenship, but describe the holder only as “vecino” of the city of

which the “alcalde” issues the paper. The word “vecino” in Spain may be

translatedproperly“residentof,”butgivesnolegalaffirmationof

citizenship. Those issued by the provincial governor of Habana, so far as we

have seen, contain a full description of the bearer by way of identification;

but with no” positive affirmation as to citizenship or residence, further than

the filling in a blank after the printed word “nacionalidad “with the word

“Cubana.” The provincial governor of Santiago, on the contrary, issues an

official document containing an even more detailed personal appearance list

than the other, but with no blank to be filled in, or any other word regarding

nationality or residence, and in the body of the paper grants passport to

bearer as a native of the city, who can travel freely where-ever he pleases,

and asking all the authorities of Cuba and all diplomatic officers (los

señores agentes diplomáticos del exterior) to afford protection and aid if

needed. Again, there appears a certificate signed officially by the secretary

of state and interior of the island of Cuba, who certifies that the bearer, born

in Spain, has not exercised a right of option for Spanish nationality

provided for in Article IX of the Treaty of Paris—“which fact constitutes

the tacit renunciation of his nationality and the protection of the flag of

Spain”—and that this paper is given him to prove that fact wherever he may

go. This paper was considered by the bearer to be a passport, though it

contained no personal identification whatever, and he had demanded the

visé of it as such.

No passports have been called to my attention as yet issued by the

authorities of the Philippine Islands; but the consul at Cadiz had demanded

my opinion as to his proper course should a passport, in any form,

purporting to be issued by some authority in the Philippine Islands and

countersignedbythemilitaryauthorities,bepresentedtohimfor

registration and visé, while he, the consul, had direct knowledge that the

bearer was born in Spain, had been in the Philippine Islands a very short

time before the taking possession of them by the United States forces, and

had been attempting, in vain, in the Philippines, to obtain naturalization as a

United States citizen, or even to have some overt act pointed out to him by

which he could legally and safely renounce his Spanish citizenship. Should

this passport be presented, it probably will be in a different form, and

certified to by a different class of officers than any of those I have above

mentioned.

It was in view of all these differing classes and kinds of official papers, and

the fact that every consular officer in Spain has repeatedly asked me for

instructions on this subject, and as well upon the earnest and often repeated

request of the consul-general at Barcelona and the consul at Cadiz, the two

places most largely interested outside of Madrid, that I wrote my dispatch

No. 306, of November 6. It was then, it is even more so now, very

necessary, for the protection of persons entitled thereto; for the refusal to

protect persons not entitled to ask our interference; for the smoothness of

relations between the consular officers of the ports and the Spanish local

authorities, and to enable me to speak authoritatively and clearly to the

foreign office on this general subject, that an explicit, clear instruction,

covering all the cases that have come to my notice, as well as cases parallel

which obviously may arise, be prepared by the Department.

I am fully aware of the complicated condition of affairs in these territories,

and the fact that the Department is depending in great measure for advice

on this subject upon the War Department. Nevertheless, the officers of the

United States in Spain should be informed what officials in Cuba, or in

Porto Rico, or in the Philippines are authorized to issue certificates of

identity,whichweshouldrecognize,besuchpaperscalledcédulas,

passports, certificates, or any other name that may be given to them. We

should also know what these papers should contain in order that we may

give them in Spain the fortification of the seal of the legation or consulate,

as the case may be.

I am expecting at any time that we may be brought face to face with the

case that some Spanish official, whether general or local, or some steamship

company, thereby being a semiofficial personage, may refuse to recognize

our visé on the ground that it is interfering with what is simply and purely a

Spanish paper, and I shall not be in any position to answer inquiries

addressed to me of such a case.

I have been asked verbally, over and over again, by the foreign office and

various members of the diplomatic corps, how far we considered the

governmentsofCubaandPortoRicogovernmentseitherunderor

concurrent with that of the United States, so as to expect their acts should

certify their official seals.

It would appear from the nature of some of these passports from Cuba that

it is taken for granted the government in Cuba has the right to call upon

foreign diplomatic officers outside of Cuba to recognize its seal and the

signature of its officers. I presume that that is intended to apply to

diplomatic officers of the United States, although the recital in such

passports is a question to be entirely open; and yet I can hardly suppose it is

to be considered that by such recital we officers of the United States

become diplomatic officers of the Cuban government.

I only cite these instances to show how circumstances have changed since

your general instruction of May 2, 1899, and the advisability of the

Department’s taking up these questions and deciding them once for all,

instead of leaving us in the possibility of taking some action which will

hereafter be disavowed.

I have, etc.,
B S

[Document 405]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 16, 1901.

No. 283.]

SIR: The Department has received your No. 363, of December 20, 1900, on

the subject of cédulas and passports presented by residents of Porto Rico,

Cuba, and the Philippine Islands. Your comprehensive statement of the

complications now arising will serve to guide the Department in specific

instructions at some future day, and the desirability of such instructions is

freely admitted. For the present, however, your course in authenticating the

cédulas and passports, when it can not be avoided, is approved, and while

the confusion you have described is to be regretted, the Department feels

that the wisest course to pursue is to meet each case as it arises and treat it

individually with good judgment and discretion. It is not thought that the

time is ripe for formulating a general and permanent plan for dealing with

the subject.

So far as Cuba is concerned, the status of the inhabitants is still undefined,

and, in fact, delegates of the people are now actually in session for the

purpose of giving some definite destiny to the island. In the event of the

withdrawal of United States authority Cuban passports or documents would

be of no concern to the diplomatic representatives of the United States.

As for the Philippine Islands, the existing conditions are of a character that

can not, as it would seem, long continue, and legislation by the Congress

must be awaited before the Department can issue instructions on the subject

of the status of the inhabitants that are certain of any stability.

In Porto Rico a full civil government is in successful operation under the

laws of the United States; but, as you are well aware, the Supreme Court of

the United States now has before it a case involving the status of the people

of that island and of the Philippines, and the Department prefers to await

thedecisionnowpendingbeforesendinganinstructioninvolvinga

question at issue before the court.

With reference to the Department’s telegram to you of November 6, 1900,

your understanding of it was correct. It was meant to authorize the visé or

authentication of cedulas and passports presented by Cubans and Porto

Ricans, and by Filipinos when issued or countersigned by the military

authorities of the United States in the Philippines.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 406]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,Januarg 30, 1901.

No. 288.]

SIR: I inclose copies of a letter from the Secretary of the Navy, and its

inclosure, requesting that the thanks of his Department be communicated to

the Spanish Government for the courtesy shown by Capt. Pedro del Peral,

of the Spanish navy, to the board appointed to examine and report upon the

condition of the steel floating dry dock at Habana.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Long to Mr. Hay.
NAVYDEPARTMENT,
Washington,January 25, 1901.
S: I have the honor to inclose herewith for your information a copy of a

letter, dated the 19th instant, from Capt. Sam. C. Lemly, U. S. N., Judge-

Advocate-General of the Navy, in which he invites the Department’s

attention to the courteous and able manner in which Capt. Pedro del Peral,

of the Spanish navy, in charge of the steel floating dry dock located in the

harborofHabana,Cuba,thepropertyoftheSpanishGovernment,

facilitated in each and every particular the labors of the board, of which

Captain Lemly was senior member, appointed for the purpose of examining

into and reporting upon the condition of said floating dry dock.

It is requested that the United States minister at Madrid may be instructed to

conveytotheSpanishGovernment,throughtheusualchannels,the

appreciation and thanks of this Department for the courteous attention and

able assistance rendered by Capt. Pedro del Peral, of the Spanish navy, in

connection with the labors of the above mentioned board.

I have, etc.,
JOHND.LONG,Secretary.
[Subinclosure.]
Captain Lemly to Mr. Long.
BOARD OFEXAMINATION OFSTEELFLOATINGDRYDOCK,
UNITEDSTATESNAVALSTATION,
Habana, Cuba,January 19, 1901.

SIR: Referring to the work of the board of which I am senior member,

appointed by the Department’s order of the 21st ultimo, No. 245413, for the

purpose of examining into and reporting upon the condition of the steel

floating dry dock, the property of the Spanish government, located in the

harborofHabana,Cuba,Iamdirectedbysaidboardtoinvitethe

Department’s attention to the courteous and able manner in which Capt.

Pedro del Peral, of the Spanish navy, in charge of the structure, has

facilitated our labors (this day concluded) in each and every particular.

I have, etc.,
SCL,
Captain and Judge-Advocate-General, U. S. Navy.

[Document 407]
Mr. Stover to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,February 1, 1901.

No. 397.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that one of the cases apprehended by me as

alikely to arise and create difficulty, as outlined in mv dispatch No. 363,
dated 20th December, 1900, seems to have arisen at Barcelona.

The consul-general communicates that a Cuban-born young man, bearing a

Cuban passport issued by the military authorities of Cuba, as well as a

certificate of identification and legal residence in Habana issued by the

authorities of that city, was duly registered at the consulate-general, and his

papers legalized according to Department’s circular of May 2, 1899.

In the drawing names for conscription into the Spanish army, which was

held during the month of January, this Cuban, whose name is Benito

Llavería y Pascual, was notified that his name was among those liable to be

drawn for military service. Presenting himself at the commission charged

with this official duty (la comision mixta de quintas) he showed his passport

and certificate, which the secretary of the commission refused to look at or

consider in any way. At his request the consul-general, on the 7th January,

formally notified this commission of the fact above stated, giving full

details and particulars. In response to this communication the consul-

general received no answer until after the drawing of the names by lot for

military service had been completed. Among those drawn for service was

the name of this Cuban, Llavería y Pascual; and not until then did the

commission answer the consul-general’s letter. A copy of their answer—if

answer it may be called—together with a translation, I inclose as part of this

dispatch.

The consul-general reported this matter to me immediately by telegram as

follows:

Cuban subject Llavería impressed Spanish army. Bears Cuban

passport issued military authorities Cuba. Has complied Article

IX treaty of peace. Shall I protest local authorities? They know he

is registered in consulate.

To which I replied as follows:

Protest formally against action regarding Cuban with passport and

transmit full particulars to this legation.

Subsequently the consul-general forwarded me the copy of the letter of the

commission that I have alluded to, with the information that he had

followed my suggestions, and had formally, in writing, protested against the

inclusion of this man in the military service of Spain. The date of this

protest was January 23, 1901, and I have heard of no reply thereto.

I report this matter now, that the Department may have on its files the case,

so far as yet it has developed itself, as it is possible I may be obliged to

communicate in relation thereto by cable, which would not be understood

were these papers not in Washington.

I have delayed bringing the matter, even unofficially, before the ministry of

state, until either some official answer has been made by the commission to

the consul-general, or until some overt act, more than has yet come to pass,

may be threatened by the military authorities at Barcelona. It may be, of

course, that the protest of the consul-general will be sufficient, and that the

Spanish local authorities there will let the matter die out without any formal

reply.

I have, etc.,
B S
[Inclosure.—Translation.]

No. 536.]

It was yesterday decided to reply to your esteemed favor of the 7th of this

month, in which you give various facts in regard to the man Benito Llavería

y Pascual, as I now have the honor of doing; that he was included in the

penalty of article 31 of the recruiting law in force during the conscription of

1898 in this city, and that afterward the chief of zone No. 6, on February 22,

1899, made it known officially that said man had failed to present himself at

theconcentration,andforthisreasonthe“processoffugitive”was

instituted against him, and that he was declared a fugitive on April 4 of said

year1899,whichishisactualsituationto-day;thatnoproceedings

whatever in this matter are pending before the mixed commission, nor has

any motion as yet been made by this man, and, furthermore, that in the

communication which you sent to this commission on the mentioned date

the object and purpose of the same is not clearly stated, nor what question

has been presented in the vice-consulate in regard to the nationality of the

above-mentioned Llavería which gave occasion for said communication. I

therefore beg of you to please amplify the same, specifically stating the

object of the communication referred to.

God give to you many years.

THEPRESIDENT.
BARCELONA,January 11, 1901.
Printed ante, p. 457 .

[Document 408]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 21, 1901.
No. 297.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 397, of the 1st instant,

reporting that one Benito Llavería y Pascual, a native of Cuba, residing in

Spain, has been called on to perform military service, against which the

United States consul at Barcelona has protested. You state that Mr. Llavería

bears a Cuban passport, issued by the military authorities of Cuba, as well

as a certificate of identification and legal residence in Habana, issued by the

authorities of that city, and that he was duly registered at the United States

consulate-general at Barcelona, and his papers had been legalized according

to the Department’s circular of May 2, 1899.

It is inferred that Mr. Llavería comes within the description of “native

inhabitants of Cuba temporarily sojourning abroad,” for whose protection

our diplomatic and consular officers were instructed by the Department’s

circular of May 2, 1899, to exercise good offices. The statement telegraphed

to you by the consul-general that Mr. Llavería “has complied Article IX,

treaty peace,” is not understood. That article only provides for the retention

of Spanish allegiance by Spanish subjects, natives of the peninsula, residing

in the relinquished or ceded territories. It does not provide for the case of a

native Cuban, residing in Cuba, Spain or elsewhere, so that it is not seen

how Mr. Llavería could make any effective declaration under Article IX.

The consul-general may be asked for an explanation on this point.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 409]
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,March 16, 1901.
No. 432.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction No. 297,

bearing date February 21, 1901, and to say that pursuant thereto I requested

the consul-general at Barcelona to make the explanation desired, as well as

to communicate to me the present status of the case of Benito Llavería y

Pascual.

I have received from the consul-general, evidently crossing my letter to

him, certain communications which seem to complete the record in that

matter so far as the authorities in Barcelona are concerned. I beg to inclose

a copy of the letter of the consul-general covering copy of an official letter,

together with a translation of the same, from the president of the mixed

commissionofenlistment(comisionmixtadereclutamiento)ofthe

province of Barcelona, from which it will be seen that the authorities of that

province maintain their position that the young man in question is liable to

military service, and that the consul-general’s protest and request for his

exemption have been finally refused.

Inviewofmydesiretoobservemostcarefullythewishesofthe

Department, that nothing should be done, officially, which would tend in

any way toward misconstruction of the relations of our Government with

the inhabitants of Cuba, just at the time when that question is being

authoritatively settled, I have deemed it wise to refer this whole matter for

the consideration of the Department, as it is the first, and, so far, the only

case, that has come to my notice of a native of Cuba or Porto Rico claimed

for Spanish military service. * * *

While the change of government and the coming into power of the liberal

party may not produce an equally profound change in the nature of the laws

to be presented to the new Cortes, when it shall have been elected, still it

may have that effect; and I think it wise to await developments, inasmuch as

I understand that no practical injury will result to the interests of this young

Cuban in question, until sufficient time has elapsed for full consideration of

the proper steps to be taken or proper claims to be made to the Spanish

Government.

The attention of the new ministry is, almost inevitably, occupied at present

by the steps, natural and necessary to the social and political life of Spain,

for the preparation of the election of the new Cortes, the date of which has,

not yet been fixed. It is considered, without a dissenting voice, that this

Government, as all governments in Spain since the establishment of the

constitution, will have a working majority in the new Cortes, as it is

considered equally natural and necessary for it to take the precautions and

political steps to bring this about. Until that is done I feel confident that no

important decision will be taken regarding changes in international affairs

from the course pursued by the former Government, but everything will be

held in abeyance for a month or six weeks at any event. I say this only to

show the Department that, in my judgment, no reason exists that I should

receive any instructions in this particular case until full consideration, or

even, possibly, the lapse of time, may bring about a solution of the general

question involved.

I have, etc.,
BELLAMYSTOKER.
[Inclosure.]
U SC G ,
Barcelona,March 12, 1901.

S: With further reference to letters Nos. 3, 4, and 6 of January 16, 23, and

30, respectively, from this consulate-general, I have the honor to inclose

herewith copy in duplicate and translations of a letter (No. 609) under date

of March 4, 1901, from the Comision Mixta de Reclutamiento, in reply to a

communication addressed by Mr. Summers, vice-consul-general, to the

captain-general of Barcelona, protesting against the action of the Spanish

authorities here in demanding the military service of one Benito Llavería

Pascual, who holds a Cuban passport registered at this consulate-general.

I have, etc.,
JULIUSG.LAY,
Consul-General.
[Subinclosure.—Translation.]
The commission to the United States vice-consul.
COMISONMIXTA DERECLUTAMIENTO,
Province of Barcelona.

No. 609.]

Having examined the “expediente” (petition) of the young man Benito

Llavería Pascual who came forward with the drafts for 1898 under No. 1 as

a conscript from the fourth district of this city; Bearing in mind that the

young man Llavería in the enlistment of 1898 of the section of the fourth

district of this city incurred the penalty of article 31 of the existing

recruiting regulations for not being in that of the year corresponding to his

age nor in the year immediately following; Taking into account that the said

young man appealed to this commission in writing on the 14th of February,

1898, stating that he was then 23 years of age; that he was a native of

Habana temporarily residing in this city at No. 317 Aragon street, second

floor, and that, having been included at the head of the enlistment list of the

enlistment, being a native of Cuba temporarily resident in this city with the

object of accompanying his father for the sake of his health; stating further

that although they were included in the “padròn” (town list) of that date it

was merely as temporary residents, seeing that they were also inscribed in

the town list of Habana, where they practiced their profession and paid

taxes; Taking into account that along with said appeal he inclosed his

baptismal certificate, duly legalized, showing that he was born on June 24,

1875, in Habana, his parents being natives of the province of Tarragona,

and a certified copy of the resolution of the recruiting section of the said

district adopted on the 30th of January, 1898, declaring that there was no

reason for granting freedom from enlistment to the young man in question;

Taking into account that in the copy of the aforementioned resolution of the

section of January 30, 1898, it appears that the decision was based upon the

fact that the young man Llavería was included in the enlistment owing to

his figuring on the “padrón municipal” (municipal town list) taken on the

21st of December, 1885, in force at that time, so that when the young man

was placed on the list his father had already resided in this city three years

at No. 317 Aragon street; that the fact of the young man being a native of

the island of Cuba did not destroy his Spanish nationality; that the residence

of the father in the locality renders the son liable to enlistment, and, finally,

that at the proper time, when he should have been enlisted without incurring

any penalty, his father already resided in the fourth district of this city,

where he continued to reside on the aforenamed date of January 30, 1898;

Seeing that this commission, in session of March 30, 1898, decided that

there was no reason for exempting the young man Llavería from being

enlisted in the fourth district of this city, nor for absolving him from the

penaltyoffirstonthelistaccordingtoarticle50oftherecruiting

regulations unless he had been enlisted previously in some other town with

greater right than in the list of the fourth district of this city; Seeing that on

January 7 last the United States vice-consul in this city wrote a dispatch to

this commission stating that the young man Llavería, a native of Habana, is

registered as a Cuban at said consulate; that the aforesaid young man came

to Spain in the year 1895, returning to Cuba in March, 1898, arriving there

on April 1 of the same year, prior to the date of the treaty of Paris, having

complied with all the requirements of Article IX of that treaty, and that he

afterwards left Habana in the month of June, 1899, for Spain, having

previously obtained a passport duly signed by the authorities of the island

of Cuba, in which his identity is set forth; Seeing that the object of the vice-

consul’s letter was not clear, a communication was addressed to the said

vice-consul on the 11th of the same month of January, requesting him to

specify the object of his letter of the 7th of that month; seeing that on the

28th day of January the United States vice-consul, referring to his letter of

the 7th of the same month, informed this commission that the young man

Llavería is properly registered at that consulate as a Cuban citizen in

accordance with the requirements of the treaty of Paris, having fulfilled all

the conditions necessary to prove his Cuban nationality, which citizens are

under the protection of the United States, and requesting that the same be

exempted from Spanish military service; Seeing that on the 8th of last

February this commission instructed the section of the fourth district of this

city to send a certified copy of the sheet of the “padrón municipal”

(municipal town list), taken on December 21, 1885, corresponding to folio

15 of the first volume of the house No. 317, second floor, of Aragon street

of this city, relating to the family of the young man Benito Llavería Pascual,

andthatthesaidsectionsentthesheetinquestionalongwitha

communication dated the 11th of February last, in which it appears that the

said list, instead of having been made on the 21st day of December of the

year 1885, as previously stated, was made on the 21st day of December of

the year 1895, and that at that time the father had resided three years as a

tenant of the house in question and the young man four months as a

temporaryresident;Consideringthataccordingtoarticle1ofthe

constitution in force since June 30, 1876, all those born on Spanish territory

are Spaniards, and that therefore the young man Llavería was a Spaniard in

the month of March, 1898, when he was included in the enlistment of the

fourth district of this city, with the penalty of article 31 of the recruiting

regulations, seeing that the island of Cuba, where he was born at that date,

still belonged to Spain; Considering that not only at the time when he

should have been enlisted without the aforementioned penalty, but also in

1898, when he was enlisted with that penalty, his father was a resident in

Barcelona, having lived for three years in the locality of the fourth district

of this city, and neither he nor his father having asked that he should be

included in the enlistment of 1894, which was that corresponding to his age,

nor in the next following, the aforementioned section was obliged to

include him in the first enlistment following the discovery of this omission,

with the penalty of article 31 of the recruiting regulations as ordered

therein; Considering that the fact that in the town list of 1895 he figures as a

visitor (passer through) was no obstacle to this being done, because what

determines the enlistment of a young man is, according to article 40 of the

aforesaid regulations under numbers 1 and 2, in the first place, the residence

of his parents, and, as already stated, the father of the young man in

question, in 1895, had already resided three yearns at the place indicated;

and is classified in the town list as a resident.

Considering that neither did the provisions of the royal order of November

14, 1888, relating to the exemption from service of those born in the

colonies, apply in the case of this young man when he was enlisted, nor at

the time when he ought to have been enlisted without penalty, because for

that purpose it was indispensable that the father’s residence in the Peninsula

should not have been a permanent one, as it was, according to the town list

of 1895; Considering that the purport of Article IX of the treaty of peace

between Spam and the United States in no way affects the present case,

seeing that the facts dealt with occurred prior to the date of the ratification

of the said treaty, which was in April of 1899;

Considering that in view of all that has been stated it is evident that the

young man Llavería is liable to military service in Spain, even in the

hypothesis that he at present no longer retains his Spanish nationality, this

circumstance, seeing that the Spanish nationality was lost after the date

when he should legally have performed that service, can not exempt him

from the fulfillment of obligations under which he was before the loss of his

nationality; In view of the proofs brought forward,

This commission, in session of the 28th of last February, decided that you

should be informed, as I have herewith the honor of doing, that there is no

reason to grant your request made on the 28th day of January last, that the

young man Benito Llavería Pascual should be exempted from Spanish

military service.

May God protect you many years.

Barcelona, March 4, 1901.

TP

[Document 410]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 8, 1901.
No. 320.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 432, of the 16th ultimo,

in regard to the case of Mr. Benito Llavería Pascual, who has been called on

to perform military service in Spain.

It appears from the inclosures in your dispatch that Mr. Llavería was born in

Habana, Cuba, in 1875; that he went to Barcelona, Spain, in 1895, where

his father had been residing for at least three years; that he returned to Cuba

April 1, 1898, and again left Habana for Spain in June, 1899, having

previously obtained a passport from the authorities of the island. He was

also registered in the office of the United States consul at Barcelona as a

Cuban citizen.

The Spanish authorities state that Mr. Llaveria was subject to enlistment in

the Spanish army, and was included in the enlistment of March, 1898, at

which time his father had been for three years a resident of Barcelona, and

young Llaveria a resident there for four months; that at that time Llaveria

was a Spaniard (having been born on Spanish territory), and that he is liable

to military service even on the hypothesis that he at present no longer

retains his Spanish nationality as the loss of such nationality after the date

when he should legally have performed the service can not exempt him

from fulfillment of the obligation which he was under.

If, under the Spanish law, Mr. Llaveria was liable to military service when

he was enrolled in March, 1898, the Department is inclined to think that the

Spanish view is correct. A Subsequent change of nationality would not

operate to discharge the obligation. You may examine this question.

The Department’s circular of May 2, 1899, only authorizes our diplomatic

and consular officers to exercise good offices for the protection of “native

inhabitants of Cuba temporarily residing abroad.” The consul at Barcelona

has protested against the action of the Spanish authorities in this case.

The Department will therefore take no further action on it until it shall have

received a report from you on the point above referred to.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 411]
Mr. Stover to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,May 21, 1901.
No. 474.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your instruction No. 320

with regard to the case of Mr. Benito Llaveria Pascual, called upon to

perform military service in Spain.

I particularly note your ruling on the general question involved in this case,

as submitted by the consulate-general at Barcelona. Your instruction says “a

subsequentchangeofnationalitywouldnotoperatetodischargethe

obligation”—“if under Spanish law, Mr. Llaveria was liable when enrolled

in March, 1898.” I take the greater note of this as it was my own opinion

before transmitting the case to the Department, and the importance that the

question might assume in other cases made it advisable to obtain a general

ruling as has been now given. Your instruction, however, to examine the

question whether under Spanish law Mr. Llaveria was liable to military

service in March, 1898, has been complied with to the best of my ability.

Anexaminationofthetextofthelawsandregulationsconcerning

recruitment in the army, which took effect August 28, 1896, leads me to the

conclusion that the carefully prepared and elaborately argued legal opinion

of the Spanish commission of recruitment No. 609, of which a copy was

transmitted with my dispatch No. 432 of April 16, is in full compliance with

the law of Spain, and that Mr. Benito Llaveria Pascual was by Spanish law

domiciled in Barcelona at the time of his enrollment in 1898; was of proper

age to be enrolled, and his failure to present himself for such purpose places

him entirely under the penal sections cited by the commission.

I have written, therefore, to the consul-general at Barcelona, transmitting to

himacopyofyourinstructionNo.320,andexplainingtohimthe

conclusion which I have above narrated.

I have, etc.,
BELLAMYSTORER.

[Document 412]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 4, 1901.
No. 337.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 474, of the 21st ultimo, in

which, referring to Department’s No. 320, of April 8 last, you state that you

have reached the conclusion that Mr. Benito Llaveria Pascual was by

Spanish law domiciled in Barcelona at the time of his enrollment for the

army in 1898; that he was of proper age to be enrolled, and that his failure

to present himself for such purpose places him entirely under the penal

sections cited by the commission.

YouaddthatyouhaveadvisedtheUnitedStatesconsul-generalat

Barcelona of your conclusions.

In reply I have to say that the Department approves your action.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 413]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Storer.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 10, 1901.

(Mr. Hill states that reports have been received by the Department that the

Filipino junta at Madrid has decided to continue the war in the Philippine

Islands against the United States, and has sent five of its members to the

scene of war to succeed Aguinaldo in command.

Mr. Storer is directed to investigate thoroughly and report all obtainable

particulars as to the departure and destination of the members of the junta

referred to.)
[Document 414]
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,May 17, 1901.

(Mr. Storer acknowledges receipt of the Department’s telegram of May 10,

in regard to the Filipino junta, and reports that the matter is receiving his

particular attention; that up to the present time trustworthy information has

been difficult to obtain, and that he is of the opinion that something of no

consequence has been exaggerated by newspaper reports.)
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,May 28, 1901.
No. 485.—Confidential.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your unnumbered dispatch,

abearing date May 13, confirming your cablegramof May 11.

aI beg to confirm my cablegramto you of May 17.

It is exceedingly difficult to obtain accurate information.

The Madrid junta was at all times only a subsidiary one to the central junta

in Paris, of which Agoncillo has always been, and is still, I presume,

considered the head. The junta in Madrid, and, as far as I can ascertain, the

subsidiary ones in Spain to it, received funds from Paris; but remittances

have long ago ceased from that quarter.

From all that I can learn I am strongly of the opinion that nothing of any

importance in the way of organization exists in Madrid. The offices of this

so-called junta, or political club, composed of Filipinos, has, during the last

two years, descended steadily in character of locality and surroundings.

From the business part of the city it has descended to quite the poor

quarters. I have been able to obtain a list of their different removals, and it

is evident they have not a cent to spend. Many of these Filipinos, of which

there have been quite a number in Madrid, are men of high education, and

had come here to complete their university courses; and much of the money

that enabled them to keep up their position before the world probably came

from their own pockets. I can not find that they were ever of any political

importance, and they confined themselves, apparently, trying to keep alive a

spirit of hostility toward the United States among the Spaniards. In all

political circles they have utterly failed, and I know that no Spaniard of any

prominence or position has any wish that they should succeed in prolonging

the disturbances in those islands. All the interests of every commercial class

inSpain,andinfactofallSpain,arethatthoseislandsshouldbe

immediately pacified, and continue to be, as in the past two years they have

been, an increasing market for Spanish products, instead of a failing one.

* * * * * * *

The opinions that I have been able to gather from the best sources of

information attainable, fully carry out my first impression, that while the

ashes of hostility to the United States still exist here in Madrid among

natives of the Philippine Islands, they will never kindle into warmth until

they have both money and encouragement from outside.

The talk in the newspapers here, which has been more or less telegraphed to

journals in the United States, if sifted down, I think is found to be nothing

more than the natural attempt of individuals who. at one time had a certain

cheap newspaper notoriety to keep that notoriety alive for their own vanity,

or possibly to give themselves some personal and financial credit.

Should anything definite of any importance come to my ears, or can be

found at Barcelona, which, after all, is the center of all oriental trade and

travel with Spain, I will, of course, cable you. It is to be remarked, however,

that the simplest method for any person desiring to go to the Philippine

Islands from Spain without his voyage being noticed would be to pass the

frontier into France and take steamer from any other port of Europe, all of

which are open to him, and most of them having lines to the Orient.

For all the consul-general can be assured, there may have been scores of

Filipinosunderassumednames,orunderFilipinonames,goneback

through Barcelona, as the travel is large, and no identification further than

the formal papers are required for passage.

I have, etc.,
B S
Printed ante.
Printed ante.

[Document 416]
Mr. Sickles to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid, Spain,July 17, 1901.

No. 515.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy and translation of a petition

addressed to the minister by Mr. Isabelo de los Reyes, director of the

periodical “Filipinas ante Europa.”

I have refused to give any passport to Mr. Reyes, and shall do nothing to

help him until I am instructed or advised by the Department. I trust my

action will be approved.

I have, etc.,
STANTONSICKLES.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
Mr. de los Reyes to Mr. Storer.
M,July 16, 1901.

The H M U S: Isabelo de los Reyes Florentine, native of

the Philippines, director of the paper “Filipinas ante Europa,” and adviser of

the Filipino Committee of Independence in Madrid, has the honor to inform

your excellency that the war in the Philippines being ended, and having

waged a newspaper campaign against the sovereignty of the United States, I

come to you as a loyal but conquered enemy to beg amnesty and permission

to return to the Philippines, provided my personal liberty and security are

guaranteed, accepting hereafter the sovereignty of the United States, and

begging to be answered by telegraph, if it be necessary to consult with the

Secretary of State of the United States.

ISABELO DE LOSREYES.

[Document 417]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 30, 1901.

No. 368.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Sickles’s No. 515, of the 17th

ultimo, inclosing copy of a letter from Isabelo de los Reyes, requesting

amnesty and permission to return to the Philippine Islands, provided this

Government will guarantee his personal liberty and security.

The matter was referred to the Secretary of War for his consideration.

Mr. Root regards it as unwise to issue any guaranty to Mr. de los Reyes. He

states that if the applicant goes to Manila, takes the oath of allegiance, and

conducts himself in conformity with existing laws, there is no intention to

prosecute him for past acts. The Secretary adds, however, that neither the

applicant’s record nor his present importance calls for special favor from

this Government.

This Department understands Mr. de los Reyes’s letter as not involving any

question of the issuance of a passport nor certification of his status as a

native of the Philippines. He is understood merely to surrender and to ask to

be permitted to return to the Philippines.

I am, etc.,
AAA,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 418]
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,May 24, 1901.
No. 478.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that the royal decree declaring the law on the

subject of the change of citizenship, both as affected by, and limited by, the

treaty of Paris, has been published officially in the “Gaceta de Madrid.”

As part of this dispatch, I beg to inclose a copy of the letter of the ministry

to the Queen, containing the report of reasons compelling this royal decree,

known as the “Exposición de los Motivos,” and the decree itself, adding

thereto as an appendix the sections of the Spanish civil code, to which

reference is made in the terms of the “Expositión” and of the decree.

In view of the difficulties of making a translation, at once accurate “and

clear, of this important matter, on careful examination I think it has been

very well done, and the legation is indebted to Mr. Bowler for it.

I have, etc.,
BELLAMYSTORER.
[Inclosure.]
YM : Since the 10th of December, 1898, when the treaty of peace

with the United States of America was signed, it has been a subject of

constant preoccupation to the succeeding Spanish Governments to solve in

a just and equitable way the important questions concerning the nationality

of the natives and inhabitants of the territories ceded or relinquished by

Spain arising in connection with the interpretation of the ninth article of that

treaty. With this end in view the former Government entrusted the study of

these important questions to a committee composed of learned functionaries

from the ministries of state, grace and justice, hacienda, and gobernacion,

which fulfilled its task by publishing a brilliant report wherein the various

delicate aspects of the question are treated with the greatest clearness and

accuracy.

The Government, desirous of reconciling the interests of private individuals

with its international obligations, without increasing unduly the charges

upon the national treasury, and at the same time attempting to harmonize

the political and economical aspects of the question, has come to the

conclusion that while there can be no doubt as regards the fact that natives

and inhabitants of the territories ceded or relinquished lost their Spanish

citizenship the moment that the sovereignty of Spain over those countries

came to an end, nevertheless those, persons who while residing outside of

the country of their origin made a clear manifestation of their desire to

retain their Spanish citizenship, either by having themselves inscribed in a

legation or consulate of Spain abroad, or by continuing to serve in the

administration, or by establishing themselves within the actual dominions

of Spain, deserve to be considered by the Government as Spanish subjects

so long as the acts which manifest their purpose of retaining Spanish

citizenship be not disavowed by the solemn declaration of the party in

interest made within a certain period which will be fixed for this purpose.

A further point of real importance is that in regard to the exact moment

whenthefactofresidingwithinorwithouttheterritoriescededor

relinquished by Spain began to be a determining factor. As to this the

Government takes the ground that it can be no other than the moment at

which the change of sovereignty was judicially defined to have taken place,

viz, the moment of the exchange of the ratifications of the treaty of peace.

Likewise it appears entirely free from doubt that all the persons who while

they may have been born in the above-mentioned territories and living

therein at said date are, nevertheless, still discharging official functions by

virtue of appointment or commission held from the Spanish Government,

should preserve their nationality.

There remained another point of great importance to be solved, viz, the

manner in which those who have lost their citizenship by not availing

themselves of the opportunity provided in the first paragraph of the ninth

article of the treaty should recover the same, and nothing can be more just

than to facilitate the recovery of citizenship by those who lost it in this

manner, and that they should recover it by leaving said territories and

afulfilling the requirements prescribed in the second paragraph of article 19
of the civil code; provided, however, that said persons have not held public

office or taken part in the elections in the territories ceded or relinquished

by Spain, nor exercised therein any right pertaining to the new citizenship

since the extinction of the Spanish sovereignty, since such acts would

prevent their being recognized as Spanish subjects, unless it be in the

bmanner set forth in article 21of the civil code.

Finally, another object of especial care and attention to the Government of

Your Majesty has been that which refers both to the right of many natives of

our former colonies to continue to enjoy the fixed annual payments which

they receive from the treasury in the nature of pensions, as well as to the

right of others to demand, on account of eminent services rendered to the

country in person or by those from whom their rights are derived, pensions

to reward therefor. It is furthermore but right that those who recover their

citizenship should be restored to the enjoyment of the pensions to which

theyarelegallyentitled,makingthepaymentofthese,nevertheless,

depend, as only seems just, upon residence within Spanish territory and the

previous examination of their respective claims; and it must be understood

that the restoration of their pensions will commence only from the time at

which application therefor is made.

Lastly, natives of the aforesaid territories who can not leave them and who

may have rendered, as has been said before, distinguished services to the

country, shall be entitled to obtain pensions as a reward, for the Spanish

nation can not neglect to protect those who have nobly defended its

interests; but the obtaining of said pensions must in every case be subject to

the special proceedings prescribed by the law of the 12th of May, 1837, as

the unusual character of this class of pensions calls for.

Carrying out the foregoing ideas, the undersigned minister has the honor to

submit to the approbation of Your Majesty the following project of law.
PRÁXEDESMATEOSAGASTA.
MADRID,11th of May, 1901.
ROYAL DECREE.
ARTICLE1. Natives of the territories ceded or relinquished by Spain by virtue

of the treaty of peace with the United States of the 10th of December, 1898,

who at the date of the exchange of ratifications of said treaty were residing

in said territories and have lost their Spanish citizenship (la nacionalidad

española), may recover it in accordance with the provisions of article 21 of

the civil code prescribed for Spaniards who have lost their nationality by

acquiring citizenship in a foreign country.

Nevertheless, persons referred to in the paragraph above, who were holding

public office, civil or military, employment, or appointment by nomination

of the Spanish Government, and who continued to exercise their official

functions in the service of Spain, shall be held to have retained their

Spanish nationality.

ART. 2. Natives of the territories ceded or relinquished, who at the date of the

exchange of ratifications of the treaty of the 10th of December, 1898, as

aforesaid, were residing outside of the country of their birth, and who at the

time of the promulgation of this decree are found to be inscribed in the

registers of the legations or consulates of Spain abroad or who were holding

public office under the Spanish administration, or who were domiciled

within the actual dominions of Spain, shall be held to have retained their

Spanish citizenship, unless within the period of a year from this date they

shallmakeanexpressdeclarationtothecontrarybeforetheproper

authorities.

The persons referred to in the paragraph above, who at the time of the

promulgation of this decree do not fall within any of the categories above

mentioned, have lost their Spanish nationality. They may recover same in

accordance with the provisions of the above-mentioned article 21 of the

civil code.

ART. 3. Spanish subjects born outside of the territories ceded or relinquished,

who were residing therein at the date of the exchange of the ratifications of

the treaty of the 10th of December, 1898, and would have lost their Spanish

citizenship by not exercising within the proper period the right of option set

forth in article 9 of said treaty, may recover the same by leaving said

territories and complying with the formalities established in the second

paragraph of article 19 of the civil code.

The persons referred to in the present article who, contrary to their wishes,

havenotbeenpermittedtoinscribethemselvesasSpaniardsinthe

municipal registers, may do so within the period of one year from this date

before the Spanish consular registrars, making a note of the inscription

which was denied to them in the municipal registrars. Those who fulfill this

paragraph of this article who reside in the ceded or relinquished territories

by reason of public office, military or civil, employment, or appointment,

the functions of which they were discharging at the time and which they

continued to discharge in the service of Spain, shall be held not to have lost

their Spanish citizenship.

A. 4. The persons referred to in this decree who, subsequently to the

exchange of ratifications of the treaty of peace with the United States, shall

have held public office or taken part in the municipal, provincial, or general

elections of the territories ceded or relinquished by Spain, or who shall have

exercised in said territories any of the rights pertaining to citizenship

therein, shall not be granted an option in favor of or a recovery of their

Spanish citizenship, except as provided in article 23 of the civil code.
A. 5. Spanish citizenship retained or recovered by virtue of the provisions

of this decree can not be set up as against the governments or authorities of

the ceded or relinquished territories in which the parties concerned were

born or reside, except by the express consent of said governments or by

virtue of a stipulation in an international treaty.

ART. 6. The persons who (in accordance with the prescriptions of this

decree) would have lost their Spanish citizenship and consequently the right

to draw any retiring fund or pension whatsoever, whether the same may

have been actually granted or not, shall recover said rights at the same time

with the recovery of Spanish citizenship in the following cases and subject

to the following conditions:

First. The payment of any retiring fund or pension necessarily

demandstheresidenceofthebeneficiarywithintheactual

dominions of Spain and submission to the regulations which

govern or in the future may govern said pensions.

Second. All restorations or rehabilitations for the purpose of

drawing retiring funds or pensions must be preceded by an

examination and revision of the claims upon which it might have

been granted. Said rehabilitation will be subjected in the various

cases to the following rules:

A. The persons referred to in the first paragraph of

article 1 and in the second paragraph of article 2 of this

decree may draw the retiring funds or pensions to which

theyareentitled,providedtheyrecoverSpanish

citizenship within the period of one year from this date;

the right to draw said pension, however, commencing

from the date of the presentation of a petition requesting

the examination and revision of their claims.

B. Those persons referred to in the first paragraph of

article 3 who within the period of two years shall

enjoyment of their respective retiring funds or pensions.

A. 7. The persons referred to in article 4, no matter what be the manner in

which they may have recovered Spanish citizenship, shall in no case be

restored to the enjoyment of the retiring funds or pensions to which they

might have been entitled.

ART. 8. The persons referred to in this decree who, in accordance with the

provisions of the same, shall have lost the right to any retiring fund or

pensionwhatsoever,shall,nevertheless,beentitledtopetitionthe

Government to grant them, for special services rendered to the cause of

Spain, pensions as a reward therefor, in accordance with the prescriptions of

the law of the 12th of May of 1837, it being further permissible in such a

case to waive the residence in Spanish territory which is prescribed as a

condition to their enjoyment.

ART. 9. The ministry of state, grace and justice, hacienda, and gobernación

shall draw up the necessary provisions for the application of this decree in

their respective departments.

Given at the palace the 11th of May, 1901.
MARIACHRISTINA.
The president of the council of ministers,

PRÁXEDESMATEOSAGASTA.
Appendix.
I. Article 19 of the civil code prescribes that children of a foreigner born in

Spanish dominions who desire to acquire Spanish citizenship shall, within

the year following their majority or emancipation, make a declaration to

that effect.

Those who are in the Kingdom should make this declaration before the

official in charge of the civil registry of the town in which they reside; they

who reside in a foreign country before one of the consular or diplomatic

agents of the Spanish Government, and they who are in a country in which

the Government has no agent should address the Spanish minister of state.

II. Article 21 provides that: “A Spaniard who loses his citizenship by

acquiring naturalization in a foreign country, can recover it on returning to

the Kingdom by declaring before an official in charge of the civil registry of

the domicile which he elects that such is his wish, in order that the official

may make the corresponding inscription therein and by renouncing the

protection of the flag of such country.”
aSee Appendix I.
bSee Appendix II.
aArticle 23 of the civil code provides that “any Spaniard who loses his

nationality by accepting employment of any other Government, or by

obtaining the royal authorization.”

[Document 419]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 10, 1901.

No. 343.]

SIR: I shall be pleased to have you sound the Spanish Government, with the

utmost discretion possible, in order to ascertain whether it would be willing

to afford this Government such assistance as may seem to the Royal

Government right and appropriate in the defense of the claims which are

now being presented by United States citizens to the Spanish Treaty Claims

Commission, recently organized by the President to carry into effect the

provisions of Article VII of the treaty of peace.

I have unofficially conversed with the Spanish minister at this capital in

regard to this matter and he has promised to bring it himself to the attention

of his Government.

TheDepartmentsuggeststhefollowingmethodofarrangingforthe

communication of the claims: The United States Government should submit

to the Spanish Government in some form previously arranged a copy of the

petition of each claimant, together with a memorandum of any additional

informationobtainedfromthepapersintheDepartmentofStateor

otherwise; and should request the Spanish Government to investigate all the

facts connected with the claim which may tend to throw light on its merits,

and submit a confidential memorandum thereon showing any defense which

Spain would have been able to make thereto, if all such claims had not been

assumed by the United States in virtue of the treaty of peace, and also

submitting such suggestions as the Spanish officials may deem pertinent to

a proper defense by the United States against the claim.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 420]
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,December 14, 1901.

No. 590.]

SIR: It already having been known to the Department that I had deemed it

better not to present the request of your instruction No. 343, bearing date

June10,1901,totheSpanishGovernment,untilthereturnofthe

counterdraft of the treaty of amity, I have the honor to report that I

yesterday had a long and confidential conversation with the minister of state

on the subject of your above-mentioned instruction.

He had already been, as is known to the Department, informed of this desire

through the minister of Spain at Washington, and said that the Spanish

Government would most cheerfully and gladly undertake to do what it

could in the direction indicated, both through the correspondence from

Washington through the Duke de Arcos, and now proposed by myself. He

said there would be one or two conditions which he would feel obliged to

put in force, one being that care should be taken that the language of the

papers describing the claim transmitted to the Spanish Government should

not be of such a character as to be needlessly offensive or hostile either to

the Spanish Government or to its administration in its former colonies. He

said that some of the papers transmitted by the Duke de Arcos were worded

in such a way as to render it necessary that he should make this condition.

The result of our conversation was that I should formally, without delay,

address him officially the request in full, at the same time indicating the

plan of procedure suggested, and both by himself and myself considered the

most practical.

This I have done at once, and am to receive an official reply without delay,

givingtheconditionsoranypossiblelimitationswhichtheSpanish

Government may find itself obliged to make.

I should add that, so far as the minister of state represents the Spanish

Government, our request will be met in the best spirit, with every intention

to carry it out in the way most satisfactory to the legal representatives of the

United States before the commission.

I transmit herewith a copy of the letter I am to-day addressing to the

minister of state, and so soon as an answer is received I will report it to the

Department for the use of the commission.

I have, etc.,
BELLAMYSTORER.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Storer to the Minister of State.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,December 14, 1901.

No. 287.]

EXCELLENCY: Whereas the commission appointed by the President of the United

States to examine and pass upon all claims for which the United States has

made itself responsible under Article VII of the treaty of Paris has already

begun its labors, I have the honor to inform you that I am instructed by my

Government to ascertain whether the Government of His Majesty would be

willing to afford the United States such assistance as may seem right and

appropriate in the defense of claims which are now being presented by

United States citizens before the said commission.

My Government hopes that this request will be looked upon as one falling

within the scope of international comity between friendly nations and in

furtheranceofjusticeingivinginformationwhichwillenablethe

commission to allow with safety all well-founded and just claims, as well as

to reject such as are pushed without good’ cause or to an exaggerated

extent.

Feeling confident myself that this request is one which will commend itself

to the good feeling and discretion of the Government of His Majesty, I

venture even now to outline a practical method which would, in the opinion

of my Government, effectively bring about the desired results.

It is suggested that the United States Government should submit, through its

representative at Madrid, to the Government of His Majesty, through the

ministry of state, over which you so worthily preside, a clear and succinct

statementofthepetitionofeachclaimantasitisfiledbeforethe

CommissionofClaimsatWashington,accompanyingthiswitha

memorandum of all additional information relating to and affecting such

claim which may be found within the control of the Government of the

United States.

At the time of this submission the Government of the United States will

request of the Government of His Majesty to investigate all the facts

connected with the claim in question which may in anyway tend to throw

light upon its merits or upon the amount justly due; and that through the

ministry of state there should be transmitted to the representative of the

United States at Madrid a confidential memorandum indicating any and all

defenses, both on the merits or in the amount of the claim, which the

Spanish Government would have been able to make thereto had not all such

claims been assumed by the United States under the treaty of Paris; and also

such further suggestions and indications as the officials of the Government

of His Majesty charged with this matter, in their discretion, may deem

pertinent to the defense against such claim by the United States.

May I ask your excellency’s consideration of this plan and request that I

may be informed as to what changes, in principle or in detail, by which, in

your discretion, it would be rendered in any way more practical or sure. I

alsobegyourexcellencywillinformmeunderwhatconditionsor

restrictions the Government of His Majesty will find themselves able to

comply with the request I have had the honor to lay before you.

I take this occasion, etc.,
B S

[Document 421]
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,December 21, 1901.
No. 594.]

SIR: I have the honor, in furtherance of the subject of my dispatch No. 590,

bearing date December 14, 1901, to report that I have just received, through

the minister of state, the official answer of the Spanish Government to our

request for aid in obtaining evidence in the hearing of claims before the

Spanish Claims Commission, established pursuant to the treaty of Paris.

I beg to inclose a copy and a translation of the same.

In view both of the importance that there should be no misunderstanding in

this matter, and also of the fact that I am temporarily incapacitated from

personally examining the scope of the technically legal phrases in Spanish

employed by the Spanish Government, I venture—perhaps needlessly—to

request the close attention of the Department to the language of this answer,

and also to the translation. I am not confident that the translation is at the

same time absolutely accurate and absolutely clear under our own system of

the law involving “res adjudicata.”

It will be seen that in response to my request that the Spanish Government

should point out any detail which would render of more practical efficacy

the course of procedure desired, it is suggested that each case transmitted to

the Spanish Government be accompanied by a memorandum of questions

or interrogatory, specifying exactly the points upon which information is

desired.

It will also be seen that the conditions precedent, asked by the Spanish

Government, are: First, that the language of the petition and other papers

submitted through this legation shall not be disrespectful to Spain, nor

reflecting unduly upon the Spanish administration; and, second, that this

information thus furnished shall not be made the subject of debate, and so

far as it consists of decisions of the Spanish Government upon the conduct

of its own officers it shall be conclusive.

I desire, in restating their position, to carry the general verbal understanding

that the minister of state and myself came to, prior to the time when I

officially transmitted the request, as perhaps making clearer the intent of the

language used by the Spanish Government in now officially formulating its

conditional compliance.

The minister of state, who, I believe, is not technically a lawyer, had given

me the idea that all that was desired was that whatever was any judicial

decree, or to use his own words “choses jugées,” should be respected; and I

explained to him that under our system of jurisprudence there would be no

premeditated disturbance of any judicial decision arrived at by any Spanish

court having jurisdiction. This, I understand, met his own views.

I again venture to commend the close attention of the Department to the

scope of this part of the Spanish letter, as it may be intended to include

Spanish departmental rulings, etc., together with the decisions of competent

tribunals.

I have, etc.,
BELLAMYSTORER.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
M S,
Madrid,December 19, 1901.
No. 118.]

Government of the United States, if that of His Majesty is disposed to

afford assistance by furnishing data to defend its interests before the

commission of claims recently appointed in Washington, in compliance

with the agreement under Article VII of the treaty of Paris.

I beg to state, in reply, that the Government of His Majesty will accede with

pleasuretothewishestransmittedbyyourexcellency,providedthe

language used by the claimants in the cases transmitted be respectful; and

thattheGovernmentoftheUnitedStatesshallpreviouslymakean

agreement that the information, which (in accordance with the present note)

I may have the honor to transmit through your excellency, be not brought

into discussion, and that the decisions of the Government of His Majesty

shall be abided by in those cases in which judgment is passed upon the

conduct pursued by our own authorities.

In the event, which I hope will be the case, that the Government of the

United States agrees to this course, I will take much pleasure in referring

the petitions which your excellency may send me, in the form you indicate,

permitting myself, however, to point out to you the convenience of having

each one accompanied by a list of questions or interrogatory with regard to

points upon which it is desired that we supply the information.

I take this opportunity to repeat to your excellency the assurances of my

highest consideration.
ELDUQUE DEALMODÓVAR DELRIO.

[Document 422]
Mr. Sickles, chargé d’affaires, to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,June 27, 1901.

(Mr. Sickles states that the consul-general of the United states at Barcelona

reports by telegraph that his visa on cédulas of persons born in Cuba and

Porto Rico is ignored by the registry office, and that holders of such cédulas

are not permitted to register as foreigners. The consul-general requests

instructions, as the time for registering expires July 1.)
[Document 423]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Sickles.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 28, 1901.

(Mr. Hill directs the issue of such papers as will be accepted by the Spanish

authorities for the present to insure the registration of Cubans and Porto

Ricans as under the protection of the United States, but not as citizens

thereof.)
Mr. Sickles to Mr. Hay.
L U S,
Madrid,June 28, 1901.

No. 507.]

In connection with this matter I inclose herewith, for the consideration of

the Department, copies of two letters from the consul-general at Barcelona

which will explain Mr. Lay’s uncertainty as to the registration of Cubans

and Porto Ricans at that place.

I have, etc.,
STANTONSICKLES,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Lay to Mr. Sickles.
CONSULATE-GENERAL OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Barcelona,June 26, 1901.

No. 45.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram as

follows:

“PrayaskforDepartment’sadviceregardingregistrationof

Cubans, Porto Ricans and Filipinos.

“SICKLES,”

and letter confirming same of the 15th instant.

In this connection I beg to advise you that the registration authorities in

Barcelona will ignore my visé on Spanish cedulas of persons born in Cuba

and Porto Rico who reside here, as evidence of nationality or citzenship,

and they are therefore not permitted to register as foreigners.

I have, etc.,
J GL,Consul-General.
[Inclosure 2.]

Mr. Lay to Mr. Sickles.
CONSULATE-GENERAL OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Barcelona,June 26, 1901.

No. 46.]

SIR: I have the honor to confirm the following telegram sent you to-day:

“Visé on cedulas persons born in Cuba and Porto Rico ignored by registry

office here and holders of same not permitted register as foreigners. Cabled

Department 15th, but no answer. Time for registering expires July 1. Lay.”

Before the receipt of your letter of the 15th I cabled the Department of State

stating that the registration of foreigners was required here after they had

presented themselves at their respective consulates, and produced some

evidence of their nationality, and asking if I should visé Spanish cedulas of

persons born in Cuba and Porto Rico who reside here, and who have left

those islands since some years, and have no evidence of intention to return

except their statements. To this telegram I have received no reply.

Although the minister informed me that cedulas of Cubans and Porto

Ricans should be viséed in accordance with instructions to the legation No.

283 of January 16, 1901, before acting on this information, I considered it

best to clear up the point that still remains doubtful in my mind mentioned

in my letter to the legation dated November 14, 1900, and therefore cabled

the Department.

It would seem that Spaniards born in the peninsula are just as much entitled

to have their cedulas viséed as persons born in Cuba or Porto Rico who

have lived here since before the signing of the treaty of peace, but if for

some reason the Government wish to recognize these people and visé their

cedulas, that visé in my opinon should represent something, as it does on

American passports.

Those persons who have produced Cuban and Porto Rican passports viséed

by this consulate-general have been permitted to register.

As the Department instructions say nothing about viséing the certificates

inclosed, although they may be accepted as sufficient evidence in Cuba of

citizenship for a passport, I have refused to visé them.

It occurs to me that there has been a misunderstanding from the first as to

what a cedula is in reality, and the Department is under the impression that

it is a Cuban or Porto Rican document. I can not imagine how the treaty of

peace has changed the status of any except inhabitants of Cuba and Porto

Rico or why we should regard natives of Cuba or Porto Rico residing in

Spain except as Spaniards. I have treated them as such here, and I know

there would be a protest if a visé for which I am obliged to charge an

official fee of $1 was found to be worthless.

I have, etc.,
JULIUS G.LAY,
Consul-General.

[Document 425]
Mr. Sickles to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,June 30, 1901.

(Mr.Sicklesreportsthattheconsul-generalatBarcelonaconsidersit

important to know immediately if the Department means by “Cubans and

Porto Ricans” resident inhabitants only, or if it means also persons born in

those islands, but resident since for some years in Spain.)
[Document 426]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Sickles.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 2, 1901.

(Mr. Hill states that the Department means by “Cubans and Porto Ricans

“bona fide residents of those islands who are temporarily residing abroad.)
[Document 427]
Mr. Sickles to Mr. Hay.
L U S,
Madrid,July 3, 1901.

No. 512.]

S: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt to-day of your telegraphic

instruction in reply to my cablegram of the 30th instant.

The purport of your cablegram has been repeated at once by wire to the

consul-general at Barcelona.

I have, etc.,
STANTONSICKLES,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

[Document 428]
The Duke de Arcos to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OFSPAIN,
Washington,September 17, 1901.
MR.SECRETARY:Ihavelearnedwithdeepsorrowthecontentsofyour

excellency’s note of the 14th instant in which you are kind enough to

inform me of the death of William McKinley, the President of the United

States. Since the day that the vile attack of an assassin endangered the life

of the President the Spanish nation and Government have followed with the

liveliest interest the different phases of the condition of the illustrious

patient. And now that the fatal end has come they sympathize with the

American people in the infinite grief of so great a loss.

I have a special mission from Her Majesty the Queen Regent and Her

Government to so inform your excellency.

IhavenotifiedmyGovernmentofthesuccessionofMr.Theodore

Roosevelt as President of the United States.

I avail myself of this occasion, etc.,
A

[Document 429]
Mr. Hill to the Duke de Arcos.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 26, 1901.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 17th

instant, whereby you convey to me the condolence of Her Majesty the

Queen Regent, and of the Spanish Government and nation, with the

Government and people of the United States in the affliction which they

have suffered in the death of President McKinley.

I shall be obliged if you will assure Her Majesty the Queen Regent and the

Spanish Government that this manifestation of sympathy on their part is

sincerely and gratefully appreciated by the Government and people of this

country.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 430]
Duke de Arcos to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OFSPAIN,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

Mr. SECRETARY: As stated to me by the Spanish consul at New Orleans, on the

26th of last month Don Modesto Peligri, the captain of the Spanish steamer
Puerto Rico, hailing from Barcelona, came into his office and informed him

that six men of the crew of his vessel bad deserted, three of whom were

already held through his own efforts, and he was searching for the others,

and requested the aid of the Federal authorities.

The consul appeared before the competent authorities asking their aid in

arrestingthesailordeserters,ascustomaryinallports;butthesaid

authorities refused to grant the request of the consul, on the ground that

there was no existing treaty between Spain and the United States that could

be invoked to effect the arrest he desired.

Those authorities acted, no doubt, according to their strict right. There are,

it is true, no treaties existing between the two countries, but your excellency

knows that the abnormal situation which such a circumstance may create

has been in many and various cases remedied by a spirit of mutual courtesy

through which, even without signature of treaty, transactions are allowed

and of common occurrence among friendly nations. Such is the present

instance.

The injury which would result from the prevalence of the opinion of the

Federal authorities of New Orleans to the navigation and commerce of both

countries can not be truly estimated. The sailors of merchant vessels could

desert with impunity, and the contracts of their masters would become a

dead letter, while there would be no legal means of punishing the guilty.

In view of these considerations I would be much obliged to your excellency

if you will kindly state to me what is your opinion on so important a

subject, and if there will not be means in the future, until the execution of

treaties which will certainly contain clauses governing such cases, of

avoiding the impunity remaining to deserters from the mercantile marine.

I avail, etc.,
ARCOS.

[Document 431]
Mr. Adee to Duke de Arcos.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 9, 1901.
No. 233.]

SIR: Referring to your note of the 25th ultimo, asking at the instance of the

Spanish consul at New Orleans whether there is not some means, pending

the consideration of a new treaty, to avoid the exemption from punishment

of deserters from Spanish vessels in the United States, with particular

reference to the recent desertion of some of the crew of the Barcelona

steamshipPuerto Rico, I have the honor to inform you that the Secretary of

the Treasury, to whom the matter was referred, reports that his Department

is not aware of any law or regulation providing for the punishment of

deserters under the circumstances such as you describe. It may be stated

further that in the act approved December 2, 1898, Congress formally

repealed the laws then existing which authorized the arrest of deserters from

vessels of the United States in ports in this country.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 432]
Mr. Storer to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Madrid,December 5, 1901.

No. 583.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that this legation has received, through the

consulate-general at Barcelona, the duplicate application for the granting of

a passport to Mr. José Portusach.

The applications, which are for himself, his wife, and his four minor

children, have been made out on the theory that the applicant, on account of

his having been born in the island of Guam in May, 1859, is now a native-

born American citizen.

The applications also recite that his family is temporarily sojourning at

Barcelona, and is the bearer of a temporary passport issued by the governor

of Guam in the month of August last, bearing the seal of the executive

office, and signed by the governor’s adjutant, Pressly.

He desires this for the purpose of traveling, and intends to return to the

United States—that is to say, to the island of Guam—within one year. The

passport issued by the governor of Guam is inclosed, and also certain

correspondence between the governor of Guam, Commander Schroeder,

and Major Jones, quartermaster, which fully identifies the applicant.

I am in doubt, first, whether the island of Guam stands under the instruction

of the Department regarding the certification of passports or cedulas hailing

from the Philippine Islands; second, I am in doubt whether, being born in

Guam, he thereby becomes a native-born citizen of the United States.

I respectfully ask the instructions of the Department whether I shall proceed

by visa, the passport issued by the governor of Guam, and if I am to issue a

passport, whether it should be issued to him as a native-born citizen of the

United States or not.

I have, etc.,
BELLAMYSTORER.

[Document 433]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Storer.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 24, 1901.

No. 397.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 583, of the 5th instant,

reporting that an application for a passport has been made to you by Mr.

José Portusach, a native of the island of Guam.

In reply I have to say that in the absence of legislation by Congress, you

may treat the applicant as you would an inhabitant of Porto Rico or the

Philippine Islands, following the instructions you already have.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 434]
Mr. Thomas to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Stockholm,January 21, 1901.

(Mr. Thomas reports the reassumption of Government by King Oscar on

January 21.)
[Document 435]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Thomas.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 21, 1901.

(Mr. Hay directs Mr. Thomas to tender the President’s congratulations upon

reassumption of Government by King Oscar.)
Liability of naturalized citizens of the

a
country
See instruction to Austria-Hungary, December 10, 1900, page 7
.

[Document 434a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 9, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF SWEDEN WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Subjects of Sweden are liable to performance of military duty in and after

the calendar year in which they reach their twenty-first year.

Under the treaty between the United States and Sweden and Norway, a

naturalized citizen of the United States formerly a subject of Sweden is

recognized as an American citizen upon his return to the country of his

origin. He is liable, however, to punishment for an offense against the laws

of Sweden committed before his emigration, saving always the limitations

and remissions established by those laws. Emigration itself is not an

offense, but nonfulfillment of military duty and desertion from a military

force or ship are offenses.

A naturalized American who performed his military service or emigrated

when he was not liable to it, and who infracted no laws before emigrating,

may safely return to Sweden.

If he renews his residence in the Kingdom without intent to return to

America, he is held to have renounced his American citizenship, and he will

be liable to perform, military duty.

Passportsarenotrequiredfrompersonsenteringortravelinginthe

Kingdom, but they may be called upon to establish their citizenship, and are

consequently advised to procure passports.

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 9, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF NORWAY WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Subjects of Norway are liable to performance of military duty in and after

the calendar year in which they reach their twenty-second year.

Under the treaty between the United States and Sweden and Norway, a

naturalized citizen of the United States formerly a subject of Norway is

recognized as an American citizen upon his return to the country of his

origin. He is liable, however, to punishment for an offense against the laws

of Norway committed before his emigration, saving always the limitations

and remissions established by those laws. Emigration itself is not an

offense, but nonfulfillment of military duty and desertion from a military

force or ship are offenses.

A naturalized American who performed his military service or emigrated

when he was not liable to it, and who infracted no laws before emigrating,

may safely return to Norway.

He must, however, report to the conscription officers, and, on receiving a

summons, present himself at the meetings of the conscripts in order to

prove his American citizenship.

If he has remained as long as two years in Norway, he is obliged, without

being summoned, to present himself for enrollment at the first session, since

he is then deemed by Norway to have renounced his American citizenship.

If he renews his residence in the Kingdom without intent to return to

America, he is held to have renounced his American citizenship.

Passportsarenotrequiredfrompersonsenteringortravelinginthe

Kingdom, but they may be called upon to establish their citizenship, and are

consequently advised to procure passports.

[Document 436]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Thomas.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 20, 1901.

No. 118.]

Government of Norway for Johannes P. Hoiland, a naturalized American

citizen, for alleged unlawful arrest and imprisonment.

The facts, as stated, appear to be as follows:

Hoiland was born in Norway, December 23, 1861, and emigrated to the

United States in April, 1883, when he was 21 years and 4 months old. He

was naturalized in the United States in March, 1896. In December, 1897, he

returned to Norway for a visit; in November, 1898, he was notified that he

had been fined 20 kroner for failure to be present at a military meeting, and

informed that he could not return to America until the fine was paid. He

refused to pay the fine, on the ground that he was a citizen of the United

States and did not have to do military duty in Norway. On June 7, 1898, he

was arrested for declining to drill as a soldier and held under arrest until the

next day, when he was released. In August, 1899, it seems that proceedings

in regard to the fine were taken in the courts, by which it is said the fine

was raised to 32 kroner, but on appeal by Hoiland to the supreme court the

judgment of the lower court was, on March 8, 1900, reversed on the ground

that Hoiland was a citizen of the United States and had duly notified the

authorities of his intention to emigrate. - He was permitted to leave Norway,

which he did on March 17, 1900.

It seems that Hoiland had no written emigration permit, but it is said that

under the laws of Norway a written permit was not necessary, as he was at

the time of his emigration only 21 years and 4 months old. It is also said

that at the time of his emigration Hoiland had not drawn lot as to whether

he should belong to the regular army or to the reserves, and under the laws

of Norway one may, before he has drawn such lot, emigrate upon a mere

notice to the commissioner of his district or parish of his intention to do so.

Anallegedoriginalstatementfromonewhowasformerlysuch

commissioner is transmitted to the Department, in which it is stated that

Hoiland notified him of his intention to emigrate to America.

Under the naturalization treaty in force between the two countries, a former

Norwegian who has emigrated after he has attained the age when he

becomes liable to military service and returns again to his original country,

is liable to trial and punishment for an act punishable by the laws of

Norway and committed before his emigration.

The Department would be pleased to have you investigate the case and

report the facts ascertained by you.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Vaule to Mr. Hay.
CROOKSTON,MINN.,June 9, 1900.

S: April 30 last past I wrote you to the effect that one Johannes Hoiland, a

citizen of this country, went to Norway for a visit in 1898 (it should have

been 1897) and was by the authorities of that country arrested, fined, and

detained over there for a couple of years for refusing to do military duty in

that country, and that he desired your office to intercede in his behalf to

obtain redress from the Government of Norway for the grievances he has

sustained, and asked you to let us know how you wanted the case presented.

May 7, 1900, you wrote me to the effect that before you would comply with

my request, you wanted to know Holland’s age when he emigrated to the

United States, and that you also wanted a copy of his naturalization papers,

and also of his military permit.

The reason I did not answer your letter before is that we have been

expecting from the authorities in Norway the original military permit,

together with his naturalization papers and other papers that were had from

Hoiland in the courts of that country. These papers have not yet arrived, but

I inclose you herewith another copy of his naturalization papers, and for the

present will state that the permit was regular, and accepted as such by the

authorities of Norway while Hoiland was detained there as stated.

Hoiland emigrated from Norway April 14, 1883, then 21 years and 4

months of age; he became a citizen of the United States on March 25, 1896;

December 11, 1897, he went back to Norway for a visit; November 2, 1898,

he was notified by an officer that he had been fined 20 kroner for failing to

be present at a military meeting, and was by the same officer at that time

notified that he could not return to America until the fine was paid. He

refused to pay the fine on the ground that he was a citizen of the United

States and did not have to do military duty in Norway; November 29, 1898,

the same officer came and borrowed Holland’s naturalization paper and

retained same to December 17, 1898, at which time the naturalization paper

was returned and a paper served on Hoiland to the effect that he was to

stand trial in regard to that fine. The authorities did not bring that case to

trial until August 25, 1899. Meanwhile Hoiland was, on June 7, 1899, taken

to a military camp and kept under arrest from 3 o’clock in the afternoon of

June 7 until 12 o’clock noon of June 8, 1899, at which time he was ordered

released from arrest by the oberst (colonel).

In regard to that fine, it was by the lower court affirmed and increased to 32

kroner, but on appeal the judgment was reversed by the supreme court

March 8, 1900, and Hoiland permitted to leave Norway and did leave

March 17, 1900.

When the military permit arrives I will forward it to you, as well as any

other papers you may desire in this matter. Kindly let me hear from you at

your earliest opportunity.

Yours, truly,
OJV

[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Vaule to Mr. Hay.
CROOKSTON,MINN.,August 12, 1901.

SIR:InregardtotheclaimofJohannesP.Hoilandforhavingbeen

unlawfully detained by the authorities of Norway, and which claim has been

heretofore referred to in my letters of April 30, June 9, and June 29, 1900, I

will say that I have investigated the case in regard to his military permit

referred to in your letter of June 15, 1900, and find that he had no “written

permit;” and it appears that, under the laws of Norway, no such written

permit was necessary for him, as he was, at the time of his emigration, only

21 years and 4 months old. He was born December 23, 1861, and emigrated

from Stavanger, Norway, April 14, 1883.

Mr. Hoiland became a citizen of the United States, as shown by the copy of

his naturalization papers, forwarded to you in my letter of June 9, 1900.

Thereafter, and on December 11, 1897, he returned to Norway for a visit.

November 2, 1898, he was notified that he was fined 20 kroner for failing

to be present at a military meeting, and was from then on prevented by the

authorities from returning to America. June 7, 1899, he was taken to Malde,

a military camp near Stavanger, Norway, arrested for not wanting to drill as

a soldier, and kept under arrest from June 7 at 3 p. m. to June 8 at 12 m., at

which time the oberst ordered his release.

The casein regard to the fine was then taken up by the courts and the fine

was raised to 32 kroner, and he was again notified that he could not return

to America until the fine was paid. Hoiland appealed to the supreme court

of the Kingdom of Norway, where the judgment of the lower court was

reversed on the ground that he was a citizen of the United States and that he

had duly notified the authorities of his intention to emigrate, and he was

permitted to embark March 8, 1900.

At the time of his emigration Hoiland had not drawn lot as to whether he

should belong to the regular army or to the reserves, and under the laws of

Norway one may before he has drawn such lot emigrate upon a mere notice

to the commissioner of his district or parish of his intention to do so. I

inclose herewith an original statement from Soren Westlye, dated June 22,

1901, who was such commissioner at the time of Holland’s emigration in

1863, and a translation attached to same. It may also be mentioned that this

statement is in substance the same as the statement presented by Hoiland to

the courts of Norway and on which he was acquitted.

If there is anything else I can do in this connection kindly let me know.

Yours, truly,
OLEJ.VAULE.
[Subinclosure.—Translation.]

I hereby certify that Johannes Peterson Hoiland notified me of his intention

to emigrate to America (without being able to state the year) and that he

thereafter emigrated.
SORENWESTLYE,
Formerly District Commissioner.
WESTLYE,June 22, 1901.

[Document 437]
Mr. Thomas to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Stockholm,December 31, 1901.

No. 236]

SIR: Referring to your instruction No. 118, of August 20 last, setting forth

the case of Johannes P. Hoiland, a naturalized American citizen, born in

Norway,who.hadaskedtheDepartmenttoobtainredressfromthe

Government of Norway for alleged unlawful arrest and imprisonment, I

have the honor to inform you that in compliance with your directions I at

once, on September 3, addressed a note to the minister for foreign affairs, a

copy of which herewith inclosed, giving the facts in the case as detailed in

your instruction, and requesting to be informed of the attitude of the

Government of Norway in the premises.

I am now in receipt of a note from the foreign office, dated December 27, a

copy of which, accompanied by a translation, is inclosed, transmitting copy

of a letter from the minister of the interior of Norway, which I inclose in

English translation.

In this letter his excellency Mr. Steen gives a full and exhaustive history of

the case, from which it appears that Hoiland, after his return to Norway, in

December, 1897, was enrolled for military service and notified to appear at

the recruit school at Maldesletten on May 2, 1899.

He did not appear; neither did he prove to the proper military authorities

who had ordered him to appear that he was an American citizen.

On his not appearing, the commander of the company (captain) at the

recruit school charged the sheriff at Time, in May, 1899, to visit Hoiland in

person and demand his explanation as to the reason for his absence, and to

request him to produce his American citizenship papers as proof in case he

had such papers. Hoiland told the sheriff that he was an American citizen,

but refused to produce or show the military authorities his citizen papers; he

said he had shown them to the police in connection with the fine case, and

he would not now show them to any more Norwegian authorities.

It was after this that Hoiland, on June 7, 1899, was transported to the Malde

drilling grounds and placed under arrest. The next day, June 8, he showed

his American citizen papers, after which he was immediately released.

The opinion is expressed that Hoiland has only himself to blame for his

arrest and imprisonment, since these were caused by his default to show his

American citizen papers on request by the proper military authorities.

It is also held that, although the treaty between the United States and

Sweden and Norway of May 26, 1869, protects naturalized American

citizens of Norwegian birth returning to Norway from military service,

American citizens whenever officially requested to do so by the proper

Norwegian authorities.

In fact, that if such persons have the right to be free from military service

because they are American citizens, they have also the duty laid upon them

of proving such citizenship.

In this connection I beg to call your attention to the printed notice issued by

the Department of State and given to naturalized American citizens of

Norwegian birth on their applying for a passport.

Paragraphs 3 and 4 of this notice read as follows:

A naturalized American who performed his military service or

emigrated when he was not liable to it, and who infracted no laws

before emigrating, may safely return to Norway.

He must, however, report to the conscription officers, and, on

receiving a summons, present himself at the meetings of the

conscripts in order to prove his American citizenship.

It would seem that if Hoiland had acted in accordance with the plain and

wise advice given by the Department he would have saved himself all the

trouble of which he complains.

I have, etc.,
W.W.THOMAS, Jr.
Mr. Thomas to the minister for foreign affairs.
[Inclosure 1.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Stockholm,September 3, 1901.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inform your excellency that the Department of

State has been asked to obtain redress from the Government of Norway for

Johannes P. Hoiland, a naturalized American citizen, for alleged unlawful

arrest and imprisonment.

The facts, as stated, appear to be as follows:

Hoiland was born in Norway, December 23, 1861, and emigrated to the

United States in April, 1883, when he was 21 years and 4 months old. He

was naturalized in the United States in March, 1896. In December, 1897, he

returned to Norway for a visit; in November, 1898, he was notified that he

had been fined 20 kroner for failure to be present at a military meeting, and

informed that he could not return to America until the fine was paid. He

refused to pay the fine on the ground that he was a citizen of the United

States and did not have to do military duty in Norway. On June 7, 1899, he

was arrested for declining to drill as a soldier and held under arrest until the

next day, when he was released. In August, 1899, it seems that proceedings

in regard to the fine were taken in the courts, by which it is said the fine

was raised to 32 kroner, but on appeal by Hoiland to the supreme court, the

judgment of the lower court was on March 8, 1900, reversed on the ground

that Hoiland was a citizen of the United States and had duly notified the

authorities of his intention to emigrate. He was permitted to leave Norway,

which he did on March 17, 1900.

It seems that Hoiland had no written emigration permit, but it is said that

under the laws of Norway a written permit was not necessary, as he was at

the time of his emigration only 21 years and 4 months old. It is also said

that at the time of his emigration Hoiland had not drawn lot as to whether

he should belong to the regular army or to the reserves, and under the laws

of Norway one may, before he has drawn such a lot, emigrate upon a mere

notice to the commissioner of his district or parish of his intention to do so.

Anallegedoriginalstatementfromonewhowasformerlysuch

commissioner is transmitted to the Department, in which it is stated that

Hoiland notified him of his intention to emigrate to America. This statement

is dated Westlye, June 22, 1901, and signed Soren Westlye, formerly district

commissioner.

Hoiland emigrated from Stavanger, Norway. The place of his arrest was

Malde, a military camp near Stavanger.

I should be pleased to be informed of the attitude of the Government of

Norwayuponthiscase,withaviewofreportingthesametothe

Department of State.

I beg, etc.,
W.W.THOMAS, Jr.
Mr. Von Otter to Mr. Thomas.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]

RF O,
Stockholm,December 27, 1901.
Mr M : By a note, dated the 3d of October (September) last, you have

been pleased to express the desire to be placed in position to report to your

Government the attitude of the Government of Norway upon the treatment

which Johannes P. Hoiland, an American citizen, has undergone at the

hands of the Norwegian authorities on account of his refusal to perform

military service in Norway.

Having requested the opinion of the competent Norwegian authorities, I

have the honor to transmit to you in reply a copy of a letter which the

minister of the interior at Christiania has addressed to me, and in which his

excellency, Mr. Steen, after having recounted the details of the affairs and in

proving that Hoiland has himself caused his arrest by his refusal to

legitimate himself as an American citizen, expresses the opinion that an

emigrant who, on his return to Norway should, according to the treaty with

the United States of May 26, 1869, be free from military service in Norway,

has nevertheless the duty of proving his American nationality before the

competent authorities.

I am convinced that you will concur in this opinion.

Please accept, etc.,
F.W.VONOTTER.
Mr. Steen to Royal Foreign Office.
[Subinclosure.—Translation.]

CHRISTIANIÅ,December 21, 1901.

The ROYALFOREIGNOFFICE,
Stockholm:
In a communication of September 10 last the Royal foreign office has

transmitted to this department a copy of a note from the American minister

at Stockholm, elated September 3, in which information is requested

regarding the attitude of the Norwegian Government with respect to the

fining and imprisonment of an American citizen, Johannes P. Hoiland, for

omitting to appear at the conscription meeting and to present himself for

military service in this country.

In consequence thereof, after having received the opinion of the war

department in the matter and the explanations procured by said department

from the competent conscription authorities, we have the honor to state as

follows, viz.: It is true, as stated in the American minister’s note, that the

said Johannes P. Hoiland was born in this country in 1861, and that he

emigrated to America in April, 1883, before the holding of the conscription

meeting in his place of domicile (Time district) in the aforesaid year. It is

also true, that, according to Nowegian law, it is not required that conscripts

who, as was the case with Hoiland, emigrate from the Kingdom before the

holding of the conscription meeting in their place of domicile in the

calendar year in which they reach the age of 22, shall have express

permission to emigrate, but it is sufficient that they, previous to their

departure, have made a declaration of their emigration to the alderman

(rodeforstander) of their ward and the commissary of their district, and from

the latter have received a written certificate that such a declaration has been

made.

This obligation to make such declaration was, however, not fulfilled by

Hoiland. It is true that the American minister has stated that Hoiland has

presented a certificate dated June 22, 1901, issued by Soren Westbye,

former district commissary, to the effect that Hoiland had made declaration

to him of his (Holland’s) emigration before he left the country in April,

1883; but the proper conscription board has now informed this department

that Soren Westbye was not district commissary for Time in 1883 (his time

of office as such had already expired the preceding year), and that opposite

Holland’s name in the muster roll for his year’s class (which roll is kept by

the military roll keeper, who is also the chief of the district commission,

registering all young conscripts, from confirmation age up) it is expressly

remarked that he had emigrated without proper declaration.

The conscript law of February 28, 1877, section 29, provides that every

emigrated Norwegian subject who returns to this country must at once

report to the proper district commission. This was not observed by Hoiland

on his return in December, 1897, and furthermore, he can not be considered

in any other way to have informed any Norwegian authority that he had

become an American citizen.

At the district meeting for Time on April 12, 1898, it was reported to the

roll keeper that Hoiland had returned. As a consequence of this, the roll

keeper charged the proper alderman (rodeforstander) to call him to appear

at the conscription meeting for Time, which was to be held on August 4 of

the same year, in order that his conscription duties to Norway might be

investigatedanddetermined.Itseems,however,asifthealderman

(rodeforstander) has neglected thus to call him, and consequently Hoiland

didnotappearattheconscriptionmeeting.Theconscriptionboard,

supposing that Hoiland had been called to appear, imposed a fine upon him

of 20 kroner for absence, and also enrolled him (as one who had, previous

to his departure for America, neglected his declaration duty) for full

military service, providing that he, on appearing for drill, should be found

serviceable. Hoiland was then informed both of the imposition of the fine

and the enrollment.

When the imposition of the fine was thereafter brought to his knowledge by

the civil authorities, he refused to pay the fine, stating as his reason that he

was an American citizen. The Norwegian authorities, supposing that he had

been expressly ordered to appear at the conscript meeting to account for his

conscript duties and that he, even if he were an American citizen, was

obliged, after being ordered, to appear at said function to prove this, then

took legal action against him to collect the fine. Hoiland was also sentenced

by the inferior court, but the supreme court acquitted him of the imposed

fine on March 8, 1900, because it might be supposed, from the evidence

thenproduced,thathehadnotreceivedanyordertoappearatthe

conscription meeting, such as the alderman (rodeforstander) had been

charged to serve on him, and because he, after it had been shown that he

was an American citizen, was regarded as not obliged to appear without

such a special order.

As a consequence of the other action against Hoiland, in accordance with

the aforesaid decision of the conscription board (his enrollment for military

service), he was charged by the proper military authorities to appear at the

recruit school at Madesletten on May 2, 1899. He did not appear, however;

neither did he prove to the proper military authorities, who had ordered him

to appear, that he was an American citizen.

On his not appearing, the commander of the company (captain) at the

recruit school charged the sheriff at Time, in May, 1899, to visit Hoiland in

person and demand his explanation as to the reason for his absence, and to

request him to lend his American citizen papers as proof, in case he had

such papers. Hoiland told the sheriff that he was an American citizen, but he

refused to lend or show the military authorities his citizen papers; he said he

had shown them to the police in connection with the fine case, and he

would not show them to any more Norwegian authorities.

It was after this that Hoiland, on June 7, 1899—thus previous to the

aforesaid acquittal by the supreme court of the fine imposed upon him for

omitting to appear at the conscription meeting—was transported to the

Malde drilling grounds and placed under arrest. The next day, June 8, he

showed his American citizen papers, after which he was immediately

released.

The conscription board has, in connection with this information, remarked

that Hoiland may blame himself for being subjected to the treatment of

which he has now complained, for if he had shown greater willingness to

prove his relation to the United States he would have avoided being

arrested.

The general war commissary has stated that he must declare himself in

unisonwiththisopinionoftheconscriptionboard,andhasinthis

connection stated that since the treaty with the United States of May 26,

1869, protects returning emigrants who have become American citizens

Norwegian authority who officially requires them to do so. Furthermore, the

general war commissary has called attention to the fact that Hoiland was

acquitted of the fine because it could not be considered proved that he had

received any call to appear at the conscription meeting. He had, however,

received an order to appear at the opening of the recruit school, on May 2,

1899, and he must therefore submit to being treated as one obliged to

appear, until he, on showing his American citizen papers, prove that he, as

an American citizen, had a right to be free.

Also the war department has stated that, with respect to the information

here given, it finds that Holland’s transportation to the Malde drilling

grounds and arrest may be ascribed to his refusal to prove himself not

commissary, presenting as its opinion that returning emigrants, who, in

consequence of the treaty with the United States of May 26, 1869, are

exempt from conscription in this Kingdom, are obliged to prove themselves

tobeAmericancitizenswheneverthisisdemandedbytheproper

Norwegian authorities.

This department also finds that it must support this opinion.

The American minister in Stockholm should be informed of the foregoing.
STEEN.

[Document 438]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Thomas.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 16, 1902.
No. 129.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 236, of the 31st ultimo,

inclosing the reply of the Norwegian Government to the complaint made by

Mr. Johannes P. Hoiland, a naturalized American citizen of Norwegian

origin, that he had been unlawfully arrested and imprisoned in Norway.

Under the circumstances of Mr. Hoiland’s resistance to, and delay in

complyingwith,thereasonablerequirementtoprovehisAmerican

citizenship before the competent authority, the Department does not see that

it is called upon to intervene any further in the matter.

His attorney has been so advised.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 439]
Mr. Grip to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

LEGATION OFSWEDEN ANDNORWAY,
Bar Harbor, Me.,September 14, 1901.

I am directed by my Government to convey to the Government of the

United States the expressions of deep sympathy of the King and the United

Kingdoms of Sweden and Norway.
A.GRIP.

[Document 440]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Grip.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 25, 1901.

SIR: The pressure of public business attendant upon the death of President

McKinley has delayed until now an acknowledgment of your telegram of

the 14th instant, conveying, by direction of your Government, an expression

of the sympathy felt by His Majesty the King and the United Kingdoms of

Sweden and Norway in view of that sad event.

I shall be obliged if you will assure His Majesty and your Government that

their condolence is gratefully appreciated by the Government and people of

theUnitedStates,whoaredeeplytouchedbytheinnumerable

manifestations of sympathy which they have received from all parts of the

world.

Accept, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 441]
Mr. Thomas to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Stockholm,September 18, 1901.

No. 219.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that a bronze statue of John Ericsson, the

great Swedish-American, erected by national subscription, was unveiled at

Stockholm on the 14th instant with imposing ceremonies.

The occasion was honored by the presence of His Royal Highness the

members of the Swedish cabinet, the governor of Stockholm, high officers

of the Swedish army and navy, members of the Swedish Riksdag, and

several hundred other gentlemen and ladies prominent in the political,

social, and literary life of Sweden. The entire personnel of the American

legation and consulate-general were also present. All were seated upon a

raised tribune in front of the monument. About the tribune were gathered a

vast multitude of over 20,000 people, who filled the broad place at the head

of Nybro Harbor, where the statue stands, in the heart of Stockholm, and

overflowed all approaching streets and avenues.

All around the park were erected tall flagstaffs, from which floated the

American and Swedish flags alternately. Swedish and American flags were

also very generally displayed from public and private buildings throughout

the entire city and from the shipping in the harbor.

At the command of the Crown Prince, “Let the veil fall from the monument

of our illustrious countryman, John Ericsson,” the covering fell, disclosing

the stately statue.

A salute of fifteen guns was fired by the first Swedish monitor,John

Ericsson, lying in the harbor hard by, and the royal naval band blew a

flourish of trumpets.

It is an interesting fact that the plans for this monitor were all drawn by

Ericsson in America and the two great cannon in the turret were procured

by Ericsson in the United States and presented by him to Sweden.

The monitor now saluted the monument of its creator.

Maj. Cl. Adelskiöld, chairman of the monument committee, then delivered

an address. He concluded with the following words, addressed to the

minister of the United States, which I give in English translation:
CONCLUSION OF MAJOR ADELSKIÖLD’S ADDRESS.

It is now eleven years since the Government of the United States

of America gave a son of Svea, John Ericsson, obsequies-which

have no parallel in historic time, and his ashes were delivered to

SwedenonbehalfoftheUnitedStatesGovernmentbythe

American minister, Mr. Thomas, whom we still have the pleasure

of seeing in the same high position he then held. And it has been

considered especially appropriate to choose this day, when two

nations joined in honoring the memory of John Ericsson, for the

unveiling of this monument, thereby publicly and before the

whole world affirming the high appreciation which the Swedish

people feel and always will feel for the mark of distinction which

the great Republic accorded Sweden by the honorable manner in

which the earthly remains of one of its most noble sons were

delivered to the fatherland.

AndItakethelibertyofmostrespectfullyrequestingyour

excellency to bring to the knowledge of your Government, your

countrymen, and the million of John Ericsson’s countrymen who

live in the United States of America the feeling of deepest and

warmest gratitude which the country and people of Sweden will

always bear toward the great Republic on the other side of the

ocean and the pride we feel in this extraordinary mark of honor.

Tell him that, though it was not granted us to have this immortal

man here in our home country during the whole of his lifetime,

we rejoice that he in his new father-erland had opportunity to

develop the rich resources of his genius, thereby making himself

useful to you, to humanity, and to us, and that we, through the

noble-mindednessofyourGovernment,weregrantedan

opportunityoftenderlycaringforhisearthlyremains,in

accordance with the wish expressed by him.

Just before the unveiling of the monument I had received your telegram

announcing the death of President McKinley. The members of the legation

and consulate-general, both ladies and gentlemen, were therefore all clad in

mourning on this occasion. Wearing the symbols of mourning, I then

delivered the following address. To this vast Swedish audience I spoke in

the Swedish language, but the following is an exact English translation of

my words:
ADDRESS OF MR. THOMAS.

It is with a heavy heart I stand here to-day.

The sad tidings have just flown over the ocean that America’s

beloved President lies dead in our distant land.

But if his dead lips could speak, full well I know they would say

to me:

“Doyourduty.LetnotmydeathcauseAmericatobe

unrepresented to-day, when Sweden honors the memory of the

great Swedish-American who at a critical moment in America’s

history rendered the Republic illustrious service and saved her

from great peril.”

Eleven years ago this September day, on board the American

man-of-warBaltimore, lying in Stockholm’s harbor, it fell to me,

representing my country, to deliver to Sweden the honored ashes

of John Ericsson.

And now to-day it is my privilege to be present at the dedication

of this monument, which has been erected to Ericsson’s honor in

Sweden’s capital.

To participate in this celebration I esteem not only an honor but a

duty, for John Ericsson belongs to America as well as to Sweden.

True, here was his fatherland, but the broad field of his activity

was in the New World beyond the western wave, and there lay the

scene of his great achievements.

These achievements have materially aided the progress of the

world, for Ericsson was a true laborer for the development and

civilization of mankind, but his most illustrious service rendered

to his adopted country will ever merit special recognition.

We Americans will never forget our great war for the Union,

which freed 4,000,000 slaves and saved our nation’s life.

We will never forget one bright spring morning when the rebel

ramMerrimacsteamed out of Norfolk Harbor and with her prow

of iron bore down upon our fleet of wooden vessels lying at

anchor in Hampton Roads; or how that monster ironclad rammed

and destroyed, one after the other, our bravest ships, broke our

blockade, and for a few short hours was mistress of the seas.

colossus of the slave power, as David did Goliath, and how, after

ahard-foughtduel,thelittleUnionshipdefeateditsgiant

adversary, and thus saved our navy, our blockade, and our power

on the ocean.

We will never forget either that the man whose genius invented

and built and gave us theMonitorwas no native American, but

the Swede, John Ericsson, born and bred in this ancient, honored

land.

America will always owe a debt of gratitude to Sweden, which

has given us a million of our best citizens, each one a link in the

golden chain which binds together two great and kindred peoples

in the bonds of friendship and good will; but our deepest gratitude

is due because Sweden gave us that man whose memory we to-

day are met to honor, and who has justly won the proud title of

the Great Swedish-American.

And America will never forget her debt. In the New World we

have raised monuments to the memory of John Ericsson in

imperishable bronze. We have inscribed his name in our Pantheon

of the Republic’s immortal heroes. We have sent his earthly

remains home to fatherland with greatest honors the nation can

bestow. And on this day, when the veil falls from the statue which

shall here perpetuate the memory of his life and deeds, our hearts

beat in unison with yours in thanksgiving for the great man whom

two nations rejoice to call their own.

I may be permitted to add that the address was received by gratifying

manifestations of approbation, for which the signal was given by the Crown

Prince. His Royal Highness also publicly arose and, taking my hand,

warmly thanked me for the words I had spoken.

The Swedish royal band then played our American national anthem, “The

Star Spangled Banner.”

All the flags around the monument park, both Swedish and American, were

thenloweredtohalf-mast,andcontinuedtoflyathalf-mastforthe

remainder of the day, as a token of respect to the memory of America’s dead

President.

I have, etc.,
WWT , Jr.

[Document 442]
Mr. Thomas to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Stockholm,December 11, 1901.
No. 233.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that events of exceptional import and

interest took place yesterday at Stockholm and Christiania.

December 10, 1901, was the fifth anniversary of the death of Alfred

Bernard Nobel, the great Swedish engineer and inventor, and on yesterday

were awarded for the first time the prizes instituted by him in his testament

to those persons who have contributed most materially to benefit mankind

in the domains of physics, chemistry, medicine, literature, and in the works

of peace.

The prizes were awarded as follows: In physics, to Wilhelm Conrad

Rontgen, professor at the University at Munich, the discoverer of the

Rontgen rays; in chemistry, to Jacobus Henricus Van’t Hoff, professor at the

University of Berlin; in medicine, to Emil von Behring, professor at Halle,

the discoverer of the diphtheria serums; in literature, to Sulty-Prudhomme,

member of the French Academy; in the works of peace, this prize was

divided in two, and awarded in equal parts to Henri Dunant, of Switzerland,

the leading spirit in bringing about the Geneva convention and in instituting

the Societies of the Red Cross, and to Frederick Passy, national economist,

of France.

ThefirstfourprizesweregivenoutatStockholmwithimpressive

ceremonies. The place was the grand hall of the Royal Academy of Music,

which was tastefully decorated. This spacious hall was filled with a brilliant

gatheringofgentlemenandladies,theleadersinSwedishscience,

literature, art, and public life, and the occasion was especially honored by

the presence of the Crown Prince and other members of the royal family.

The exercises were enlivened by addresses appropriate to the event, and by

music and song. The prize diplomas were given out by the Crown Prince in

person and were received in person by Professors Rontgen, van’t Hoff, and

Behring.

As M. Sully-Prudhomme was unable to be present on account of sickness,

the diploma in literature was delivered to the minister for France at

Stockholm, to be forwarded by him to M. Sully-Prudhomme.

On the same day the prize in the works of peace, divided in two parts, as

above mentioned, was awarded to M. Dunant and M. Passy at Christiania

by the Norwegian Storting convened in solemn session.

Each of the five prizes is for the sum of over 150,000 crowns (150,782.23

crowns exactly), or more than $40,000—an amount sufficient of itself to

place each recipient in independent circumstances, and to permit him

untrammeled to pursue his investigations and life work, which have already

been of so great benefit.

Furthermore, five prizes of like, or perhaps greater, amount will be awarded

every year on December 10 hereafter forever.

I think it may be said that these prizes, in kind as well as in amount, are

unparalleled in the history of science, literature, and humanity, and that the

day these prizes were for the first time awarded marks an epoch in the

advance of the human race.

Alfred Nobel directed that substantially the whole of his vast fortune be

used for the benefit of mankind. Though the discoverer of dynamite, he

instituted one of his grand prizes for the works of peace. His beneficence is

as broad as humanity. He was more than patriot; he was the friend of the

human race. In his last will he directs that in awarding the prizes no

consideration whatever be paid to nationality, but that the worthiest be

awarded the prize, whether he is Scandinavian or not.

Peace to his ashes. His great and enduring work reflects honor upon himself

and upon the race from which he sprung.

I have, etc.,
W.W.THOMAS, Jr.

[Document 442a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 8, 1901.
NOTICE TO AMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY CITIZENS OF SWITZERLAND WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

Every Swiss citizen is liable, under Swiss law, to military service from the

beginning of the year in which he becomes 20 years of age until the end of

the year when he becomes 44. Every Swiss of military age who does not

perform military service is subject to an annual tax, whether he resides in

the Confederation or not, or to punishment for nonpayment of the tax if he

returns to Switzerland.

If a Swiss citizen renounces Swiss allegiance in the manner prescribed by

the Swiss law of July 3, 1876, and his renunciation is accepted, his

naturalization in another country is recognized, but without such acceptance

it is not recognized, and is held to descend from generation to generation.

Before he returns to Switzerland an American citizen of Swiss origin should

file with the cantonal authorities his written declaration of renunciation of

his rights to communal, cantonal, and in general Swiss citizenship, with

documents showing that he has obtained foreign citizenship for himself,

wife, and minor children, and receive the sealed document of release from

Swiss citizenship through the direction of justice of the canton of his origin.

If he neglects this and is within the ages when military service may be

required, he is liable to military tax, or to arrest and punishment in case of

nonpayment of the tax.

There is no treaty between the United States and Switzerland defining the

status of former Swiss citizens who have become naturalized as American

citizens.

Passports are not required for admission to Switzerland, but are usually

demanded from persons sojourning in that country. They do not require to

be viséed or indorsed to be valid.

[Document 442b]
[Untitled]
A PROCLAMATION.

Whereas a Convention between the United States of America and the Swiss

Confederation providing for the extradition of criminals was concluded and

signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at Washington on the 14th day

of May, one thousand nine hundred, the original of which Convention,

being in the English and French languages, is, as amended by the Senate of

the United States, word for word as follows: The Government of the United

States of America and the Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation, with

a view to the better administration of justice, have resolved to conclude a

new Convention for the extradition of fugitive criminals, and, for that

purpose, have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries, to wit: The President of

the United States of America: John Hay, Secretary of State of the United

States; the Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation: J. B. Pioda, Envoy

Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Switzerland to the United

States; Who, after communicating to each other their full powers, which

were found in good and due form, have agreed upon the following Articles:

ARTICLEI.

The Government of the United States of America and the Swiss Federal

Council bind themselves mutually to surrender such persons as, being

charged with or convicted of any of the crimes or offenses enumerated

hereinafter in Article II, committed in the territory of one of the contracting

States, shall be found in the territory of the other State: Provided that this

shall be done by the United States only upon such evidence of criminality

as, according to the laws of the place where the fugitive or person shall be

found, would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial if the crime

or offense had been there committed. In Switzerland the surrender shall be

made in accordance with the laws in force in that country at the time of the

demand.

Neither of the two Governments, however, shall be required to surrender its

own citizens.

ARTICLEII.

Extradition shall be granted for the following crimes and offenses, provided

they are punishable both under the laws of the place of refuge and under

those of the State making the requisition, to wit:

1.Murder,includingassassination,parricide,infanticideand

poisoning; voluntary manslaughter.

2. Arson.

3. Robbery; burglary; housebreaking or shop-breaking.

4. The counterfeiting or forgery of public or private instruments;

the fraudulent use of counterfeited or forged instruments.

5. The forgery, counterfeiting or alteration of coin, paper-money,

public bonds and coupons thereof, bank notes, obligations or

othercertificatesorinstrumentsofcredit,theemissionor

circulation of such instruments of credit, with fraudulent intent;

the counterfeiting or forgery of public seals, stamps or marks, or

the fraudulent use of such counterfeited or forged articles.

6. Embezzlement by public officials, or by other persons, to the

prejudice of their employers; larceny; obtaining money or other

property by false pretences; receiving money, valuable securities

or other property, knowing the same to have been embezzled,

stolen or fraudulently obtained. The amount of money or the

value of the property obtained or received by means of such

criminal acts, must exceed 1000 francs.

7. Fraud or breach of trust, committed by a fiduciary, attorney,

banker, administrator of the estate of a third party, or by the

president, a member or an officer of a corporation or association,

when the loss involved exceeds 1000 francs.

8. Perjury; subornation of perjury.

9. Abduction; rape; kidnapping of minors; bigamy; abortion.

10. Wilful and unlawful destruction or obstruction of railroads,

endangering human life.

11. Piracy; wilful acts causing the loss or destruction of a vessel.

participation in, any of the crimes and offenses enumerated in Article II,

provided such attempt or participation is punishable in the United States as

a felony, and in Switzerland with death, or confinement in a penitentiary or

workhouse.

ARTICLEIV.

No extradited person shall be tried by a Special Court.

ARTICLEV.

Demands for the extradition of fugitive criminals shall be made by the

diplomatic representative, or, in his absence, by one of the consular agents

of the State making the requisition.

When the person whose extradition is asked has beensentencedfor the

offense which occasioned the demand for extradition, such demand shall be

accompanied by a certified copy of the sentence pronounced; if the person

demandedismerelychargedwithanoffense,thedemandshallbe

accompanied by a duly certified copy of the warrant of arrest issued by the

competent magistrate of the country in which the offense was committed,

and by certified copies of the depositions or other evidence upon the basis

of which the warrant was issued. These documents shall contain an accurate

statement of the offense charged, of the place where and the time when it

was committed. They shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the

provisions of law applicable to the offenses charged, as shown by statute or

judicial decision, and by the evidence necessary to establish the identity of

the person demanded.

The extradition procedure shall be governed by the regulations in force at

the time of the demand, in the State upon which the demand is made.

ARTICLEVI.

When it is desired to procure the arrest of a fugitive, by telegraph or

otherwise, before the regular papers have been presented, the procedure in

the United States shall be to apply to a Judge or Magistrate authorized to

issue warrants of arrest in extradition cases, and to present a complaint on

oath, as provided by the laws of the United States.

To procure the provisional arrest of a fugitive in Switzerland, the diplomatic

representative or a consular agent of the United States shall apply to the

President of the Confederation who will order the necessary steps to be

taken.

The provisional detention of a fugitive shall cease, and the person arrested

shall be released, if a formal demand for extradition, accompanied by the

necessary papers, is not presented, in the manner provided in the present

Treaty, within two months after the day of arrest.

ARTICLEVII.

Extradition shall not be granted for political crimes or offenses. No person

extradition.

If the question arises in a particular case, whether the offense committed is

or is not of a political character, the Authorities of the State upon which the

demand is made shall decide.

A VIII.

Extradition shall not be granted when, under the laws of the State upon

which the requisition is made, or under those of the State making the

requisition,thecriminalprosecutionorpenaltyimposedisbarredby

limitation.

ARTICLEIX.

No person surrendered by either of the Contracting States to the other shall

be prosecuted or punished for any offense committed before the demand for

extradition, other than that for which the extradition is granted, unless he

expressly consents to it in open Court, which consent shall be entered upon

the record, or unless, having been at liberty during one month after his final

release to leave the territory of the State making the demand, he has failed

to make use of such liberty.

The State to which a person has been surrendered shall not surrender him to

a third State, unless the provisions contained in the first paragraph of the

present Article have been fulfilled.

ARTICLEX.

When the person whose extradition is demanded is prosecuted, or has been

convicted, in the State of refuge, for another offense, the extradition may be

postponed until the close of the criminal prosecution or the expiration of the

penalty.

ARTICLEXI.

If the extradition of the person demanded by either of the two contracting

States is likewise demanded by one or more other States, for offenses

committed by the said person in the territory, preference shall be given to

the State whose requisition is based upon the most serious offense, unless

the State upon which the requisition is made is bound by Treaty to give

preference to another.

If the offenses are of equal gravity, the demand first presented shall have

preference, unless the State upon which the requisition is made is bound by

Treaty to give preference to another State.

A XII.

All articles seized which are in the possession of the person demanded, at

the time of his arrest, shall, at the time of the extradition be delivered up

with his person, and such delivery shall extend, not only to articles acquired

by means of the offense with which the accused is charged, but to all other

articles that may serve to prove the offense.

The rights of third parties to the articles in question shall, however, be duly

respected.

ARTICLEXIII.

The expenses incurred in the arrest, detention, examination and surrender of

the fugitive shall be borne by the State making the demand. The State

making the demand shall not, however, be charged for the services of such

officials of the Government upon which the demand is made, as receive a

fixed salary; for the services of officials receiving only fees, no higher fees

shall be charged than those to which such officials are entitled under the

laws of the country for services rendered in ordinary criminal cases.

ARTICLEXIV.

The present Treaty shall go into effect thirty days after the exchange of

ratifications. This Treaty repeals Articles XIII, XIV, XV, XVI and XVII of

the Treaty of November 25, 1850, between the Swiss Confederation and the

UnitedStatesof America;andtheprovisionsinthose Articlesshall

henceforward apply only to demands for extradition pending at the time

when the present Treaty goes into effect.

The ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

AfterthedenunciationofthisTreatybyeitheroftheContracting

Governments, the Treaty shall still remain in force for six months after the

day of the denunciation.

Inwitnesswhereof,therespectivePlenipotentiarieshavesignedthe

foregoing Articles, and have affixed their seals.

Done in duplicate at Washington, in the English and French languages, the

14th day of May 1900.

JOHNHAY[SEAL.]

J.B.PIODA[SEAL.]

And whereas the said Convention as amended by the Senate of the United

States has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of the two

Governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the 27th day of

February, one thousand nine hundred and one; Now therefore, be it known

that I, William McKinley, President of the United States of America, have

caused the said Convention to be made public, to the end that the same and

every article and clause thereof, as amended, may be observed and fulfilled

with good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of

the United States of America to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington, this twenty-eighth day of February in the

year of Our Lord one thousand nine hundred and one, and of the

Independence of the United States the one hundred and twenty-fifth.

[SEAL.]WILLIAMMCKINLEY
By the President:

JH
Secretary of State.

[Document 443]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Pioda.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 19, 1901.
No. 291.]

aSIR: Referring to a notefrom your legation of August 31, 1897, I have the

honor to say that, according to a dispatch from Mr. Long, the agent and

consul-general of the United States at Cairo, No. 116, of March 22, 1901,

he has been formally requested by Dr. Edouard Cérésole and Mr. A. du

Souchet,citizensofSwitzerland,residingatAlexandriaandCairo,

respectively, to be placed under the protection of the representatives of the

United States at those cities. Mr. Long has replied to these gentlemen

statingthatinconformitywiththeauthorizationoftheDepartment’s

ainstructionsNo. 15, of September 7, 1897 (reference to which is made in

its note to Mr. Vogel of that date), the representatives of the United States at

those places would be glad to use their personal and nonofficial good

offices, with the consent of the Egyptian Government, in their behalf should

occasion arise.

In the absence of a formal request from the Swiss Government, such as was

presented on behalf of Mr. Reinhart, I can only say that, if agreeable to it, I

shall take pleasure in causing Mr. Long’s disposition of the two cases to be

approved.

Accept, etc.,
JH
Not printed.
Not printed.

[Document 444]
Mr. Pioda to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OFSWITZERLAND,
Washington,May 23, 1901.

Mr. SECRETARY OFSTATE: Referring to the note which your excellency was pleased

to address to me on the 19th ultimo, relative to the request presented by Dr.

A. Cérésole and Mr. A. du Souchet, Swiss citizens, to Mr. Long, agent and

consul-general of the United States at Cairo, to have their names enrolled at

theofficeofthesaidconsulate-general,withaviewtoenjoyingits

protection, if necessary, I hasten herewith to communicate to you the reply

which I have just received from my Government on this subject.

The circular of the Federal Council of July 8, 1871, a copy of which your

excellency will find herewith, states the point of view of my Government

on the subject of the protection of Swiss citizens in countries where

Switzerland has no diplomatic or consular representatives. It appears from

this circular that in 1871 my Government and the Government of the United

States of America agreed that the latter should instruct its representatives in

foreign countries to take under their protection any Swiss citizen who

desired it, without the necessity of a previous understanding between the

two Governments in each particular case.

Mr.Fishaddressedacircular,underdateofJune16,1871,tothe

representatives of the United States in foreign countries (see Foreign

Relations of the United States for 1871, p. 28 ) authorizing them to extend

their protection to Swiss citizens with the consent of the authorities of the

country in which they resided.

The contents of the aforesaid note of your excellency have given rise to a

doubt in the mind of my Government whether the instructions given by Mr.

Fish have since then been modified. I should therefore be grateful to your

excellency if you would inform me on this point.

My Government apprises me, moreover, that it will not hesitate to support

the request of the aforesaid gentlemen on condition that they themselves lay

their request before the Federal Council. Messrs. Cérésole and du Souchet

must also be informed that the representatives of the United States are not

authorized by their Government, according to the view set forth by the

Department of State, to assert the claims of foreigners officially, and that

they must confine themselves to lending, when necessary, their personal

and unofficial good offices.

In having the honor to bring the foregoing to your excellency’s notice, and

awaiting such further communications as you may be pleased to make to

me on this subject, I avail, etc.,J.B.PIODA,
Minister of Switzerland.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
Circular.
BERNE,July 8, 1871.

[The Swiss Federal Council to the diplomatic and consular officers of the

Confederation.]

SIR: Petitions have several times been presented to us by Swiss citizens or

commercial firms established in countries where Switzerland has neither

diplomatic officers nor consuls, asking for our intervention with this or that

foreign power with a view to securing its consular protection for them.

In one case of this kind, the legation of Germany at Berne remarked that it

would be much easier and more expeditious to avoid, by a general measure,

the correspondence that has hitherto been necessary in each particular case,

and suggested that this matter should be settled once for all. It declared,

furthermore, that the Imperial Government was prepared to issue general

instructions to its diplomatic and consular officers to grant, in places where

there were no official representatives of the Confederation, their protection

to such Swiss citizens as should make application therefor.

We accepted this offer of the German Government, declaring, however, that

we did not desire thereby to compel Swiss citizens in foreign countries to

placethemselvesundertheconsularprotectionofGermany,oreven

specially to recommend them to apply for such protection.

Similarnegotiationshavingbeenheldbetweenthepresidentofthe

Confederation and the United States legation at Berne, the American

Government.

In informing you of these arrangements, we would remark that it is

understood that none but those localities are concerned in which there are

no official representatives of the Confederation, and that a Swiss citizen can

in nowise be permitted to renounce the protection of the consul of his

country in order to have recourse to that of a foreign consul, nor can the

latter be permitted to grant him his protection before it has been asked for.

In conclusion, we repeat: Although a general measure of this kind has been

acceptedbyus,ithasonlybeenwithaviewtoavoidingalong

correspondence in each particular case, and in order to guarantee efficient

protection to Swiss citizens when it is impossible for the Confederation to

furnish such protection to them directly, through its own agents.

We avail, etc.,

In the name of the Swiss Federal Council:

The President of the Confederation:
S
The Chancellor of the Confederation:
S

[Document 445]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Pioda.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 15, 1901.
No. 298.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of the 23d ultimo,

relative to the cases of Dr. Edouard Cérésole and Mr. A. du Souchet,

citizensoftheSwissRepublic,residingatAlexandriaandCairo,

respectively, and to the willingness of the Government of the United States

to authorize its agents to exert their personal and unofficial good offices in

their behalf in case of necessity, should this be agreeable to the Swiss

Government.

You cite the circular of June 16, 1871 (Foreign Relations, 1871, pp. 28 , 29

), as an agreement between the two Governments, by which the United

States undertook the protection of Swiss citizens, with the consent of the

authorities of the country in which they resided, without the necessity of a

previous understanding between the United States and Switzerland in each

particular case. You accordingly inquire whether the instructions of Mr.

Fish, at the time Secretary of State, have been modified, since the inquiry in

Mr. Hay’s note of April 19, 1901, No. 291, would appear to indicate in the

mind of the Swiss Government a doubt upon the subject.

By reference to the Department’s note to your legation of July 1, 1887 (Mr.

Bayard to Mr. Kloss, Foreign Relations, 1887, pp. 1076 , 1077 ), you will

find it specifically stated in what manner representatives of the United

States may be permitted to employ their good offices for the protection of

an alien in those countries where his Government maintains neither a

diplomatic nor consular officer. The views of this Government have not

undergone a change from those expressed in the note to Mr. Kloss. In Mr.

Frey’s note of October 24, 1887 (Foreign Relations, 1887, pp. 1077 , 1078

), he said that—

Although the Federal Council is unable fully to share the view

stated in your note (Mr. Bayard’s) with regard to the nature and

scope of the relation between the protecting State and persons

committed to its protection, it has nevertheless been glad to be

informed,inadefinitemanner,byyournotewhatyour

interpretation of the relation in question is.

The Federal Council, you will recall, considered the matter as settled, and

returned its thanks for the willingness of this Government to authorize the

consular representatives of the United States to use their good offices in

behalf of Swiss citizens, “of which kindness the Federal Council proposes

to avail itself, if there shall be any necessity therefor.”

Mr. Hay’s note was intended to inform your Government that Dr. Cérésole

and Mr. du Souchet had appealed for the protection of this Government, and

that Mr. Long was willing to grant the use of his unofficial good offices in

their behalf, if permitted by the Egyptian authorities.

In this connection I note your statement that the Swiss Government will not

hesitate to support the request of these gentlemen “on condition that they

themselves lay their request before the Federal Council.”

If it shall, therefore, be the desire of the Swiss Confederation, permit me to

assure you that it will be the pleasure of the Government of the United

States to authorize its agents at Cairo and Alexandria to extend by the use of

their good offices, with the consent of the Egyptian Government, all

possible protection to Mr. du Souchet and Dr. Cérésole, the case arising, as

explained in its note of July 1, 1887.

Awaiting your further reply, and adding that the agent and consul-general of

the United States at Cairo will be given copies of this correspondence for

his information, I avail, etc.,DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 446]
Mr. Lardy to Mr. Hill.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OFSWITZERLAND,
Washington,July 25, 1901.
MR.ASSISTANTSECRETARY OFSTATE: In reply to the note you addressed to Mr. Pioda,

under date of June 15 last, in regard to the protection to be granted by the

representatives of the United States to two Swiss citizens, Messrs. Cérésole

and Du Souchet, I am instructed by my Government to thank you for the

kind dispositions you have been pleased once more to evince toward Swiss

citizens who might apply for protection to diplomatic or consular agents of

the United States of America in countries where Switzerland is not

represented.

The Federal Council leaves each one of its citizens who may settle in a

country where the Confederation has no diplomatic or consular agent

entirely free to place himself under the protection of such power as he sees

fit, and has therefore no objection to the representatives of the United States

at Cairo and at Alexandria being instructed to comply with the request of

Dr. E. Cérésole and A. du Souchet and to enter their names in their list of

protégés.

Yet, as the protection afforded by the United States of America to Swiss

citizens is confined, when granted, to extending to them their unofficial

goodoffices,whileGermanyandotherpowersmakeabsolutelyno

distinction, in this connection, between the Swiss protégés and their own

people, it would be desirable that in each individual case Swiss citizens who

apply for the protection of the United States of America be expressly

warned of the fact that the protection of representatives of the United States

is limited, and particularly that the latter are under no circumstances

permitted to intervene officially in their behalf with the authorities of the

country to which they are accredited.

Be pleased, etc.,
CHARLESL.E.LARDY.

[Document 447]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Lardy.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 5, 1901.

No. 303.]

SIR: In reply to your note of the 25th ultimo, I have the honor to inform you

that a translation of it has been sent to the consul-general of the United

States at Cairo, with instructions to follow the suggestions in your note to

inform such Swiss citizens as may put themselves under his protection that

he will be able only to extend unofficially his good offices in their behalf in

case of need. He has also been directed to instruct the consular agent at

Alexandria in that sense.

Accept, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 448]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Hardy.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,April 23, 1901.
No. 7.]

SIR: The Department is in receipt of a letter, a copy of which is inclosed,

from the Rev. Carl F. Kupfer, president of William Nast College of Central

China, from which it appears that in August last he applied to your

predecessor for a passport, sending as evidence of his citizenship a passport

issued to him by the Department in 1881, and that he was told that that

passport was not sufficient evidence of his citizenship to warrant the issue

of a new passport upon it.

You are now informed that when Mr. Kupfer’s passport No. 3261 was

issuedtohimonSeptember23,1881,hepresentedhisfather’s

naturalization certificate, issued at the March term, 1863, by the Marshall

County court of Virginia.

Upon this statement of facts you are instructed that a passport issued by this

Departmentshouldalwaysbeacceptedprimafacieasproofofthe

citizenship of the person to whom it was issued.

I am, etc.,
JH
[Inclosure.]
Kinkiang, China,March 20, 1901.

HONOREDSIR: On September 16, 1881, I sailed from New York for China via

Suez Canal. Before leaving New York I left an application for a passport,

and wrote to my mother, Sherrard, Marshall County, W. Va., to send to the

State Department my father’s naturalization papers. She did so, and Hon. J.

G. Blaine, then Secretary of State, issued a passport which was sent to me

in Bremen, Germany.

Since then I have been a missionary of the Methodist Episcopal Church.

The years 1889 and 1890 I spent in the United States, also a part of last

year, 1900. Last August I brought my family to Zürich, Switzerland, and

applied to the United States minister, through the consul at Zürich, for a

passport for Switzerland. With my application I sent to the minister my old

passport issued by Mr. Blaine, a Chinese passport issued by the United

States minister to China, also a consular certificate of the births of our

children, and my own birth certificate. But the minister refused to give me a

passport for Switzerland, insisting that I must furnish the naturalization

papers of my father. The old papers having long since been lost, I wrote to

Moundsville, the county seat of Marshall County, W. Va., asking the clerk

to send me a copy of my father’s naturalization papers. Before an answer

came I was called by cable to return to China, and when the answer came

from the clerk it proved to be only a statement that Carl G. Kupfer (my

father) had upon a certain date called at the office and applied for his

naturalization papers. Upon this the minister again refused to give my

family a passport; and the authorities in Zürich are giving my family no

little trouble. It is only through the consul’s kind aid that they have been

able to remain in Zürich. My wife has written again to Moundsville, but can

get no reply. While I was in Switzerland I went twice from Zürich to Berne

to see the minister, but neither time did I find him at home. His secretary, a

Swiss, who was in charge, had the audacity to tell me that I was no longer

an American citizen, having been out of the country for more than twelve

years.

In this distress for the peace of my family, may I trouble you to kindly send,

at an early convenience, a record of my first passport to the minister at

Berne, that my family may no longer be harassed by the authorities of

Zürich. I shall be greatly obliged.

Believe me, etc.,
CARLF.KUPFER,
President of William Nast College of Central China.

[Document 449]
Mr. Pioda to Mr. Hay.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OFSWITZERLAND,
Washington, D. C.,May 24, 1901.

MR.SECRETARY OFSTATE: One Emile Stolz, who has been residing since the year

1887 in the village of Epagny, Fribourg Canton, Switzerland, and now

works there as a fireman in the condensed-milk factory, addressed to my

Government, under date of March 15, a representation against the Fribourg

government, which threatens to expel him, notwithstanding his claim that

he is an American citizen, holder of a regular American passport, which,

however, was canceled by the minister of the United States at Berne,

instead of being renewed by him. The Federal Council has called upon the

government of Fribourg for information in the case. The said government

reports that Stolz arrived at Epagny in 1887 and deposited a regular

passport issued by the United States legation at Berne, and good for two

years. On the 3d of March, 1889, he married at Gruyere Helene Grenion, of

that place. License for the marriage was granted by the chief of police of the

Fribourg Canton under the circular of the Federal Council of July 19, 1887,

upon production of the American passport, about whose validity there was

no room for doubt. Eight children, one of whom, the girl, Albertine Felicie,

died on November 20, 1892, were born of this marriage. Stolz again

secured a renewal of his passport by the legation in 1889, and for the last

time on November 9, 1891, but in 1893, when he personally called at the

legation for a third renewal, the last passport was there purely and simply

canceled, and Stolz was told that under the laws of the country he must

again take up his domicile in America if he meant to remain a citizen of the

UnitedStates.Now,itwasimpossibleforhimtocomplywiththat

requirement.

In 1897 the Fribourg authorities renewed steps, either at the consulate of the

United States at Geneva or the legation at Berne, but in vain, as shown by

the letters annexed to the record, which I have the honor to inclose

herewith.

Stolz was then called upon to regularize his status and took steps toward

acquiring Swiss citizenship. On the 27th of June, 1898, he received from

the high Federal Council the requisite authority for that purpose, but failed

to find within the statutory term any commune that would accept him as a

burgher, not, as he alleges in his petition, on religious grounds, but solely

because of his scanty means and the burden of his large family. About the

beginning of the year 1900 Mr. Stolz was granted by the chief of police of

Fribourg a last term of one year in which to set himself right, either by

producing valid papers or by furnishing adequate bail as a guaranty of the

consequences of his illegal residence in the Fribourg Canton. The term has

expired, and Stolz’s status remains unchanged. He is unable to meet the

required conditions.

Under the circumstances, the chief of police of Fribourg, through the

Gruyere prefecture, notified Stolz for the last time, on March 8 ultimo, that

he must straighten his situation as soon as possible or be expelled from the

Canton.

Now the chief of police of Fribourg puts the question, Can the legation of

the United States of America thus cancel a passport regularly issued to one

of its citizens? If such proceedings were permissible, the chief of police of

Fribourg would feel himself constrained in the future to deny any American

citizen who might come to settle in the Canton the right to sojourn therein.

By way of information the chief of police of Fribourg adds that Emile Stolz

must have originally been of German extraction. He declares he was born in

Alsace; never having performed military service in Germany, he never had

identification papers from that country. He has lived at Basel, and, for

several years, in America. A brother of his, married and father of a family,

lives at La Tour de Trême, where he owns a bakery. The latter holds a

regular certificate of origin, issued by the prefecture of Lorrach, in Baden,

on September 23, 1899, and good for five years.

I am instructed by my Government and now have the honor to transmit

herewith the canceled passport of Stolz and to inquire of your excellency

whether the legation of the United States at Berne may not be authorized to

issue a new passport to the applicant?

Be pleased, etc.,
J.B.PIODA.

[Document 450]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Pioda.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 14, 1901.
No. 297.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 24th

ultimo in regard to one Emile Stolz.

Without going into a recital of the facts in his case as set forth in your note,

I desire to state that the refusal of the legation of the United States at Berne

to issue a new passport to Stolz was entirely justified by the facts and by the

general instructions of this Department.

Stolz, who obtained naturalization in the United States, has been absent

from this country for fourteen years. He settled in Switzerland, married, and

reared a family there. It appears also that he has taken every step in his

power to acquire Swiss nationality, but is unable to find any commune

which will accept him as a burgher because of his scanty means and large

family.

The position of this Government in cases like this where an American

citizen goes to a foreign country and settles there animo manendi, is that he

thereby forfeits the right to the protection of this Government and is to be

considered as having expatriated himself.

The Department is unable to comply with the request of your Government

that the legation of the United States at Berne be authorized to issue a new

passport to Stolz.

Accept, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 451]
Mr. Lardy to Mr. Adee.
[Translation.]

LEGATION OFSWITZERLAND,
Washington, D. C.,July 30, 1901.

MR.ASSISTANTSECRETARYOFSTATE: My Government instructs me to call upon your

extreme good offices with a view to determining the nationality of one

Louis Rover.

The latter was registered as born in Lyons on the 18th of October, 1888, of

Léon Jean Rover, born in New York, and of his “spouse,” Germaine

Rivière, a French woman, born at Lyons.

But Léon Jean Rover and Germaine (or rather Genevieve) Rivière were, as

a matter of fact, not husband and wife at that time; their marriage was not

solemnized until the 21st of May, 1891, in the presence of the registrar of

London city. The couple have since then separated by mutual agreement

without a decree of divorce, the father having by a regular deed left the

child in the custody of the mother.

Under the circumstances I take the liberty of asking whether the State law

of New York admits that Louis Rover, born out of wedlock of an American

and a French woman, was legitimatized by the subsequent marriage of his

parents and has thus acquired United States citizenship.

As there does not appear to be any evidence that Léon Jean Rover is an

American citizen, I should also be very grateful if you could cause an

inquiry to be made upon that point, should there be some chance of success.

Be pleased, etc.,
C LEL

[Document 452]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Lardy.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 23, 1901.

No. 306.]

SIR: Replying to your note of the 30tb ultimo, I have now the honor to

inform you that the attorney-general of the State of New York, under date of

the 16th instant, declares it to be his opinion that by section 18 of the

domestic regulations law of the State of New York, chapter 272 of the laws

of 1896, as amended by chapter 725 of the laws of 1899, “an illegitimate

child,whoseparentshaveheretoforeintermarriedorshallhereafter

intermarry, shall thereby become legitimatized and shall become legitimate

for all purposes, entitled to all the rights and privileges of a legitimate child;

but an estate or an interest vested or trust created before the marriage of a

parent of such child shall not be divested or affected by reason of such child

being legitimatized.”

Section 1933 of the Revised Statutes of the United States provides that “all

children heretofore or hereafter born out of the limits and jurisdiction of the

United States whose fathers were or may be at the time of their birth

citizens thereof are declared to be citizens of the United States; but the

rights of citizenship shall not descend to children whose fathers have never

resided in the United States,” and section 1992 declares all persons born in

the United States and not subject to any foreign power, excluding Indians

not taxed, to be citizens of the United States.

Assuming that the father of Louis Rover, Leon Jean Rover, who was born in

New York, had never renounced his American citizenship acquired by his

birth, it is the opinion of the Department that Louis Rover, born in France in

1888 of a French mother, became a citizen of the United States by the

subsequent marriage of his parents in 1891, in pursuance of section 18 of

the domestic relations law of New York, cited at the beginning of this note.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 453]
Mr. Lardy to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

MANCHESTER,MASS.,September 15, 1901.

The President of the Swiss Confederation, after wiring to Mrs. McKinley

and calling personally on Mr. Hardy, has sent me the following message:

The Federal Council, deeply moved by the demise of President

McKinley, who succumbed to the effects of a heinous attempt,

directs that you expressly convey its sympathy to the Government

of the Union and to the family of the deceased. The entire Swiss

people share these sentiments.
LARDY,
Chargé d’Affaires of Switzerland.

[Document 454]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Lardy.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

I have directed Minister Hardy to make appropriate acknowledgment of the

eloquentmessageofthePresidentoftheConfederationwhichyou

communicated by your telegram of yesterday.
JOHNHAY.

[Document 455]
Mr. Lay to Mr. Hardy.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

In the name of the President and people of the United States, you will make

to the President of the Confederation a very warm acknowledgment of the

message of brotherly sympathy and sorrow which his excellency sends on

behalf of the Federal Council through Mr. Lardy.
HAY.

[Document 456]
Mr. Griscom to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,December 11, 1900.

(Mr. Griscom requests that arrangements be made for theKentuckyto

remain a little longer in order that any impression of hostility may be

removed, and states that, with the Department’s approval, he will go to

Smyrna on December 13, if the affairs of the legation will permit.)
[Document 457]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Griscom.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,December 11, 1900.

(Mr. Hay states that theKentuckyhas been ordered by the Navy Department

to remain.)
[Document 458]
Mr. Griscom to Mr. Hay.
L U S,
Constantinople,December 12, 1900.
No. 295.]

S: I have the honor to confirm my telegram of yesterday wherein I request

that the battle shipKentuckybe allowed to remain a little longer in Turkish

waters in order to remove any impression that its visit here is of a hostile

I have to acknowledge the receipt this day of your reply.

I have now to report that on the 10th instant I attended a dinner at Yildiz

Palace, accompanied by Captain Chester and his staff. I presented these

gentlemen to His Majesty in audience before dinner, and after dinner

Captain Chester and I were received in a long private audience.

The Sultan welcomed Captain Chester cordially, and expressed to him the

pleasurehehadinentertaininghiminConstantinople.Duringthe

conversationtherewasnomentionofthediplomaticaffairspending

between the two countries beyond the fact that the Sultan stated he had

purchased a cruiser from Messrs. Cramp, of Philadelphia. It was apparent

that he regarded our questions as absolutely settled, and his evident desire

was to convey this impression without using any direct expressions. He

evinced a most friendly disposition toward the United States and requested

that the President be fully informed as to the reception of Captain Chester

andtheentertainmentatthepalace.Thedinnerwasaverydirect

compliment to the United States, as no other foreigners were invited, and

necessarily I was placed at His Majesty’s left hand, and at his right was the

grand vizier and then Captain Chester. Nearly all the cabinet officials and

marshals of the Empire were present. During the dinner His Majesty

conversed affably with me and showed a friendly interest in the American

Navy and American institutions. He informed me that if the cruiser which

he had just bought from Messrs. Cramp was a success he intended to buy in

America three or four more of a larger type. He also stated that he had great

confidence in the rifles manufactured in America, and that he proposed in

the near future to make a large purchase for his army.

Captain Chester leaves to-day for Smyrna, and his orders from the Navy

Department were to leave for Manila as soon as he returned to his ship. He

was desirous of remaining long enough to exchange courtesies with the

local Turkish authorities, and it seemed to me desirable that the ship’s

departure should not be too abrupt, so I therefore telegraphed you as above

reported, expressing the hope that theKentuckybe allowed to remain a little

longer in Turkish waters.

I have, etc.,

LLOYDC.GRISCOM.

[Document 459]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Griscom.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 4, 1901.

No. 329.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 295, of the 12th

ultimo, reporting the courtesies shown by the Sultan to Captain Chester and

his staff, of the U. S. S.Kentucky, during the recent visit of that vessel to

Constantinople.

YouwillexpresstoHisMajesty,throughtheproperchannel,this

Government’s appreciation of the courtesies shown to Captain Chester and

his officers.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 459a]
[Untitled]
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 22, 1901.
NOTICE TOAMERICAN CITIZENS FORMERLY SUBJECTS OF TURKEY WHO CONTEMPLATE RETURNING TO THAT COUNTRY.
The information given below is believed to be correct, yet it is not to be

considered as official, as it relates to the laws and regulations of a foreign

country.

The Turkish Government denies the right of a Turk to become a citizen of

any other country without the authority of the Turkish Government. His

naturalization is therefore regarded by Turkey as void with reference to

himself and his children, and he is forbidden to return to Turkey.

The consent of the Turkish Government to the naturalization in another

country of a former Turk is given only upon condition that the applicant

shall stipulate either never to return, or, returning, to regard himself as a

Turkish subject. Therefore, if a naturalized American citizen of Turkish

originreturnstoTurkeyhemayexpectarrestandimprisonmentor

expulsion.

Jews are prohibited from colonizing in Turkish dominions.

There is no treaty between the United States and Turkey defining the status

of naturalized Americans of Turkish birth returning to Turkey.

Passports are required from all persons entering Turkish dominions (Egypt

excepted), and persons who enter without passports are liable to fine or

imprisonment. The passports should, if possible, be viséed by a Turkish

consular officer in the United States.

[Document 460]
Mr. Griscom to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,January 31, 1901.
No. 316.]

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith inclosed a copy of a dispatch from

Consul Merrill at Jerusalem, wherein he reports that he has been notified of

a new order issued by the Ottoman minister of the interior in relation to

foreign Jews who visit Palestine. The order applies to all Jews who come to

Palestine from other countries as pilgrims or visitors, and it provides as

follows: On arriving at Jaffa the visitor must deliver his passport to the

Turkish authorities and receive in return a Turkish document. The visitor is

allowed to reside in the country three months, at the expiration of which

time he must surrender his Turkish permit, receive his passport, and leave.

In case they do not leave when requested at the expiration of the time

allowed, the consuls of different nationalities are to be called upon to

compel their subjects to depart.

Mr. Merrill points out that the only hold the consulate has on naturalized

AmericanJewsinPalestineisthepossessionoftheirpassportand

citizenship papers. Also, they do not always depart at Jaffa, the usual point

of arrival. If they do not leave at the expiration of three months, the consul

must have authority to send them away in case they refuse to go. The

refusal is generally given on the grounds of having no money.

AsIamtransmittingthisdispatchatoncefortheinformationand

instructions of the Department, I have not yet ascertained what action, if

any, the other foreign missions propose to take in the matter.

I have, etc.,
LCG

[Inclosure.]
Consul Merrill to Mr. Griscom.
UNITEDSTATESCONSULATE,
Jerusalem,January 14, 1901.

SIR: We have received from the governor of Jerusalem a copy of an order

from the Turkish minister of the interior at Constantinople relative to Jews

who visit Palestine. Said order, we are notified, goes into effect on the 15th

of January Greek style, or January 29 of our reckoning.

The order applies to all Jews who come to Palestine from other countries as

pilgrims or visitors.

The conditions are as follows:

On arriving at Jaffa the visitor must deliver his passport to the Turkish

authorities and receive therefor a Turkish document. The visitor is allowed

to reside in the country three months. At the expiration of that time he must

leave the country, surrender his Turkish permit, and receive therefor his

passport.

In case that foreign subjects do not leave when requested at the expiration

of their permits, the consuls of the different nationalities are to be called

upon to compel their subjects to go away.

When an American naturalized Jew arrives in Palestine the only hold we

have upon him is his passport and citizen papers, if he has any. If his

passport is deposited with the Turkish authorities at Jaffa, where he lands,

what shall we do?

Again, visitors frequently make their way north up through the country and

embark at Beirut. But if their passports have been deposited with the

Turkish authorities at Jaffa, and held by them, what can be done?

If such visitors are obliged to leave at the expiration of the three months, the

consul must be authorized to send them away in case they refuse to go.

They will almost certainly plead that they can not go because they “have no

money.”

This order concerns this consulate more than any other United States

consulate in Turkey, for it is well known that to one naturalized Jew landing

at any other port, 25 or 30 land at Jaffa, the port of Jerusalem.

It will be seen at once that in this matter definite instructions are needed.

Otherwise the same old chronic trouble will reappear; the consul says one

thing and the local Turkish authorities say another thing; there will be

constant irritation and annoyance.

I should have communicated these facts earlier to the legation, but it is only

within a few days that we received the order in question.

I remain, etc.,
SELAHMERRILL,
United States Consul.

[Document 461]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Griscom.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 28, 1901.
No. 354.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 316, of the 31st

ultimo, reporting that you are advised by the United States consul at

Jerusalem that the Ottoman minister of the interior has issued a new order

respecting the sojourn in Palestine of foreign Jews who go there as pilgrims

or visitors.

You state the provisions of the order and request instructions in the

premises.

Settingasidetheobjectionablefeaturewherebyaracialorreligious

distinction is made in regard to Jews, and of which feature this Government

finds difficulty in taking official cognizance, in view of our constitutional

inhibition against any disability founded on creed, the Turkish order now

reported appears to establish the rule of three months’ permitted sojourn of

American visitors to Palestine, for which we have always contended. See

instructions to Mr. Straus, No. 13, dated October 14, 1898, and subsequent

correspondence, on the subject of the Ottoman regulations respecting the

entrance of foreign Jews into Palestine.

It should, however, be made clear to the Turkish authorities that the consuls

constrain the departure of an American citizen from Turkish jurisdiction.

Neither can the consul be called upon to forego the performance of his duty

in case an American citizen should be harshly dealt with in contravention of

treaty or law.

As the consul is without authority to compel a visiting American citizen to

deposit his passport and citizen papers in the consulate, it would seem that

he is not in a position to contest the Turkish requirement that such papers be

surrendered to the Ottoman officers during the time of sojourn in Palestine.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 462]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Griscom.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 27, 1901.

(Mr. Hay states that the President expects the fulfillment of the promises so

often repeated by the Sultan, and directs Mr. Griscom to insist upon

immediate payment of the indemnity by the Government of Turkey.)
[Document 463]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,June 12, 1901.

(Mr. Leishman takes pleasure in reporting the settlement of the indemnity

claims, and states that the sum of 19,000 pounds sterling has been deposited

to his credit in the Imperial Ottoman Bank, which sum is held subject to

instructions from the Department.)
Mr. Hay to Mr. Leishman.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

D S,
Washington,June 18, 1901.

(Mr.Hayacknowledgestheprecedingtelegram,andextendscordial

congratulations to Mr. Leishman on the settlement of the indemnity claims,

[Document 465]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,May 17, 1901.

No. 25.]

SIR: I beg to inclose herewith duplicate of application of one Demetrius

Chryssanthides for passport which I felt compelled to refuse, and submit the

facts for your information. The applicant, as will be observed, is a native of

Greece, having obtained his certificate of naturalization from the superior

court of San Francisco on the 2d day of April, 1896. His answers not being

very clear, I questioned him further and discovered from his own statements

that he had not fully complied with his conditions specified on oath, having

been absent from the United States during the five years immediately prior

to obtaining his naturalization papers, as he acknowledged that he left the

United States in October, 1892, remaining in Europe until the month of

February, 1893.

Under the circumstances I felt compelled to decline to issue a passport to

him and made memorandum on his certificate of naturalization, but as it

would be a very easy matter for him to obtain a duplicate, if you deem it

wise, it might be advisable to have a letter written to the clerk of the

superior court at San Francisco, calling the above facts to the attention of

the court.

Trusting above will meet with your approval, I have, ete.,JGAL
[Inclosure.]
M14, 1901.

I, Demetrius Chryssanthides, a naturalized and loyal citizen of the United

for a passport for myself * * *

I solemnly swear that I was born at Constantinople on or about the 1st day

of November, 1856; that I emigrated to the United States, sailing on board

the American Line, from Liverpool, on or about the — day of September,

1887; that I resided five years, uninterruptedly, in the United States, from

1887 to 1892, at San Francisco; that I was naturalized as a citizen of the

United States before the superior court of city and county of San Francisco,

on the 2d day of April, 1896, as shown by the accompanying certificate of

naturalization; that I am the bearer of passport No. 1, issued by W. W.

Rockhill, Athens, on the 30th day of September, 1897, which is returned

herewith; that I am the identical person referred to in said certificate and

passport; that I am domiciled in the United States, my permanent residence

therein being at Boston, in the State of Massachusetts, where I follow the

occupation of barber; that I last left the United States on the—day of

August, 1899, on board the White Star Line, arriving in Liverpool the 20th

day of August, 1899; that I have resided in Alexandria since the 20th day of

September, 1899; that I am now temporarily residing at Constantinople, and

that I intend to return to the United States within one year with a purpose of

residing and performing the duties of citizenship therein.

I desire the passport for the purpose of travel and protection.

* * * * * * *

[Document 466]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Leishman.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 14, 1901.
No. 26.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the recipt of your dispatch No. 25, of the 17th

ultimo, reporting that you have refused to issue a passport to Demetrius

Chryssanthides, because he had not resided continuously in the United

States during the five years preceding the date on which his certificate of

naturalization was granted by the superior court of the city and county of

San Francisco.

InthetreatybetweentheUnitedStatesandBavariaconcerning

naturalization, signed May 26, 1868, Article I provides that Bavarians who

shall become naturalized in the United States, and “shall have resided

uninterruptedly “in the United States for five years shall be treated as

American citizens. An explanatory protocol to the treaty says, in paragraph

2 of Article I: “The words ‘resided uninterruptedly’ are obviously to be

understood, not of a continual bodily presence, but in the legal sense; and,

therefore, a transient absence, a journey, or the like, by no means interrupts

the period of five years contemplated by the first article.” The same

explanationappearsintheprotocoltothenaturalizationtreatywith

Wurttemberg of July 27, 1868. The Department has never doubted that that

explanation would be accepted by the other powers with which the United

States has naturalization treaties. (See The American Passport, page 175.)

This is the accepted construction of the words “resided uninterruptedly,” but

the law is (sec. 2170, R. S.): “No alien shall be admitted to to become a

citizen who has not for the continued term of five years next preceding his

admission resided within the United States.” This is broader than the

language of the treaties, and is to be understood in the ordinary legal sense,

according to which “a transient absence for business, pleasure, or other

occasion, with the intention of returning” (13 Opinions of the Attorneys-

General, 376) does not interrupt the residence.

“The just rule, it is apprehended, is that suggested by Senator Berrien [in

the debate on the law]: ‘If the applicant is absent any part of the time

[during the five years before naturalization] it remains for the court to

decide whether that absence is sufficient to prevent the issuing of the

certificate.’” (American Law Review, February, 1895; article by Frederick

Van Dyne, Assistant Solicitor, Department of State.) In the case under

consideration, Chryssanthides was absent about five months, three years

before his naturalization. Whether or not this was a period long enough to

have destroyed his residence was a question for the court before which he

applied for naturalization to determine. The presumption is that the court

decided properly.

Upon the showing presented by you the Department is of the opinion that

this absence did not by itself furnish sufficient reason for refusing to issue a

passport to Chryssanthides. Unless there is more evidence adverse to his

good faith than you submit, he should be granted a passport and the adverse

memorandummadeonhisnaturalizationcertificateshould,asfaras

possible, be removed.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 467]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 5, 1901.

No. 51.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch No. 26 of June

14, 1901, in regard to Demetrius Chryssanthides, and note with much

interest the Department’s ruling on the proper interpretations of the words

“resided uninterruptedly,” as applied in oath of persons when obtaining

certificate of naturalization, and shall be governed accordingly in future

cases.InmeantimeIhavesentforabovementionedDemetrius

Chryssanthides and issued a passport to him, at same time correcting

memorandum made on his certificate of naturalization.

I have, etc.,
JOHNG.A.LEISHMAN.

[Document 468]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 5, 1901.

No. 52.]

SIR: I beg to inclose herewith petition from Rev. J. L. Fowle and other

American missionaries located at Cesarea, requesting the Department of

State to authorize the British consul at Angora to look after American

interests, as we have no consular representative at that point.

Pending your decision, I have not deemed it prudent to bring the matter to

the attention of the British ambassador, but have no doubt that the British

Government would gladly consent to have their consul take charge of

American interests at Angora, or, in fact, at all other points in the Ottoman

Empirewheretheyhaveaconsularrepresentativeandtheamerican

Government has not, as Sir Nicholas O’Conor, the British Ambassador

here, has frequently spoken to me of the advisability of having English and

American consuls look after the joint interest of English and American

citizens throughout the Turkish Empire, as the country generally is in a

rather unsettled and disturbed condition, and if one can credit one-half of

the numerous reports and rumors, the word dangerous may be added; and

Sir Nicholas O’Conor has even gone so far as to suggest that if such an

arrangement could be made, he would seriously consider changing some of

his consuls from points where we both have representatives to points where

neither Government is represented at present, particularly mentioning the

desirability of transferring the English consul now at Sivas, where we have

Mr. Jewett, and placing him at Bitlis, a disturbed district, where neither the

English nor American Government is represented.

If such an arrangement is practical it would receive my hearty indorsement,

as no one can tell what a day may bring forth here, and as long as present

conditions exist every proper precaution should be taken to properly insure

the lives and properties of American citizens, as the uncertainty which

exists warrants measures that might at present appear unnecessary or even

absurd. The rumors of disturbances, uprisings, etc., are of too vague a

character to describe, and while there is nothing in the immediate situation

to justify any grave uneasiness there is sufficient to warrant the exercise of

more than ordinary care and precaution.

I have, etc.,
JOHNG.A.LEISHMAN.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Fowle to Mr. Leishman.
CESAREA,June 19, 1901.

DEARSIR: You may, perhaps, recall our conversation of May 23, regarding a

request to the Department of State that the British consul at Angora, H. S.

Shipley, esq., be authorized officially to take charge of any business

pertaining to the Americans here at Oesarea that would naturally come

under the jurisdiction of an American consul if we had one in this (Angora)

vilayet.

We hope and trust that no such occasion will arise, but agree with the

opinionexpressedthatdaythatitwillbebesttobepreparedfor

emergencies.

If the matter and the manner of this request meet with your approval, will

you kindly forward it to Washington through the regular channels?

Assuring you that we fully appreciate the difficulties of your position and

are grateful for favors received, I remain, on behalf of the members of our

mission, sincerely yours,JLF

[Document 469]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 22, 1901.

No. 60.]

SIR: With reference to my dispatch No. 52, of the 5th instant, I have the

honor to transmit herewith for your information a copy of a letter which I

have just received from Mr. Edwin Gilbertson, British consul at Broussa,

which may add somewhat to the evidence which I have placed before the

Department relative to the advisability of joint action between British and

American consulates throughout the Ottoman Empire.

I have, etc.,
JOHNG.A.LEISHMAN.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Gilbertson to Mr. Irishman.
BROUSSA,July 17, 1901.

S:

While writing to your excellency I take the opportunity of calling your

attention to the fact that although the British Government authorized its

consuls to give friendly assistance and support to American citizens in

places where there is no United States representative, and which they have

done for the last twenty years, the local authorities have lately, under the

pretext that they have no order from the minister of foreign affairs to

recognize us as being in charge of American interests, commenced not only

to contest our right to assist American citizens, but insist upon the latter

applying directly to them for any assistance they may need.

Under these circumstances your excellency will no doubt see the necessity

of instructions being sent to the vali in the sense required.

* * * * * * *

I am, etc.,
EDWINGILBERTSON.

[Document 470]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Leishman.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 25, 1901.

No. 40.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 52, of the 5th

instant, transmitting a petition from Rev. J. L. Fowle and other American

missionaries located at Cesarea, requesting the Department to authorize the

British consul at Angora to look after American interests in his consular

district, where this Government has no consular representative.

You will confer with the British ambassador on the subject. If he be

favorable to authorizing the British consul at Angora to protect American

interests, formal request to that end may be made by you, or the United

States ambassador in London will be instructed to make the request, as may

be most convenient.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 471]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Leishman.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 7, 1901.
No. 47.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 60 of the 22d ultimo,

with inclosed copy of a letter of the 17th ultimo from the British consul at

Broussa, stating that the local authorities in places where American citizens

are unrepresented contest the right of British agents to take charge of their

interests and insist on Americans applying to them directly for any needed

assistance.

Withreferencetoyourrepeatedsuggestionastotheadvisabilityof

concerted action between British and American consulates throughout the

Ottoman Empire, I have to say that the usual rule of this Department in

authorizing one of its diplomatic or consular representatives abroad to take

charge of the interests of unrepresented citizens or subjects of another

nation, is to make acceptance of the friendly trust conditional on the

acquiescenceofthegovernmentorauthoritytowhichouragentis

accredited. If the consent of the government of the country be necessary to

enable one of our consuls to use his good offices in behalf of the citizens or

subjects of another nation, it is expected that such consent will be sought,

just as it is when our consul takes temporary charge of the affairs of a

consulate of another country which may for any cause become vacant for

the time being.

Inasmuch as the consul temporarily acting does not become the official

representative of another government, recognition of his competency to

exert his friendly offices does not involve application for or issuance of an

exequatur, but merely the usual courteous acquiescence of the government

of the country, followed by appropriate notification to its local officers.

You will communicate these views to your British colleague and confer

with him further upon the subject.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 472]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 5, 1901.

No. 53.]

SIR: I beg to inclose herewith copy of correspondence in regard to Rev. R.

M. Cole, at present located at Bitlis, who according to his own statements

has been restrained from moving about freely for nearly a year past on

account of the local governor refusing for some unknown reasons to grant

him a teskéréh or traveling passport. This regulation has been in force for

many years, and as long as it is not abused is no doubt a very sensible and

proper police regulation, as few if any of the Turkish agents can read either

English or French; but as I knew of no reason why Mr. Cole should be

restrained in any way, and as I considered that the guaranteed rights and

privileges of American citizens generally were being infringed upon, I

decided to take a very decided and firm stand, and if this does not result in

correcting the matter it is my intention to instruct Mr. Cole to travel freely

upon his American passport, and if necessary send a kavass to accompany

him, notifying the Porte at the same time that I will hold the Ottoman

Government strictly accountable not only for Mr. Cole’s safety, but also for

any delay, damage, or indignity which he may suffer.

I have, etc.,
JGAL
[Inclosure 1.]
C U S,

No. 109.]

“Governor of Bitlis refuses Cole permission to go to Moush.

States prohibition comes from Constantinople. Probably due to

Spahank massacre.

“BERGHOLZ.”

The Rev. R. M. Cole, of the American mission at Bitlis, having occasion to

go to Moush applied to the governor-general for an escort which was at

once given, and on September 12 Mr. Cole left Bitlis. On the outskirts of

Moush he was met by two police commissioners who demanded his

teskéréh or, in lieu of which, a bourouldi. Unfortunately, Mr. Cole had

omitted the formality of requesting either the one or the other and, in

consequence, was not permitted to enter the city. He protested that the fact

of his having an escort was sufficient evidence that he was traveling with

the full consent of the governor-general at Bitlis. It was of no avail, and he

was ordered back to Bitlis. The governor-general upon receiving Mr. Cole’s

complaint stated that the police of Moush had been officious. He refused,

however, to issue the necessary papers and left the city the following day,

and his assistant has since declined to permit the reverend gentleman to

enjoy his undoubted treaty right of travel.

Having no recognition outside of his province, I addressed a note to the

governor-general in which I briefly stated Mr. Cole’s case, and, without

discussing either the action of the governor-general or that of the police

commissioners of Moush, I requested him, on my behalf, to be good enough

to telegraph to his colleague at Bitlis to grant Mr. Cole the privilege secured

by treaty to make his journey to Moush. His excellency at once consenting

to telegraph, I sent the following telegram to Mr. Cole:

“CB:

“Renew demand to go to Moush. If refused telegraph me.

“BERGHOLZ.”

In reply Mr. Cole wired me: “Just asked again. Order impossible this side of

Constantinople. COLE.”

I then sent you the telegram confirmed above. Have heard nothing further

from Mr. Cole.

Had Mr. Cole taken the precaution to provide himself with a bourouldi

whenfirstleavingBitlishisdetentionandreturntoBitlisbythe

commissioners of police at Moush would probably not have happened, and

I have written him suggesting that in future whenever he has occasion to

travel he request the usual teskéréh, or bourouldi, so that the minor

authorities may have no possible grounds for interfering with him. The

action of the police commissioners’ was irregular, as it was their duty to

conduct Mr. Cole, under the circumstances, to the governor of Moush and

not compel his return to Bitlis.

I have, etc.,
LEOBERGHOLZ,Consul.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Peet to Mr. Leishman.
C ,June 8, 1901.

DS: The Rev. Royal M. Cole, of Bitlis (Kourdistan) sends me word that

the vali at that place is refusing to issue to him the usual papers for traveling

in his district.

This prohibition has lasted for some months, during which time Mr. Cole

has been, in reality, a prisoner in the city of Bitlis.

His work has often required his presence in the outlying towns of the

district, but repeated requests for the local passport (teskéréh usually given

for traveling) have been met with a firm refusal.

Thevaliclaimstobeactingunderthemostpositiveordersfrom

Constantinople that forbid his using any discretion in the matter whatever.

He usually professes that but for these orders he would readily grant the

passports as heretofore.

The vali has never given any satisfactory reason for the attitude on the part

of his superiors, but has in apparent friendship urged Mr. Cole to seek by

appeal to his legation at Constantinople a withdrawal of the orders under

which he is now compelled to refuse what otherwise he would grant him.

Mr. Cole is a missionary, and as such has under his care and direction a

number of congregations and schools in the district in which Bitlis is

situated. In the usual discharge of his duties he is obliged to visit these

congregations and schools from time to time. The prohibition upon his

movements has deprived him from discharging his duties in this regard for

now more than six months.

This attitude on the part of the Government is utterly different from the

usage of the past seventy years, and is so plainly a violation of the rights we

have hitherto enjoyed and those that others do now enjoy as to call, it seems

to me, for a demand that the embargo on Mr. Cole’s activities be withdrawn

or that the Government justify themselves in the position they are now

holding toward Mr. Cole.

Very respectfully,
WWP

[Document 473]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 8, 1901.

No. 56.]

SIR: Referring further to my dispatch No. 53 of July 5, I beg to advise that

the trouble in regard to the Rev. Mr. Cole at Bitlis has been satisfactorily

adjusted, and herewith I inclose copy of correspondence which will explain

the matter more fully.

I have, etc.,
JOHNG.A.LEISHMAN.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Leishman to the minister for foreign affairs.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,June 24, 1901.

EXCELLENCY: I beg to call your excellency’s attention to the fact that as yet I

have not received any reply to my note No. 17 of June 12, in which I

brought to your excellency’s notice the case of the Rev. R. M. Cole, a native

American citizen, residing as missionary in charge of schools in the vilayet

of Bitlis, owing to the local governor, who claims to be acting under general

instructions from Constantinople, refusing to grant him the usual teskéré.

While desirous to have all our citizens comply with local police regulations

and customs whenever that courtesy does not establish a bad precedent or

interfere with the rights guaranteed them, I can not permit the Rev. Mr. Cole

or any of our citizens to be practically treated as prisoners and prevented

from traveling freely while in pursuit of their peaceful avocation, and

consequently I feel constrained to advise your excellency that unless I am in

receipt of written advices on or before the 30th day of June next advising

me that proper instructions have been sent to the local governor of Bitlis,

and that the customary traveling passport or teskéré has been issued to the

Rev. R. M. Cole, I shall be compelled to instruct Mr. Cole to travel

wherever his duties may take him on his American passport, and in this

event I shall not only hold the Imperial Ottoman Government responsible

for his safety and good treatment, but also strictly accountable for any

indignity, delay, or trouble he may experience.

Accept, etc.,
JOHNG.A.LEISHMAN.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Cole.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 6, 1901.

DEARSIR: I herewith inclose copy of two telegrams which I sent you on the 1st

and 4th instant, respectively, to which I have not as yet received any reply.

I trust the delay is not the fault of an attempt to delay matters. I am

investigating through the telegraph bureau, and if necessary will bring the

case to the attention of the Porte, as I am determined not to permit your

freedom to be interfered with, and certainly have no intention of sitting

quietly and allowing any American who is pursuing his peaceful avocation

to be molested or interfered with in any way.

Awaiting your advices, I am, etc.,
JGAL
[Subinclosure.]

[Telegram sent in Turkish.—Translation.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 1, 1901.

I am informed that instructions have been sent to governor of Bitlis to

furnish you with a traveling teskéré, and, should you find it necessary or

desirable,toalsoprovideyouwithaguard.Pleaseadvisewhether

everything has been arranged to your entire satisfaction.
LEISHMAN.

[Document 474]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Cole.
[Telegram sent in Turkish.—Translation.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,July 4, 1901.

Did you receive my telegram of Monday last? Please answer promptly.
LEISHMAN.
[Inclosure 3.—Telegram.]
Mr. Cole to Mr. Leishman.
BITLIS,July 6, 1901.

Received your telegram. Vali’s representative says instructions arrived that

no hindrance to my traveling. See letter.
COLE.

[Document 475]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Leishman.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,August 1, 1901.
No. 42.]

correspondence in regard to the case of the Rev. R. M. Cole, who is at

present located at Bitlis, and who had been restrained from moving about

freely for nearly a year past because the local governor refused, for some

unknown reason, to grant him a teskéré or traveling passport.

The Department approves your action in the case, and is gratified that the

restriction on Mr. Cole’s movements has been removed.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 476]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,September 6, 1901.
No. 71.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose copy of note which I have addressed to the

Porte in regard to Rev. R. M. Cole, from which you will observe that,

notwithstanding the promises made by the Imperial Ottoman Government

andtheinstructionssenttolocalvali,whichwereafterwards

countermanded, the desired Turkish traveling teskéréh was not furnished to

Mr.Cole,andconsequentlyIfeltcompelledtoassumetheposition

indicated in above-mentioned note.

From what I can glean, the antagonism shown is caused by a desire to

annoy and harass Mr. Cole for the active interest he has always taken in the

Armenian cause, especially during the massacres.

If Mr. Cole carries out instructions strictly I do not anticipate any serious

trouble.

I have, etc.,
JGAL
[Inclosure 1.]
L U S,
Constantinople,September 3, 1901.
No. 37.]

EXCELLENCY: Referring to the legation note No. 22 of June 24 last, I beg to

advise your excellency that I refrained from taking any action in regard to

the Rev. Mr. Cole, having been assured by his excellency the minister of the

interior on the 30th June that instructions had been sent to the governor of

Bitlis to furnish Mr. Cole with a traveling teskéréh, and, if necessary, to

furnish him with a guard. This information was confirmed by Mr. Cole,

who, it appears, accepted the word of the acting governor that he would be

given a teskéréh whenever he wished to travel, the excuse being that

countermandingordershadbeenreceivedfromConstantinople.This

appeared very much like an act of bad faith on the part of some of His

Imperial Majesty’s officials which can not be overlooked, and as the

Government of the United States can not permit any infringement on the

rights guaranteed through the favored nation clause of rights and privileges

granted other friendly powers, and not being willing to permit Mr. Cole

being treated practically as a prisoner, I have to-day telegraphed Mr. Cole

authorizing him to travel freely wherever his duty and personal interests

may call him throughout the Turkish Empire, and I hereby notify your

excellency that I shall hold the Imperial Ottoman Government responsible

for the personal safety of Mr. Cole and strictly accountable of any damage,

annoyances, or inconveniences which may suffer.

Regreting the circumstances which compel me to take this step, I beg, etc.,
JOHNG.A.LEISHMAN.
[Inclosure 2.—Telegram.]
L U S,
Constantinople,September 3, 1901.

As the several officers of the Ottoman Government have failed to carry out

their promises, you are authorized by the legation to travel wherever your

duty or personal interests may call you on your American passport, taking

always care to inform [local governor?] of your movements. I am notifying

Porte that I have given you such instructions, and I will hold His Imperial

Majesty’s Government strictly accountable for any delay, damages, or

injury that you may suffer. Await receipt of letter which I am sending you

giving full instructions.
LEISHMAN,
Minister.
[Inclosure 3.]
Mr. Leishman to Mr. Cole.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,September 3, 1901.
SIR: I received your telegram while ill in bed, advising that the local

governor had refused you a traveling teskéréh. This was quite a surprise to

me, as I was led to believe by your telegram that you had already been

furnished with same. As I had taken extra precautions to assure myself, as

not being satisfied with the assurance given me by the minister of the

interior that word has been sent to the governor of Bitlis to furnish you with

a traveling teskéréh and if necessary with a guard, I wired you to the effect

and asked you whether it has been done, to which you replied: “Received

yourtelegram.Vali’srepresentativesaysinstructionsarrivedthatno

hindrance to my traveling. See letter,” giving me to understand that you had

been furnished with the desired passport, but it now appears that you merely

accepted the acting governor’s promise that you would be furnished with

desired passport when you were to travel and when that time arrived you

were refused and given to understand that countermanding order had been

received from Constantinople.

Under the circumstances I have wired advising you to travel wherever your

duty or personal interests called you on your American passport, but not

attempt to go anywhere that is dangerous or unsafe, and be very careful not

to take any unusual risks; and you should also take the precaution to notify

the local governor before starting that you intend visiting such and such a

place, so as to leave no room for any excuse should you be stopped,

interfered with, or attacked by the police, by the authorities, or by burglars

en route; and should such an emergency arise, communicate at once with

the legation by wire.

Yours, etc.,
JOHNG.A.LEISHMAN.

[Document 477]
Mr. Adee to Mr. Eddy.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,October 8, 1901.

No. 66.]

SIR: I inclose herewith for your information a copy of a letter from the

correspondingsecretaryofthe Americanboardofcommissionersfor

foreign missions, expressing his heartiest satisfaction with the contents and

tenor of Mr. Leishman’s note to the Porte, of the 3d ultimo, in relation to the

delay on the part of the Turkish authorities to issue a traveling teskéréh to

Reverend R. M. Cole.

I am, etc.,
ALVEYA.ADEE,
Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Smith to Mr. Hay.
Boston,September 27, 1901.

S: I have to acknowledge with hearty thanks the favor from the State

DepartmentofSeptember26,inclosingacopyofaletterfromMr.

Leishman to the Department, dated September 6; also a copy of Mr.

Leishman’s letter to the Porte, of his cablegram to Mr. Cole, and of his letter

to Mr. Cole.

Allow me to express the heartiest satisfaction with the contents and tenor of

Mr. Leishman’s address to the Porte. It is most courteous, clear, and

unequivocal, and can not fail to have made the right impression. I am under

great obligation to you for giving so prompt information in this matter.

I am, etc.,
JUDSONSMITH.

[Document 478]
The Sultan of Turkey to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

YILDIZ,September 14, 1901.

I have learned with emotion of the tragic death of Mr. McKinley. I beg to

express to you the deep share I take in the sorrow caused by this event.
ABDULHAMID.

[Document 479]
Mr. Hay to the Sultan of Turkey.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

I am charged by the President to convey to your Majesty the grateful thanks

of our Government and people for the touching sympathy your Majesty

extends in this hour of affliction.
JOHNHAY,
Secretary of State.

[Document 480]
Mr. Eddy to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Constantinople,November 26, 1901.

No. 107.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that on the 8th of this month a French

squadron arrived at Mytilene, and after landing a body of marines the

French admiral took possession of the custom-house, over which he flew

the French flag. As soon as information of this was received here the

Turkish Government gave orders that telegraphic communication with

Mytilene should be cut off, and through this action the chargé d’affaires of

France at Constantinople was unable to communicate with the French

admiral at Mytilene.

Mr. Bapst, who is in charge of French interests, had a long interview with

the minister for foreign affairs directly this took place, and succeeded in

obliging the Imperial Government to yield to the demands which had

originally caused the difficulty between Turkey and France.

This difficulty has been settled in the following manner:

(1) The Lorando claim, reduced to £340,000, will be paid from

the returns of the customs at the rate of £12,000 a month.

(2) Permission has been granted for the rebuilding of all French

schools and institutions destroyed during 1895–96.

(3) The official recognition of all French schools and institutions

now existing in the Ottoman Empire.

(4) The recognition of the Chaldean patriarch.

* * * * * * *

I have, etc.,
SPENCEREDDY.

[Document 481]
Mr. Finch to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Montevideo, Uruguay,May 21, 1901.

No. 442.]

SIR: I inclose copy of a letter from Mr. John G. Hufnagel, United States

commercial agent at Paysandu, Uruguay, dated May 11, 1901, in which he

requests me to issue a certificate of citizenship to his son to replace one

issued by the United States minister in Germany.

The case of Mr. Hufnagel seems unusual to me and is referred to you for

instructions.

Respectfully,
WILLIAMR.FINCH.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Hufnagel to Mr. Finch.
COMMERCIALAGENCY OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Paysandu,May 11, 1901.
S: I have three sons; the oldest, George A., was born at Baltimore, Md.,

and is now United States vice-commercial agent here. The other two, Louis

F. E., aged 17 years, and Richard D., aged 15 years, were born here.

When I was in Washington in the month of June, 1899, I called on the chief

of the naturalization bureau, stating to him that I have been United States

consular and commercial agent here since 1873, and asking him if my two

younger sons, born here, would have the privilege of American citizenship.

He answered that any sons of United States consular officers who were

citizens of the United States are considered Americans, and if my two sons

were in the United States he would give them a certificate of American

citizenship, but as they were at the time at college in Nuremburg, Germany,

he advised me to apply to the United States consul in Nuremburg (to whom

he wrote a few lines), who would take the boys’ deposition and request the

certificate of citizenship from the United States embassy at Berlin. Since

thenLouisattendedcollegeinGera,Germany,whereitseemsthis

certificate was mislaid, and he arrived here a few weeks ago without it.

Now, would you kindly inform me if you could grant him a certificate of

citizenship; and if not, what steps I would have to take in order to have my

son exempted from military duty here?

Respectfully awaiting your answer, I remain, etc.,JOHNG.HUFNAGEL,
United States Commercial Agent.

[Document 482]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Finch.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 28, 1901.
No. 188.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 442, of the 21st ultimo,

inclosing copy of a dispatch from Mr. John G. Hufnagel, United States

commercial agent at Paysandu, making application for a passport for his

minor son, Louis F. E. Hufnagel.

The status of young Hufnagel would appear to be covered by section 2172

of the Revised Statutes, which declares that the son of a naturalized citizen

of the United States “though born out of the limits and jurisdiction of the

United States “may be considered a citizen thereof. Mr. Hufnagel, sr., was,

as the Department understands, naturalized as a citizen of the United States

in 1851, and had not lost his citizenship when his son was born. When the

son reaches the age of 21 years he will be expected to elect his nationality.

Until then he is entitled to the protection of the United States.

You are instructed, therefore, upon proof of the facts as alleged, to issue a

passport to young Mr. Hufnagel.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 483]
Mr. Finch to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Montevideo, Uruguay,June 4, 1901.

No. 444.]

SIR: I inclose herewith copy and translation of an editorial which was printed

in the Montevideo Daily Nation, the official paper of Uruguay, dated June

4, 1901. The article refers to me.

Respectfully,
WILLIAMR.FINCH.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
THE MINISTER OF NORTH AMERICA.
[From the Montevideo Daily Nation of June 4, 1901, official paper of the

Government of Uruguay.]

Mr. William Finch, the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of

the United States of North America, paid a visit yesterday to Mr. Eduardo

MacEachen, the minister of government.

After a few moments Mr. MacEachen accompanied the esteemed diplomat

to the office of the minister of foreign affairs, where they remained more

than half an hour in pleasant conversation.

Mr. Finch is a good friend of our country and loses no opportunity of

demonstrating it. The proof of it is in the words expressed by him, when he

presented Rear-Admiral Cromwell to His Excellency the President of the

Republic, three or four days ago.

WhentheChiefMagistrateofferedaglassofchampagnetothe

distinguished visitors after saluting the rear-admiral, Mr. Finch in his turn

toasted to the prosperity of the Republic, saying that during the three years

he has held his high office he had always found in the President an excellent

friend of the United States.

The President answered saying that the North American minister, Mr.

Finch, had won all the sympathies of the citizens and Government of the

Republic by the correctness of his proceedings and the worthy manner with

which he represents his country.

[Document 484]
Mr. Finch to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Montevideo, Uruguay,August 5, 1901.

No. 457.]

SIR: I inclose copy and translation of an extract from the annual message of

the minister of foreign affairs of Paraguay to the Congress of that country,

in which he alludes to me.

Respectfully,
WILLIAMR.FINCH.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]

[Extractfromthemessageoftheministerofforeignaffairstothe

Paraguayan Congress for the term 1900 to 1901.]

TheHon.WilliamR.Finch,chiefofthe Americanlegationtoour

Government, has shown the best desires not only to maintain and strengthen

the cordial and friendly ties which unite both Republics, but also to

stimulate the development of their commercial relations, omitting no means

to favor the projects of our Government in this respect.

[Document 485]
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.]

MONTEVIDEO,September 16, 1901.

I present in the name of the Government of Uruguay condolences for the

demise of President McKinley. Greetings.
GERMANROOSEN,
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[Document 486]
Mr. Hay to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

TheAmericanGovernmentandpeopledeeplyappreciateUruguayan

sympathy.
HAY.

[Document 487]
The President of Paraguay to the President of the United States.
[Telegram.]

ASCUNSION,PARAGUAY,September 14, 1901.

The Government and people of Paraguay join in the great American sorrow.
EMILIOACEVAL,President.

[Document 488]
Mr. Hay to the President of Paraguay.
[Telegram.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,September 16, 1901.

President Roosevelt charges me to express grateful thanks for your message

of Paraguayan sympathy.
HAY,Secretary of State.

[Document 489]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,December 29, 1900.

No. 538.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose a statement from Mr. Russell in reference to

the arrest and imprisonment of our consular agent at Barcelona, who is not

a citizen of this country, but a Danish subject. Mr. Russell says that no

apology was ever made to Mr. Balz, and that his telegram to him, filed with

the Government telegraph company here, was never delivered. Mr. Balz has

been imprisoned before without cause and made to pay forced loans to local

military leaders.

I have, etc.,
FRANCISB.LOOMIS.
[Inclosure.]
Statement of Mr. Russell.
On the night of October 22 I received a cable from our consular agent at

Barcelona stating that he was in prison “incomunicado” by order from

Caracas, and knew nothing of the cause of his arrest. I went the next

morning to the foreign office and was informed that the consul had been

arrested by mistake, but had been released with due apologies. The consul

telegraphed me that he had been released without any explanation. On the

24th I sent a telegram as follows: “Government has informed me that you

were arrested by mistake, but on discovering the error you had been

released with due apologies. Answer.”

This telegram was sent on the 24th of October, but was never received in

Barcelona.

[Document 490]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Loomis.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,January 16, 1901.
No. 379.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 538, of the 29th ultimo,

inclosing Mr. Russell’s statement concerning the arrest of the United States

cousular agent at Barcelona.

You are instructed to inform the Venezuelan foreign office that Mr. Balz,

who was arrested without cause, reports that no explanation or apology was

made when he was released. You will call attention to the fact that Mr.

Russell’s telegram to the consular agent in reference to this matter was

intercepted.

This is not the first occasion upon which Mr. Balz has been subjected to the

arbitrary action of the Venezuelan local military leaders. Although he is not

a citizen of the United States, this Government will protect him, while

acting as its consular representative, against the arbitrary interference of

Venezuelanofficials.Youwillinsistthatadequateexplanationsand

apologies be made to the consular agent, and that proper measures be taken

to prevent the recurrence of such acts.

I am, etc.,
JH

[Document 491]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,February 23, 1901.

No. 563.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose a copy and translation of the answer of the

Venezuelan Government to my note requesting prompt and satisfactory

consideration of the Balz case, with suitable apologies to the consular agent

of the United Sates at Barcelona. The meaning of the inclosed answer is that

the case, so far as this Government is concerned, has been dropped. There

will be no further investigation, in all probability, for this is the usual

formula for denying a request.

* * * * * * *

Referring to your instructions numbered 379, I did not make a demand for

apologies and explanations in this case in the first instance because I

thought a request in so clear and simple a case would be sufficient; but it

seems that I was mistaken, and unless I receive, instructions to the contrary

I will make the demand as indicated in your instructions.

I have, etc.,
F BL
[Inclosure 1.]
L U S,
Caracas,January 30, 1901.

Mr. M : A few weeks ago I had the honor, during the course of a

conversationattheforeignoffice,toinviteyourattentiontothe

consideration of an incident which occurred last October. I refer to the

arrest of the consular agent of the United States at Barcelona. I am now

directed by my Government to bring the matter to the attention of your

excellency and to ask for its prompt and earnest consideration.

The facts in the case appear to be as follows:

On the afternoon of October 22, 1900, Mr. I. H. Balz, the consular agent of

the United States at Barcelona, was arrested without due process of law and

cast into prison. It was stated that the minister of the interior telegraphed the

authorities at Barcelona that the Balz wanted was one who was treasurer

under the Government, in that State, of President Rolando. The authorities

knew very well that Mr. Balz was a peaceful merchant, who never had any

connection with the Government at Barcelona. Notwithstanding that, and

despite his protests, he was arrested, imprisoned, and kept in confinement

till 9 o’clock the following morning, when he was released with the remark

that his arrest and incarceration “was a mistake.”

Mr. Russell, upon learning of Mr. Balz’s arrest, at once called upon your

excellency and recited the facts respecting it. Mr. Russell was informed that

the arrest was a mistake and that Mr. Balz had been released with due

explanations and apologies.

Mr. Russell then sent the following telegram to Mr. Balz, which has not yet

reached him. It was sent over the Government lines and was paid for at the

time of filing in the Caracas office: CONSULAMERICANO,Barcelona.

Gobierno me dijo que por equivocación fué arrestado y al saber error

inmediatamentelehabíapuestoenlibertadconlasdebidasexcusas.

Conteste.

R
No satisfactory apology has been made in connection with this arrest, and it

is not the first time Mr. Balz has been subjected to harsh treatment at the

hands of the local authorities at Barcelona.

Referring to the incident in question, I am instructed by my Government to

say that it will protect Mr. Balz while acting as its consular representative

againstthearbitraryinterferenceoflocalofficials,andIamfurther

instructed to request that suitable apologies be made to Mr. Balz and that

sufficient measures be taken to prevent the recurrence of similar acts.

I think when your excellency reviews this case you will admit that there has

been an oversight in the matter of apology to Mr. Balz, and that the failure

to deliver Mr. Russell’s telegram has not been at all explained.

Accept, etc.,
FRANCISB.LOOMIS.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]
Mr. Blanco to Mr. Loomis.
MINISTRY OFFOREIGNAFFAIRS,
UNITEDSTATES OFVENEZUELA,
Caracas,February 16, 1901.
MR.MINISTER:ReferringtotheaffairofMr.Balz,mentionedinyour

excellency’s note of the 30th of last month, this ministry has asked from the

ministry of interior a full report of the occurrence, and the ministry of

fomento has also been asked to explain the apparent loss of the telegram

sent by Mr. Russell. As to the excuses or explanations referred to in your

note, this ministry is of the opinion that Mr. Balz ought to be satisfied, as

the local authorities were immediately called upon to explain the motive for

the arrest and their report was transmitted through official channels. The

miscarriage of the telegram would, at best, be an unpleasant incident that

would have nothing to do with the Government’s desire to throw light on

the case and explain it satisfactorily.

The Government took action in this case because it deems that a consular

agent is always worthy of much consideration, but as all action must

necessarily be limited, considering the character of the official in question,

it is not possible to take such action as would be taken had the incident

occurred to a diplomatic representative. It is useless to attempt to explain to

your excellency the radical differences between the two cases—differences

which make the consular agent subject to civil jurisdiction as far as his

aproperty and person are concerned.Inviolability is confined to the office,

the flag, the archives, escutcheon, and seals; consequently complaints from

consuls can never be regarded as seriously as complaints from public

ministers.

I make these observations to your excellency in order to inform you of the

measures that have been taken to clear up the affair of Mr. Balz, who can

look for no other action to be taken in his case than would be taken in

similar cases with respect to any person whatever entitled to the guaranty

and protection given by the laws of the country.

Accept, etc.,
EDUARDOBLANCO.
aThis is a generally admitted doctrine, and accepted by the United States

and Venezuela without any modification whatever.

[Document 492]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,March 9, 1901.

No. 574.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a letter from the United

States consul at La Guaira, with the inclosures which accompanied the

bletter. Consul Goldschmidt sends copies of several receiptsobtained by

Mr. Balz in return for forced loans which he was required to pay to local

authorities.

There is also inclosed a statement from Mr. Balz, forwarded through

Lieutenant-Commander Sargent, commanding the U. S. S.Scorpion.
Kindly return the copies of the receipts, with instructions as to what steps

are to be taken with reference to them.

I have, etc.,
FRANCISB.LOOMIS.
[Inclosure 1.]
C U S,
La Guaira,February 22, 1901.

S: I have the honor to inclose statements from I. H. Balz, esq., United

States consular agent at Barcelona, which said agent sent me in writing

through Commander Sargent, of theScorpion.

According to this and to the verbal statement to Commander Sargent, Mr.

Balz has not received any apology for his arrest.

This is to be regretted, and I hope that it may not be allowed to pass by our

Government without notice, for if such things are permitted, who knows

who the next consular officer will be to suffer such indignities at the hands

of Venezuelan officials.

I also forward to you copies of vouchers forwarded to me about a week ago

for forcible loans which he had to contribute in the past.

I am, etc.,
LOUISGOLDSCHMIDT.
[Inclosure 2.]
Report received from I. H. Balz, February 22, 1901, through Commander Sargent, U. S. S.

“Scorpion.”
That on the the 22d of October, 1900, about 12 o’clock m., the magistrate of

the town came into my store, informing me that the president of the state

wished to see me.

I asked him if it was possible to wait until after breakfast. He told me that

the matter was urgent. I then complied with his request by following him

immediately. When I got about six paces from my store, he told me that I

was a prisoner by the order of his superior. I told him that it was a mistake,

and that he should permit me to speak to the president, which was allowed

afterwards. When I arrived at the president’s house, he told me that he had

received orders from the President of the Republic for my arrest without

communication. I told him, as I stated above, that it was an error, and at

once I asked the cause. He answered me that he was ignorant of the

circumstance.

The president of state wired to the Caracas Government that his orders had

been carried out, and at the same time, to bring to light the particulars of

said case. I then asked to be allowed to remain at my house until things

were being justified, but I was refused. He (the secretary) decided that as

the President of the Republic ordered my arrest, I must be a prisoner.

I was then taken as a prisoner to the commandant’s house, where I remained

in custody without communication for a period of twenty-one hours, after

which time I was released from prison without an apology, with only an

intimation from the president of the state that it was a mistake.
bNot printed.

[Document 493]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,April 7, 1901.

No. 599.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that I had a long talk with the minister of

foreign affairs a fews days ago concerning the Balz case. He showed no

disposition to take a view different from the one already entertained by his

Government, and argued for halt an hour that as Balz was a consular officer

he had no right to protection of a special character. I said I did not care to

go over the ground again, but that my Government was of opinion that a

satisfactory apology or explanation was due, and I remarked that it was my

personal notion that if no satisfaction were offered in this case it would look

as though a foreign consular officer in Venezuela could in no wise count

upon adequate protection from imprisonment and persecution at the hands

of local military authorities. The minister said that he was not willing to

admit that; and “Then,” said I, “kindly say whether it is, or is not, the

intention of your Government to offer a satisfactory explanation or apology

in the case of our consular agent at Barcelona.” He said he would let me

know in a day or two, and yesterday he sent me word that a satisfactory

apology would be offered to Mr. Balz.

I have, etc.,
F BL

[Document 494]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,April 20, 1901.

No. 604.]

SIR. I have the honor to state that in an interview with the minister of foreign

affairs to-day I was shown a telegram from the president of the State of

Barcelona, in which it was stated that the Government of Venezuela had

given a satisfactory apology to Mr. Balz for his arrest some months ago, and

that Mr. Balz had declared that he was satisfied with the action of the

Government of Venezuela.

I have, etc.,
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.

[Document 495]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,May 3, 1901.

No. 605.]

SIR: I have the honor to herewith forward copies with translations of a letter

from the provisional president of the State of Barcelona to Mr. Balz in

regard to the latter’s arrest some months ago, and of Mr. Balz’s reply to

General Rodriguez. Mr. Balz has not communicated with me as yet. This

correspondence was sent to our consul in La Guaira. I await your further

instructions in this matter.

I have, etc.,
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.
General Rodriguez to Mr. Balz.
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]

UNITEDSTATES OFVENEZUELA,
EXECUTIVEMANSION,STATE OFBARCELONA,
Barcelona,April 16, 1901.

No. 578.]

Mr. C : I am pleased to tell you that your arrest some months ago, and

which I regret exceedingly, was due to a mistake, as I personally had the

honor to tell you at the time, and as there is nothing that can lessen the

esteem in which Mr. Balz is held by the authorities, the Government takes

especial pains to maintain the most cordial relations with the consulate out

of regard for the person in charge, and also for the fact that he is the

consular agent of the United States, a nation always friendly to Venezuela.

In reassuring Mr. Balz of my consideration I have the honor to sign myself,

etc.,VICTORRODRIGUEZ.
Mr. Balz to General Rodriguez.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]

CONSULARAGENCY OF THEUNITEDSTATES OFNORTHAMERICA,
Barcelona,April 18, 1901.
No. 9.]

Mr. PRESIDENT: There has been received in this consular agency your attentive

note of the 16th of the present month, No. 578, relative to what happened to

me on the 22d of last October, and I note what you have said.

Furthermore, this consular agency will cooperate with you in maintaining

the most cordial relations with your Government, not merely out of regard

for its very worthy representative, but because it is my desire and also in

accordance with instructions I have from the Government I have the honor

to represent.

In reassuring Gen. Victor Rodriguez, provisional president of the State, of

my consideration, I have, etc.,I.H.BALZ.

[Document 496]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Russell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 4, 1901.

No. 414.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 604, of the 20th ultimo,

reporting that you had been shown by the minister of foreign relations a

telegram from the president of the State of Barcelona, in which it was stated

that the Government of Venezuela had apologized to Mr. Balz for his arrest

and that the latter had declared himself satisfied.

The Department is pleased to learn of the reported termination of this

regretted incident.

You may also inquire what explanation was offered by the Venezuelan

Government for the nondelivery of your official telegram to Mr. Balz, and

report all details as to the apology.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 497]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Russell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,May 22, 1901.
No. 415.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 605, of the 3d instant,

inclosing a copy of the note addressed by the president of the State of

Barcelona to the United States consular agent at Barcelona apologizing for

the latter’s arrest, also a copy of Mr. Balz’s reply.

The Department awaits your reply to its No. 414, of the 4th instant, which

crossed your dispatch, relative to an expected explanation of the failure to

deliver the legation’s telegram to the consular agent.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 498]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 15, 1901.

No. 625.]

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 415, of May

22, 1901, in regard to an expected explanation from the Government of

Venezuela as to the loss of the legation’s telegram to Mr. Balz last October.

I have directed an official communication to the foreign office on this

subject, but up to the present I have received no reply.

I have, etc.,
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.

[Document 499]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 30, 1901.

No. 634.]

SIR: In accordance with your instructions I directed an official note to the

foreign office asking for an explanation in regard to the loss of the

legation’s telegram to Consular Agent Balz, at Barcelona, last October.

The foreign minister officially inquired of the minister of fomento, who in

turnsoughtanexplanationfromthedirector-generalofthenational

telegraph service, and the latter official replied, which reply I herewith

inclose as embodied in a copy of a letter from the minister of fomento to the

minister of foreign affairs.

I have, etc.,
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.
[Inclosure—Translation.]
The Minister of Fomento to the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
M F D M T ,
Caracas,June 15, 1901.

TotheH M F A :Referringtoyourattentive

communication of the 12th of the present month, No. 715, D. P. E., I have

the honor to herewith forward a copy of a note received in this ministry

from the director-general of the national telegraph, as follows:

“[L. S. No. 193—90th and 43d.]

“ C ,June 15, 1901.

“To the HONORABLEMINISTER OFFOMENTO: On the 13th of the present month,

upon the receipt of your note, steps were taken to investigate the

matter therein referred to, and it is found that the telegram for Mr.

Balz was dispatched without delay from the office in this city; but

as in one of the intermediate stations there was a considerable

interruptiononaccountoftheheavyrainsthetelegramin

question remained in said station until the lines could be repaired,

which it was intended to do immediately. For this reason the

sender was not notified. The continued heavy rains increased the

work of repairs, and shortly after came the earthquake catastrophe

of October 29. All the offices in the east were damaged very

considerably, and in some even the archives were lost; so that the

telegram in question had to suffer the fate of all the rest that had

accumulated on account of the interruptions in the service above

mentioned; and in those days of panic and fright it was impossible

for the operators to submit their usual reports, by which the

existence of the telegram in one of the intermediate offices would

have been known, and the sender would have been advised of the

delay in transmission. You will see that the cause of the loss of the

telegram was not due to any irregularity in the telegraph service,

but was one of those things that it was impossible to prevent. The

same thing happened to many other telegrams, many of an official

characterinregardtoaffairsofadministration,andalsoin

connection with department of finance. God and the Federation.

“VICENTEVALARINO.”
From the foregoing report you will see that unforeseen and unavoidable

circumstances caused the loss of the telegram referred to, and I sincerely

hope that the explanation given will be satisfactory to the legation of the

United States. God and the Federation.
F A G.

[Document 500]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Russell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 12, 1901.
No. 429.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 634, of the 30th ultimo,

forwarding the Venezuelan Government’s explanation of the nondelivery of

your legation’s telegram of October 24 last to the United States consular

agent at Barcelona.

InreplyIhavetosaythattheexplanationissatisfactorytothis

Government.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 501]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,February 12, 1901.

(Mr. Loomis reports that the Venezuelan Government protests most strongly

against the presence of the U. S. S.Scorpionin the Orinoco River without

having asked permission to enter, declaring such presence to be in violation

of Venezuelan as well as of international laws.

Instructions as to proper reply requested.)

[Document 502]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Loomis.
[Telegram—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 13, 1901.

(Mr. Hill states that theScorpion’svisit to the Orinoco to obtain information

wasinaccordancewithnumerousprecedentsandwithoutoffensive

intention.

The vessel was ordered to La Guaira, touching at Cumana, Carupano, and

Barcelona.)
[Document 503]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Loomis.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,February 14, 1901.

No. 394.]

SIR: I confirm your telegram of the 12th instant reporting the Venezuelan

Government’s protest against the presence of theScorpionin the Orinoco

River, and the Department’s telegraphic reply of the 13th instant.

I inclose for your information copy of the Navy Department’s memorandum

of the 13th instant relative to the precedents for the visits of United States

war vessels to the Orinoco River.

I am, etc.,
DJH,Acting Secretary.
[Inclosure.]

NAVYDEPARTMENT,
Washington,February 13, 1901.

Memorandum.
The records of the Department show that naval vessels have visited the

Orinoco River on a number of occasions. When no survey has been

undertaken these visits have been without previous notice, so far as the

Department’s records show. Two recent cases of visits to the Orinoco are

without, however, erecting shore stations. There is no record of any protest

or objection from the Venezuelan Government on the occasion of either of

these visits.

The Navy Department understands the status of the Orinoco River, in

regard to navigation, to be in all respects similar to that of the Mississippi

River. Foreign war vessels pass freely up the Mississippi River without

previous notice to this Government. Our war vessels have done the same in

the Orinoco River. In the Amazon, for instance, the case is understood to be

different. This river, though open to commercial navigation, is not open to

war vessels except on special notice and permission.

It may be that the minister to Venezuela on his own account, in the case of

the visit of theWilmington, asked permission or notified the Government of

what was contemplated. If so, this is unknown to the Navy Department.

On the occasion of the visit of theWilmingtonthe Venezuelan Government

marked its acquiescence and gratification in that visit by desiring to

decorate the commanding officer of the vessel with the order of Bolivar.
JDL,Secretary.

[Document 504]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,February 23, 1901.
No. 564.]

SIR: I have the honor to inclose a copy of a note from the minister of foreign

affairs, with translation of same, in reference to the presence of the
Scorpionin the Orinoco River. I also inclose a copy of my answer to this

note based upon your cabled instructions.

In this connection it may be of interest to the Department to know that

when the British gunboatAlertwent to Ciudad Bolivar last summer to

inquire into the facts concerning the killing of the British consular clerk at

thatport,Mr.Grant-Duff,theBritishchargéd’affaireshere,asked

permission from the Venezuelan Government for the gunboat to go to

Ciudad Bolivar. He reported his action to the foreign office in London and

was promptly informed that what he had done was not at all necessary, and

that in the future permission for English war vessels to navigate the Orinoco

River was not to be asked.

I have, etc.,
F BL
[Inclosure l.—Translation.]

Caracas,February 9, 1901.
MM : The law of May 15, 1882, numbered 2419 in the national

compilation, gives to the head of the Government the power to grant or not,

in his judgment, permission to foreign men-of-war to enter, for scientific

purposes, ports that are not open. Every time that a war vessel of the United

States has made a request of this nature it has been granted without any

difficulty, and not long ago United States war vessels were engaged in

scientific work in the Cano of San Juan and at the bar at the mouth of the

Orinoco, but these vessels had gone through with the legal formality above

mentioned, and this formality can not be dispensed with, except in violation

of the well-established principles of international law.

By direction of the Supreme Chief of the Republic, I call your excellency’s

attention to the aforementioned law for the reason that this Government has

been disagreeably surprised to learn that a war vessel calledScorpion,

flying the flag of the United States, had entered the harbor of Santa

Catalina, a port that is not open, and situated in the Dalla Costa district of

the State of Guayana; that an officer in uniform went ashore from said war

vessel and returned on board accompanied by a gentleman called Boynton,

an employee of the company which has its agency at said port, and that no

explanation was given for this flagrant violation of the usual formalities.

The grave nature of this act, violating, as it does, the very principles on

which national sovereignty are based, compels the Supreme Chief of the

Republic to respectfully call the attention of the Government of the United

States to this delicate question, and to protest in the most solemn manner

against the action of the man-of-warScorpionas opposed to the principles

of international law and a violation of the laws of this Republic.

In compliance with an imperative duty, I have directed the foregoing

communication to your excellency, and I renew, etc.,E B
[Inclosure 2.]
L U S,
Caracas,February 16, 1901.

MM : I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of February

Scorpion, has been

seen in the Orinoco River at Santa Catalina and that her presence there was

not in conformity with certain sections of the law of Venezuela, which, as I

gather from your note, provides that foreign men-of-war shall not enter the

Orinoco River for scientific purposes without first having asked permission

of the chief of the Venezuelan Government. I was not aware that there was a

law in force closing the Orinoco River to the public vessels of a friendly

nation bent on the peaceful and inoffensive mission of seeking information

from its nationals engaged in lawful business on the banks of that stream. It

is true that when it was desired to do certain scientific work for the benefit

of navigation and the shipping of all nations at the bars of the Orinoco and

San Juan rivers, the formal permission of the Venezuelan Government was

asked; but in these cases it was deemed necessary to keep a war vessel in

Venezuelan waters for many weeks, and the officers and men on these

scientific expeditions were at work in small boats taking many observations

and measurements, so it was only natural that their presence for a long

period, and their activity, should be explained in the form of asking

permission for the performance of the task in question.

TheScorpion, as I understand it, recently made a very quick trip to Santa

Catalina and immediately returned to the coast. Her visit was of course

wholly inoffensive in character and devoid of significance in any other

sense than the one I have the honor to indicate, and, as your excellency

knows, there are precedents for the informal visits on the part of war vessels

of a friendly nation.

I should esteem it a favor if you would be kind enough to furnish me with a

list of the Venezuelan ports, streams, and harbors, concerning which there is

a special provision of law respecting the entry of foreign men-of-war.

I take, etc.,
F BL

[Document 505]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,March 1, 1901.
No. 572.]

SIR: I inclose a copy of a second note from the minister of foreign affairs

concerning theScorpion, with a translation.

On Tuesday last the minister of foreign affairs said he would send me a list

of the closed ports, and I was led to believe that the incident would be

closed in that way, but it seems that such is not the case. I purposely made

my answer to the minister’s first note a little vague, because I was not fully

acquainted with all of the facts concerning theScorpion.
I regret to say that the legation does not own a set of the laws of Venezuela.

I inclose a copy of my answer to the minister’s second note. It seems to me

that nothing further ought to be expected.

I have, etc.,
FRANCISB.LOOMIS.
[Inclosure 1.—Translation.]

Caracas,February 26, 1901.
YE : Referring to your excellency’s note of the 16th of the present

month, I am sorry that I did not succeed in explaining with sufficient

clearness in my note of the 9th, No. 208, the spirit of the law of the 15th of

May, 1882, regarding the entrance of foreign men-of-war in the ports of the

Republic. I stated that the above-mentioned law “gives to the head of the

Government the power to grant or not, in his judgment, permission to

foreign men-of-war to enter, for scientific purposes, ports that are not

open.” I could not refer in a general sense to the Orinoco, as Ciudad

Bolivar, situated on one of its banks, is a port open to foreign commerce, in

accordance with the provisions of Law XIV of the finance code.

TheScorpionentered Santa Catalina, a port not open to foreign commerce,

which constituted a distinct violation of the law, and of which I spoke to

you in the name of the Supreme Chief of the Republic.

In a communication of July 1, 1882, the law in question was made known

to all the diplomatic corps resident in Caracas soon after it was passed by

the Congress of the Republic. Said law is the same one cited by one of my

predecessors to your legation in notes of January 14 and April 20, 1899, and

the same law that another of my predecessors referred to in notes of

December 19 and December 23, 1899.

So that when, in the note protesting against the act of theScorpion, mention

was made of the law of 1882, it was done with the idea that attention was

being called to a well-known public act, an act that had been made known

to foreign Governments, inserted in the official compilation of laws, and

referred to frequently in the correspondence with the representatives of

friendly nations. The existence of said law, and the knowledge of its

existence on the part of other Governments, fully justifies and makes

obligatory in the name of the sovereignty of the Republic, the protest

contained in my note of the 9th of the present month, and which I hereby

confirm by order of the chief of the Venezuelan Government.

In regard to the list of the ports, rivers, and harbors which your excellency

asks for I need only refer to Law XIV of the finance code, which specifies

the points open to foreign commerce, and these are the only ones in which

foreign men-of-war may enter; and article 3 of said law establishes the only

exception which can only by made effective by means of a special permit

from the chief of the Republic.

Accept, etc.,

EDUARDOBLANCO.
[Inclosure 2.]
Mr. Loomis to Mr. Blanco.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,March 1, 1901.
Mr. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your note of

February 26, relating to the visit of the United States man-of-warScorpion
to Santa Catalina, in the Orinoco River, and the protest made by the

supreme chief of the Republic.

I will forward your excellency’s note to Washington by the first mail,

whither all of the correspondence concerning the matter has been sent.

I desire to repeat in this connection that the visit of theScorpionwas wholly

inoffensive in character, and that I trust it will be so understood. There is

nothing further from the desire of my Government than to give offense to

the Government of Venezuela, and I trust your excellency, who so well

understands this, will assure the supreme chief of the Republic that it is the

sincere purpose of the United States Government at all times to further

strengthen the cordial relations that have long existed between it and the

Government of Venezuela.

There does not seem to be in this legation a copy of the laws to which your

excellency refers, but I shall try to obtain one at my earliest convenience.

I take this occasion, etc.,
F BL

[Document 506]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Loomis.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,March 18, 1901.

No. 402.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 564, of February 23 last, in regard to the visit of

the U. S. S.Scorpionto Santa Catalina, I inclose for your information copy

of a letter from the Secretary of the Navy, pointing out the distinction

existingbetweentheordinaryvisitofaman-of-warandavisitfor

“scientific purposes.”

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.
[Inclosure.]
Mr. Long to Mr. Hay.
NAVYDEPARTMENT,
Washington,March 13, 1901.

S: The receipt is acknowledged of the letter of the Department of State of

March 11, 1901, inclosing a copy of a letter from the United States minister

to Venezuela to the State Department with copies of its two inclosures,

being a letter of the United States minister to Venezuela to the foreign office

of that country, and a copy of the translation of the reply thereto.

In the practice of this Department there is a distinct and well-recognized

difference between the visit of a man-of-war and a visit for “scientific

purposes,”suchscientificpurposesbeingusuallyhydrographicand

occasionally topographic examination of territorial waters or shores of a

foreign country.

The Department would ordinarily not order one of its vessels to any port of

anycountryhavingarecognizedGovernmenttoconductsurveysor

examinations, without having first not only notified that Government of its

wish, but having obtained explicit permission for conducting the survey

upon the occasion of the visit.

On the other hand, it would neither send notice nor request permission in

case the visit was not undertaken for the purposes of conducting such

survey or other similar purpose, unless the waters proposed to be visited

were expressly denied to passage of men-of-war by national decree, as in

the case of the Amazon.

Very respectfully,
JOHND.LONG.

[Document 507]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,May 4, 1901.
No. 610.]

SIR: I have the honor to herewith inclose a copy, with translation, of the law

passed by the Venezuelan Congress of 1882 in regard to the entrance of

foreign men-of-war into Venezuelan ports.

This law was published in the Official Gazette of April 30 last, as the law in

force at present.

The Belgian legation here had sent to the foreign office a copy of the late

Belgian regulations on this same subject, and the foreign minister in

acknowledging the communication of the Belgian chargé d’affaires sent a

copy of the inclosed decree as the law in force on the subject in Venezuela

at present.

I have, etc.,
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
The Congress of the United States of Venezuela decrees:
A 1. The ports where foreign men-of-war can enter are only

those open to foreign commerce.

A. 2. Foreign men-of-war can not enter the above-mentioned

ports except to the number of three or four, at most, nor can they

remain longer than thirty days.

ART. 3. When for any good reason foreign men-of-war are obliged

to enter a port in a greater number than above mentioned, or

prolong their stay for more than thirty days, or visit for scientific

purposes ports that are not open, they must ask special permission

from the President of the Republic, who may grant it or not, in his

judgment.

ART. 4. Foreign men-of-war are subject to all police regulations of

the ports, such as health laws, anchorage regulations, etc.

ART. 5. In case of any infraction of the foregoing articles the local

authorities shall not take any measures against the men-of-war,

out of regard for their extraterritoriality, but the Chief of the

National Executive shall be immediately informed and he will

proceed in accordance with international usages.

Given in the federal palace of the legislative body, at Caracas, May 11,

1882, nineteenth year of the Law and twenty-fourth of the Federation.

President of the Senate,
J.P.ROJASPAUL
President of the House,
A.COVA.
Secretary of the Senate,
M.CABALLERO.

[Document 508]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 15, 1901.

(Mr. Russell reports that information has been received by the President of

Venezuela that a war vessel of the United States has been anchored off the

island of Margarita, and that full details have been requested by the

President by cable of the governor of the island.)
[Document 509]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 15, 1901.
No. 629.]

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that on the 9th instant a cable was

received by the President of Venezuela from the governor of the island of

Margarita, notifying him that an American man-of-war (presumably the
Mayflower) was anchored off the port of Juan Griego, but had not entered.

The President has cabled for details regarding the arrival and anchorage of

theMayflower.
I have, etc.,
W WR

[Document 510]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 19, 1901.

(Mr.Russellreportsthatanexplanationhasbeenrequestedbythe

Venezuelan Government of the entry by the U. S. S.Mayflowerof a closed

port in the island of Margarita, and asks what answer he shall make.)
[Document 511]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 22, 1901.

(Mr. Russell reports that the Venezuelan Government claims that the State

Department, Navy Department, and United States legation at Caracas are

aware of the law upon the subject of closed ports of Venezuela, and

menacingly repeats request for explanation of theMayflower’sentrance of a

closed port in the island of Margarita.

A reply is requested.)

[Document 512]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Russell.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,June 22, 1901.

(Mr. Hay states that the visit of theMayflowerto Margarita Island was in

accordancewithcustom,andthattherequestoftheUnitedStates

Government to be furnished with a list of closed Venezuelan ports has not

been complied with.)
[Document 513]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Russell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 3, 1901.
No. 426.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 629, of the 15th, and the Department’s telegram

of the 22d ultimo, I have to say that the Department is in receipt of a letter

from the Acting Secretary of the Navy stating that his Department is unable

tounderstandhowtheMayflowerviolatedtreatystipulationswith

Venezuela by visiting Porlamar, inasmuch as that port is declared by the

Hacienda code to be open for export and for the importation of certain

articles.

You may take this statement to the Government of Venezuela.

I am, etc.,
DJH,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 514]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,July 14, 1901.

No. 643.]

SIR: I have the honor to herewith forward a copy and translation of the

answer to my note to the foreign office in regard to the anchorage of the U.

S. S.Mayflowerin a port of the island of Margarita. I also inclose a copy of

my note.

I think the incident is now closed.

I have, etc.,
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.
[Inclosure 1.]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Blanco.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 26, 1901.

MM : I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s

communication of June 15, 1901, in regard to the anchorage of the United

States man-of-warMayflowerin a port of the island of Margarita, said port

not being open to foreign commerce.

TheDepartmentofState,inacommunicationdatedMay24,1901,

requested to be furnished with a list of the Venezuelan portsnot open to

foreign commerce, and your excellency, at my request, kindly furnished me

with said list, which was sent to Washington by the mail which left La

Guaira June 16, last. So that at the time of the departure of theMayflower

for the Venezuelan coast both the State and Navy Departments were in

ignorance as to what ports a foreign man-of-war could not enter.

TheMayflower’svisit to the island of Margarita was made in accordance

with custom, and with no intention to violate any of the Venezuelan laws,

and my Government, desirous of maintaining its friendly relations with

Venezuela, has in this instance merely followed the precedents of former

years in sending one of its war vessels to Venezuela on a friendly visit.

In requesting your excellency to acquaint His Excellency the President of

the contents of this communication, I beg to be allowed to renew to you the

assurances of my highest and most distinguished consideration.
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.
Mr. Blanco to Mr. Russell.
[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]

MINISTRY OFFOREIGNAFFAIRS OF THE
UNITEDSTATES OFVENEZUELA,
Caracas,July 3, 1901.

SIR: On receiving your attentive note of the 26th of last month in regard to

the entrance of the man-of-warMayflowerinto a port of the island of

Margarita, I informed the President of the Republic of its contents. The

President took note of all you had to say on the subject, and in addition

expressed himself as being much gratified at the prompt investigation made

by you of this matter, which was of the utmost importance as referring to

the categorical provisions of a law of Venezuela.

Accept, etc.,
E B
For law in regard to entrance of foreign men-of-war into Venezuelan ports

see inclosure with dispatch No. 610, page 546

[Document 515]
Mr. Hill to Mr. Russell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 27, 1901.

No. 432.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 643, of the 14th instant,

inclosing copy of your note to the Venezuelan foreign office explaining the

visit of theMayflowerto Margarita Island, and a copy of the foreign office’s

reply.

The incident appears thus to have been satisfactorily closed.

I am, etc.,
DAVIDJ.HILL,
Acting Secretary.

[Document 516]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,July 28, 1901.

No. 655.]

SIR: Referring to your No. 426 of July 3, 1901, in which it is stated that the

Acting Secretary of the Navy in a communication to the Department of

State states that he is unable to understand how theMayflowerviolated any

of the Venezuelan laws by entering the port of Porlamar, inasmuch as said

port is open for export according to the Hacienda code, I have the honor to

report that I have made this statement to the Government of Venezuela. The

foreign office, replying to my note on the subject states that the law of May

15, 1882, provides that foreign men-of-war can only enter those ports that

are open to foreign commerce, and that according to the Hacienda code the

ports open to foreign commerce are La Guaira, Puerto Cabello, Maracaibo,

Cuidad Bolivar, and Carúpano.

The minister also adds that the Government did not complain of the
Mayflower’svisiting Porlamar, but Pampatar.

I have, etc.,
W WR

[Document 517]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,June 30, 1901.
No. 637.]

SIRI have the honor to inform you that the commission appointed to

examine and pass upon claims for damages arising from the revolution

which placed General Castro in power has completed its work and closed

its sessions.

Sevenhundredandtwenty-fiveclaims,nativesandforeigners,were

presented to the commission, amounting to 16,438,034.73 bolivars. Two

hundred and twelve claims were accepted, amounting to 3,676,202.12

bolivars, and of this amount 1,223,200 bolivars were recognized.

In the list of foreign claimants appear the names of Richard Morgan Olcott

and Felipe Soto Linares, North Americans. Mr. Olcott’s claim is stated to be

100,000 bolivars, all of which is recognized. The 100,000 bolivars due Mr.

Olcott is not in the nature of a claim to be passed upon by the commission,

but is the second payment due in accordance with an agreement entered into

by Mr. Olcott with the Venezuelan Government on the 12th of December,

1900, and it would appear that this is an attempt to pay it with the scrip to

be issued for the debts recognized by this commission. The other North

American mentioned is a Porto Rican, whose claim I know nothing of.

The foreigners whose claims were allowed by the commission are as

follows: Italians, 38; Turks, 1; Germans, 7; Spanish, 2; Colombian, 2;

French, 1; Arab, 1; Dane, 1; North American, 2; total, 55.

In this connection I would state that several of the foreign ministers have

approached me lately and suggested that there should be some combined

action in regard to claims. In accordance with instructions the Venezuelan

Government has been informed several times that our Government could

see no reason for departing from its practice of treating the claims of its

nationalsonlyonadiplomaticbasis,andtheonlyanswertothese

representations was in the case of the claim of Ford Dix, which was

forwarded to the Department.

In case a meeting of the diplomatic corps is called for concerted action I

will cable for specific instructions.

I have, etc.,
WILLIAMW.RUSSELL.

[Document 518]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,July 14, 1901.

No. 646.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that the Government has issued a decree in

reference to the claims allowed by the late claims commission.

The decree states that as the Government is at present short of cash with

which to meet these obligations, the matter is referred to the next Congress

which will decide as to how the claims shall be paid.

In the list I inclosed in a former dispatch you will notice that the largest

number of claims passed on by the commission were from Italians. Italy has

a clause in her treaty with Venezuela by which claims against Venezuela

from Italians must be submitted to the Venezuelan tribunals, and this would

appear as the reason why so many Italian claims were presented to the

commission. “La Voce d’ Italia,” an important Italian journal of this city,

published an article last week stating that, although Italian claims had been

presented to the commission, it had been done with the understanding that

the Italian Government was not bound by the decision of the commission,

and that there could always be an appeal to the legation. Whether this was

an authorized statement is not known, but the Government organ here,

commenting upon the article of “La Voce d’Italia,” made it the occasion for

a violent attack on all foreigners, stating that they were here for no other

purpose than to rifle the national treasury.

I have, etc.,
W WR

[Document 519]
Mr. Hay to Mr. Russell.
DEPARTMENT OFSTATE,
Washington,July 17, 1901.
No. 431.]

SIR: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 637, of the 30th ultimo,

reporting that the commission appointed to examine and pass upon claims

for damages arising from the revolution which placed General Castro in

power has completed its work and closed its sessions.

It is not in accordance with the policy of this Government to act in concert

with foreign governments in protesting against the barring of the claims of

its citizens, but it reserves entire freedom of action, as regards the right to

intervene in support of any of its citizens.

I am, etc.,
JOHNHAY.

[Document 520]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES TOVENEZUELA,
San Juan, P. R.,July 31, 1901.

(Mr. Russell reports that a revolutionary force from Colombia, commanded

by an important Venezuelan, Rangel Garbiras, is invading Venezuela, which

Government has sent 10,000 men to meet the invading force, and that all

individual guaranties under the constitution have been suspended by the

President of Venezuela.)
[Document 521]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,August 3, 1901.

(Mr. Russell inquires if he can take charge of Colombian interests in

Venezuela in the event that the Colombian minister is given his passport.)
Mr. Adee to Mr. Russell.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

D S,
Washington,August 5, 1901.

(Mr. Adee authorizes Mr. Russell to take charge of Colombian interests by

way of good offices, without assuming any representative character, if he is

requested by the Colombian minister to do so and the Government of

Venezuela acquiesces.)
[Document 523]
Mr. Russell to Mr. Hay.
[Telegram.—Paraphrase.]

LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,August 16, 1901.

(Mr. Russell reports that the Colombian minister left Caracas voluntarily,

with the intention of returning, and that he is in charge of the property and

archives of the Colombian legation.)
[Document 524]
Mr. Bowen to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,August 24, 1901.
No. 6.]

SIR: * * * I have the honor to inform you that the Colombian minister left

here on the 12th instant with his secretary of legation. On that day Mr.

Russell informed the Venezuelan Government that he had consented to take

charge of the Colombian legation premises and the archives belonging

thereto. The Venezuelan Government, on the 13th instant, acknowledged

the receipt of Mr. Russell’s letter without giving or withholding therein its

consent. The keys of the Colombian legation were delivered to Mr. Russell

by the Colombian minister on the 12th. Inclosed you will find a copy of the

agreement between the Colombian minister and Mr. Russell in regard to the

duties to be assumed by the latter.

It would appear from the foregoing statements, together with the inclosure,

that no request has been made of this legation to take charge of the interests

of Colombia in Venezuela; and that Mr. Russell, and he only, is authorized

or obliged to take charge of the Colombian legation, property, and archives.

As communication by cablegram or letter between Colombia and Venezuela

may be impossible, I would respectfully suggest that any modification of

necessary instructions should be sent by you to me.

* * * * * * *

I have, etc.,
HERBERTW.BOWEN.
[Inclosure.—Translation.]
Agreement between the Colombian Minister and Mr. Russell.
LEGATION OF COLOMBIA.
Luis Carlos Rico, minister of Colombia, being obliged to go temporarily to

his country, and leaving no chargé d’affaires, in view of the good relations

that exist between his Government and that of the United States, has

decided to leave to the care of the Hon. W. W. Russell, chargé d’affaires of

the latter country, the archives of the legation, which are in two sealed

boxes and in a package also sealed, which contains two copy books. He also

leaves in his care the legation building, its keys, official newspapers, and

various books, which are in the bookcases in the office. The boxes, the

package, the newspapers, and the books shall not leave the care of the

honorable diplomatic representative of the United States, nor shall the

legation seals, except to be delivered to the Government of Colombia or its

representatives in this city.

In witness whereof Luis Carlos Rico, minister of Colombia, and W. W.

Russell, chargé d’affaires of the United States, subscribe in duplicate this

agreement, and seal it with their respective seals.

Caracas, August 11, 1901.
W.W.RUSSELL.

LUISCARLOSRICO.

[Document 525]
The President of Venezuela to the President of the United States.
[Telegram.]

CARACAS,September 21, 1901.

The Venezuelan Government and people join in the mourning of your great

Republic.
CASTRO.

[Document 526]
The President of the United States to the President of Venezuela.
[Telegram.]

EXECUTIVEMANSION,
September 21, 1901.

The sympathy of Venezuelan Government and people is deeply appreciated.
ROOSEVELT.

[Document 527]
Mr. Bowen to Mr. Hay.
LEGATION OF THEUNITEDSTATES,
Caracas,October 19, 1901.
No. 34.]

SIR: I have the honor to report that I attended this afternoon at the German

legation a reception given by the chargé to the German colony at Caracas

and the officers of the German war shipVineta, now at La Guaira. About

250 Germans were present, not counting the band of theVineta. While there

I made a short friendly speech, in which I referred to the pride we

Americans take in the German part of our population, and to the good will

that exists between us and the Germans whenever and wherever we meet.

Whateverweretheshortcomingsofmyspeech,theywereevidently

completely forgotten when I concluded it by raising my glass on high and

proposing the health of the Emperor and his navy. The chargé and the

captain of theVinetareplied very gracefully to my speech, and called for

cheers—first for the President and people of the United States, and then for

the American Navy. The cheers were given with remarkable enthusiasm,

and then the band played the Star-Spangled Banner and the German

national anthem.

I have, etc.,
H WB