1056 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Energy OSD Sarah Jackson, Deputy Assistant Lt. Col Carl Groth, Acting Secretary, International Director, International Policy Development Economic Affairs HUD JCS Donna Shalala, Asst Sec, Col Robert A. Witter, Chief, Policy Development and General Policy Branch Research SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The purpose of the meeting was to review the conclusions of PRM 33 on Science and Technology and Development, and to review U.S. preparations for the U.N. Conference on Science and Technology for Development. PRC action was taken on four items. (C) 1. PRM 33 Conclusions and Follow-up. The PRC noted the conclusions of PRM 33 without discussion. (OMB noted it would send a memo to Christopher outlining its concerns with the analysis done for PRM 33.) The PRC agreed on several follow-up activities: (a) IDCA would organize and coordinate an integrated bilateral program to strengthen S&T capacity in developing countries; (b) an interagency group, jointly-chaired by State and IDCA, would prepare proposals for facilitating LDC access to private technology; and (c) the ISTC would undertake an overall assessment of R&D activities within USG agencies to determine their usefulness to developing countries. (C) 2. UNCSTD—U.S. Proposal. In reviewing the US preparations for the UNCSTD, the PRC endorsed US support for several multilateral initiatives to be raised at the Conference. The PRC noted that the U.S. should support the UNDP proposal to establish a special S&T fund to be administered by UNDP which would target LDC needs in capacity building and education and training; State proposed, but most other agencies opposed, making a specific funding commitment at the conference in view of the limited time to analyze the plan and hold congressional consultation. The PRC also agreed that the following proposals merited US support at UNCSTD: (a) a Council for Mobilization of World Science and Technology, preferably as a function of the UNDP, (b) a generalization of the Tokyo Summit agreement on energy for LDCs,2 (c) doubling of support (in nominal terms) over 5 years for CGIAR agricultural research centers, and (d) remote sensing discussions with satellite operators and users. It was agreed that US bilateral proposals for an S&T information access center and the space shuttle sensor for geothermal exploration require further development. The PRC noted that proposals to be presented or supported by the US at 2 See Document 222.
