principles, and to reinforce them by all appropriate agreements and treaties.
While we desire always to cooperate and to help, we are equally determined
to be independent and free. Bight and truth and justice and humanitarian
efforts will have the moral support of this country all over the world. But
we do not wish to become involved in the political controversies of others.
Nor is the country disposed to become a member of the League of Nations
or to assume the obligations imposed by its covenant.
INTERNATIONAL COURT
America has been one of the foremost nations in advocating tribunals for
the settlement of international disputes of a justiciable character. Our
representatives took a leading part in those conferences which resulted in
the establishment of The Hague Tribunal, and later in providing for a
Permanent Court of International Justice. I believe it would be for the
advantage of this country and helpful to the stability of other nations for us
to adhere to the protocol establishing that court upon the conditions stated
in the recommendation which is now before the Senate, and further that our
country shall not be bound by advisory opinions which may be rendered by
the court upon questions which we have not voluntarily submitted for its
judgment. This court would provide a practical and convenient tribunal
before which we could go voluntarily, but to which we could not be
summoned, for a determination of justiciable questions when they fail to be
resolved by diplomatic negotiations.
DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE
Many times I have expressed my desire to see the work of the Washington
Conference on Limitation of Armaments appropriately supplemented by
further agreements for a further reduction and for the purpose of
diminishing the menace and waste of the competition in preparing
instruments of international war. It has been and is any expectation that we
might hopefully approach other great powers for further conference on this
subject as soon as the carrying out of the present reparation plan as the
established and settled policy of Europe has created a favorable opportunity.
But on account of proposals which have already been made by other
governments for a European conference, it will be necessary to wait to see
what the outcome of their actions may be. I should not wish to propose or
