March 27–December 31, 1979 867 —Timing. Refrain from putting forward a US proposal until Egypt and Israel have developed their positions. This should be done over the next couple of months. The Egyptian proposal should be considerably harder than what we expect an eventual compromise position to be. We should become increasingly involved in the substance of negotiations in October–November. Some positive results need to be shown by early next year. —US Role. The Israelis are trying to narrow our involvement in the talks and to put us on the defensive. Ambassador Strauss will need to establish his credibility with Begin from the outset.3 This may be unpleasant, since Begin has a tendency to test people by using some pretty rough tactics. Strauss cannot let himself be intimidated. On the contrary, he may need to win at least one round with Begin on some issue. I’m not a good enough politician to suggest how this can be done. Hopefully he is. —Concepts. According to the Camp David agreements, we are trying to establish a transitional regime for the West Bank/Gaza built around the idea of a freely elected self-governing authority which will replace the Israeli military government in most areas except security. At this point, we should not be talking about final borders, selfdetermination, a Palestinian state, or any of the other issues that are supposed to be left for a second phase of negotiations. The importance of keeping the focus on the interim character of the next agreement is that it may make it easier for all parties to accept less than their maximum demands. The key ideas should be that no party will be worse off during the transitional period than they are today; final outcomes should not be overtly prejudged; and some positive incentive must exist to move from the present situation into the transitional arrangements. A major objective of this stage is to create a representative Palestinian leadership that will be able to participate in later negotiations (hopefully at the expense of the more extreme elements in the PLO.) —Substance. The most difficult issues in the negotiations will involve land and security arrangements. I have tried to think of plausible negotiated outcomes. The best I can come up with is: —Land. Privately owned land in Israel and in the West Bank/Gaza will be sold on a nondiscriminatory basis. Israel will not retain the right to expropriate private property in the West Bank/Gaza. But the Israeli 3 Strauss was scheduled to travel to the Middle East on his first trip as the President’s Special Representative June 30–July 8. A June 28 memorandum from Aaron to Mondale that summarized the Department’s assessment of priorities for Strauss’s “get-acquainted trip,” indicated that Strauss needed to “stimulate Begin to think of some gesture for his July 10 meeting with Sadat” and should raise the issue of settlements “almost pro forma this time, so that he can say he raised the issue.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 51, Middle East: 3–6/79)
