1955  509
which you gave to me at our meeting of October 27. It has also taken 
into consideration our discussions of subject at our last two meetings. I 
am taking into consideration your statements this morning.
B. It seems to me that we are in agreement that differences between 
our two sides shall not lead to armed conflict. However, as I said at our 
last meeting, this is subject too vitally important to our two peoples and 
to peace of the world to leave to cloudy language that may mean one 
thing to one side and something else to other side. I consider it essential 
that we both not only fully understand each other but that any form of 
words that we use publicly to announce whatever understanding we 
reach be absolutely clear.
C. In studying your draft it does not seem to me this purpose is 
fully accomplished. For example, while you cite in your draft some of 
sound and fundamental principles of international conduct set forth in 
Charter of United Nations, it is quite clear from our discussion that we 
have differing views with respect to applicability of these particular 
principles to situation in Taiwan area. As I noted at our last meeting, 
there are also other United Nations principles which may be consid­
ered also to have applicability to that situation. There are many other 
equally appropriate citations in United Nations Charter and other 
international documents. However, it does not seem to me profitable to 
attempt to cite or include in any public statement upon which we may 
agree all of provisions of United Nations Charter or other documents 
which may be applicable to situation.
D. I do consider it important that we make perfectly clear in what­
ever we agree publicly to say, that without prejudice to our differing 
views or policies with respect to the situation in the Taiwan area, we are 
determined it shall not lead to armed conflict.
E. I think it also desirable that whatever we say we make it clear 
that neither one of us is renouncing right of individual and collective 
self-defense, which is recognized by United Nations Charter.
F. Also, as I said at our last meeting, I do not consider we can con­
dition our enunciation of such fundamental principle upon any partic­
ular form of negotiation between our two countries. I repeat statement 
which I made at our meeting of October 8, that such declarations would 
make it appropriate to pass on to discussion of other matters with bet­
ter hope of coming to constructive conclusions. I have already indi­
cated my willingness to hear your views with respect to what you term 
trade embargo if following our issuance of such declaration there are 
other matters properly within the scope of our talks which you desire to 
bring up, I will also be prepared to discuss them with you.
G. You and I have agreed that our differences in Taiwan area 
should not lead to armed conflict. We are also in agreement that pub­
lic statement should be made in this regard. I have therefore prepared
