602
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
206.
Memorandum From Nicholas Platt of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, April 3, 1979
SUBJECT
The Japanese—What Have They Done for Us Lately?
At the staff meeting March 29 you asked whether the apparently
endless series of high-level consultations with the Japanese have pro-
duced any tangible results. The answer is that they have, although the
Japanese response has at each stage been too late and too little to make
much political impact. When you mark where we were when we began
intensive efforts to solve the trade problem 18 months ago and where
we are now, the substantive progress becomes more measurable.
What Have the Japanese Done?
American pressure during the series of meetings since September
1977 has been focused on encouraging the Japanese to reduce their
massive current account surplus and open their markets wider to im-
ports of foreign manufactures. In response, the Japanese have:
—Adopted stimulative budgets resulting in a growth rate of about
5.5 percent—less than the 7 percent targeted, but higher than any other
major industrialized democracy.
—Allowed the yen to appreciate 25 percent during 1978.
—Voluntarily limited exports to the U.S. of cars, ships, TV’s, tex-
tiles, and steel.
—Allowed imported cars easier pollution standards than applied
to their own.
—Reduced industrial tariffs on items of particular importance to
us like computers and color film.
—Made major long-term concessions on the MTN, including in-
dustrial tariff cuts averaging 44 percent.
—Made major increases in key agricultural quotas like beef, citrus,
and leather.
—Purchased emergency imports of uranium enrichment services
and other commodities worth an estimated $3 billion.
—Increased the volume of manufactured imports at a rate of 10
percent a year.
—Reversed the trend in the current account surplus. If current pro-
jections prove out, the current account surplus for fiscal 1979 (April 1–
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 25, Japan: 4–5/79. Confidential. Sent for information.
A stamped notation reads: “ZB has seen.”
