February 1951–February 1952
167
liminary analysis of the documents seized in the 27 October police raid
on Tudeh’s Tehran provincial headquarters indicated that no Tudeh
plans “of any significance” had been found. I have seen only one report
of Tudeh military preparations, an unconfirmed SO report of some
months back alleging that a terrorist group of 100 men was being orga-
nized in southern Iran. There have been two or three recent reports that
Tudeh recognized that an opportunity to take power might come rela-
tively soon but that it was still unprepared and did not desire a direct
clash at this time with the relatively favorable Mossadeq government.
6. This picture of the development of the Tudeh Party is admit-
tedly based on incomplete information, and our information regarding
specific Tudeh capabilities is even less precise. Even there, I think we
have enough information to reach some reasonably sound conclusions.
Tudeh’s capability for assuming power eventually rests on three in-
terrelated factors in various combinations: its ability to marshal pop-
ular support, either at the polls or in street demonstrations; its purely
military strength vis-a`-vis the security authorities; and its ability to ca-
jole, bribe, or trick other politicians into giving it assistance. These
factors are analyzed below.
a. Popular support. Actual strength of the party and its supporters is
unknown, and existing estimates by US, British and Iranian officials in
Iran range all the way from 4,000 (active membership) to 20–40,000
(possibly including sympathizers). A rough index is provided, how-
ever, by the size of Tudeh demonstrations, which have specifically been
described in some reports as tests of strength. Tudeh demonstrations in
Tehran this year have never had more than about 5,000 specifically
pro-Tudeh participants and have been markedly smaller in the few
provincial centers in which Tudeh demonstrations have taken place.
These figures are markedly below those of 1946, the last occasion on
which Tudeh had any real pretensions of being a mass party. More-
over, it is significant that Tudeh demonstrators have been not only out-
numbered but actually defeated in street fighting by the National Front
element. Tudeh mass support is unlikely to be a critical factor until the
party can take over a significant portion of the floating support now
aligned with the National Front.
b. Military strength vis-a`-vis the security authorities. There have been
no reports of the existence of Tudeh paramilitary organizations and
only scattering reports of preparations for a military phase. This nega-
tive information is obviously inconclusive. There is some reason to be-
lieve, however, that if the party were preparing for imminent military
operations some indications would show up in reports now being re-
ceived. By way of comparison, there have been numerous reports over
the last few years of Soviet agent activities and imminent revolts
among the Kurds. None of these revolts has materialized. There have
