600  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Secretary Baker began the session by noting that the Ministers had 
agreed that Marshal Akhromeyev would proceed first. The U.S. side 
would then respond with Ambassador Bartholomew.
Marshal Akhromeyev thanked the Secretary and stated that the 
working group on arms reductions—­headed by Mr. Bartholomew and 
himself—­had considered in great detail2 two questions: ALCMs and 
SLCMs. Before the sides began to consider specific differences, he would 
report that at the beginning there was a lack of understanding concern-
ing the fact that the Soviet side had allegedly departed from the Moscow 
understandings on these two questions. The Soviet side had clarified that 
there were no departures. With regard to ALCMs, the Moscow agreement 
had dealt with counting rules and the range for SRAM-­type missiles 
not to exceed 600 kms. This package formed the essence of the Moscow 
agreement. However, some questions—­such as counting rules—­were 
outstanding in Moscow and they had remained outstanding.
Akhromeyev continued that there were four differences on ALCMs 
from Moscow. First, there was no common understanding on range 
threshold to ensure that SRAM-­type missiles did not have a range 
greater than 600 kms. Second, a difference still remained on counting 
ALCMs on future types of heavy bombers. The Soviet side believed 
that, since these were future bombers, the counting rule should be “as 
equipped”; the U.S. side believed the counting rule should be similar 
to that for existing U.S. bombers, i.e. they would count as 10 but have 
a capability of 20.
Akhromeyev said the third difference related to counting heavy 
bombers within the 1600 limit. In Moscow the sides had agreed the 
number of bombers in the 1600 limit could be sliding, that is, the num-
ber could change within certain limits. This remained the same. But 
in Moscow the U.S. side had said that the floating number would not 
be limited by an upper limit, although the Soviet Union would have 
40% more bombers than the United States. The Soviet side believed the 
upper limit had to be limited but did not respond to this problem in 
Moscow. After having studied this, the Soviet side believed that the 
upper number must be limited, say at 115. But the U.S. side had not 
expressed a view.
Akhromeyev noted that the fourth difference concerned counting 
non-­nuclear-­armed heavy bombers that could be excluded from the 
1600 limit. The Soviet position was to count them in the 1600 limit; the 
U.S. position was that 115 such bombers could be outside the 1600 limit. 
These were the differences on ALCMs.
Turning to SLCMs, Akhromeyev asserted that two differences 
remained as before. But there had also been a dramatic misunderstanding; 
2 See Documents 99 and 100.
