Venezuela  1225
dictatorships in the Caribbean area. There is also a general resentment of 
U.S. restrictions on the importation of Venezuelan oil, which have a direct 
effect upon Venezuela’s oil-­based economy. The government, however, 
and any likely successor government, will desire to maintain friendly rela-
tions with the United States, because of the close economic ties between 
the two countries and in order to facilitate readjustment of the division of 
petroleum profits. Even so, Venezuelans will remain highly sensitive to any 
apparent U.S. lack of regard for Venezuelan democracy and sovereignty.
55. If the present regime in Venezuela or an elected successor 
should be overthrown by a military coup, the event would be widely 
interpreted, in Venezuela and throughout Latin America, as the result 
of U.S. connivance and as confirmation of the supposed U.S. preference 
for dictatorships in the area.12
12 An accompanying map of Venezuela is not printed.
VE–14.	
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, 
Washington, September 24, 19581

Washington, September 4, 1958.
SUBJECT
Venezuelan Foreign Minister’s Call on Secretary
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
Dr. Rene de Sola, Foreign Minister of Venezuela
Mr. Rubottom
The Secretary met with the Venezuelan Foreign Minister in an office 
outside the Conference Room prior to this morning’s meeting of the 
Foreign Ministers of the American Republics.2 The Foreign Minister said 
that he wished simply to call to the Secretary’s attention the following:
1. The Venezuelan Government is under great pressure to revise the 
list of items in which the United States obtained concessions of the 1952 
revised trade agreement, such as milk and cigarettes. He feels that the 
volume of trade in these items is relatively small and that they would 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.13/9–2458. Confidential. Drafted by 
Rubottom.
2 The ministers held an informal meeting on September 23–24 to discuss improved 
measures for hemispheric economic cooperation.
