Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 551 should answer this question. From a policy standpoint, one point is obvious—the Carter Administration has recognized the reality of these new alignments in Asia and has fashioned its policy accordingly. U.S. policy is now joined with the present and future, not the past. 2. In terms of numbers, the greatest change has occurred in Africa. Taking into account the explosion of new nations, there have been 23 alignments or realignments over the past 25 years. The end to this change is not in sight. 3. The greatest potential area of change is in the “arc of instability.” You will note a question mark by Iran on the 1979 map, as well as its white coloration. That same question mark could be applied to the region. 4. The area of least change—with the obvious exception of Europe—has been the Western hemisphere, although to our south there has been a slight trend toward less alignment with the U.S. Given the history of the region—and the need to set U.S.-Latin relations on a more mature basis for the future—this is probably a positive development (up to a point). 5. With respect to worldwide trends, the United States has reason to be optimistic; the Soviets less so. Again, the changing political alignment of the PRC is largely responsible for this. In addition, our region of the world is relatively stable; the Soviet Union’s is not. The next few years, however, will be critical ones. How the conflicts in the Middle East, the “arc of instability,” and Southern Africa are resolved will go a long way toward determining the alignments of the future. As you have often mentioned, the world today is undergoing tremendous change—demographic, social, economic and political. The attached maps reflect the surface manifestations of these changes. Far more interesting would be a map that depicted the undercurrents of change. In lieu of such a map, studies such as the one you recently requested on the international implications of Islamic fundamentalism will be essential.12 12 Not found.
