August 8–September 17, 1978 109 Kamel wondered if we are not moving too fast. Ghorbal asked if we have heard anything from the Israelis which might warrant an accelerated schedule. The Secretary said the Israelis have not presented anything new. At Kamel’s request, the Secretary undertook to inform President Carter of the Egyptian Foreign Minister’s view that it might be wise to proceed more leisurely. The Secretary noted, however, the two Presidents may already have decided on the schedule.2 Camp David Talks The Secretary invited Kamel to present any points that the Egyptians might wish to make. Kamel said that Sadat is coming to Camp David with an “open heart” and a willingness to listen to “the other party” and to any ideas that President Carter might have. The only point that should be borne in mind is that no concessions should be asked in terms of territory and sovereignty. If there is a positive outcome, Kamel noted, it should bring in the other parties. Hussein should be able to participate and the peace process would have Saudi blessing. Kamel noted that Sadat sees the Camp David meeting as “crucial and very important.” Unless some positive outcome is reached, it will be difficult to continue. It will undermine Sadat’s position in the Arab world. Sadat, Kamel noted, has stated several times that whatever the outcome of the Camp David meeting, he will get together with the Arabs and report. Sadat is thinking of a mini-summit. The Secretary asked what Sadat has in mind in terms of limitation of numbers. Kamel observed that most of the Arabs are opposed to the peace process because they believe that the Israelis are not changing their attitudes. The Saudis believe that it is imperative that Sadat be supported by other Arab elements. Any Arab Summit or mini-summit does not mean a shift from the peace effort. This will continue on the basis of the decision made at Rabat to search for peace. Asked who might attend such a mini-summit, Kamel thought the Jordanians, Saudis and, hopefully, the Syrians. Asked about the likelihood of Syrian participation, Kamel noted that this will depend upon what comes out of Camp David. The Saudis will tackle the Syrians on this matter. The Secretary asked about the present state of Egyptian-Syrian relations. Kamel noted these are very negative. There are no permanent channels of regular contact. Sometimes the Syrian UN Representative Shoufi meets with Egyptian Permanent Representative Abdul Meguid. Nevertheless, what the Egyptians are hearing about Assad’s positions is encouraging. Kamel noted, however, that Assad’s positions tend not to be constant. The Saudis believe that things can be worked out with 2 See footnote 7, Document 28.
