Covert and Overt Operations 881 to be worked out among Cutler, Treasury and Justice. Dr. Brzezinski noted that it also affected our negotiating position on the hostages. (S) 332. Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to President Carter1 Washington, August 1, 1980 SUBJECT A Strategy for the New Phase in Iran The Issue The purpose of this memorandum is to report to you as Chairman of the PRC the views and recommendations from the PRC meeting on Iran.2 A draft of this memo and the attached options paper (“Strategy for Iran—The Next Two Months”) were circulated before the PRC as a basis for discussion.3 The purpose of this exercise is to establish a strategy for approaching the new situation in Iran which you have described—the functioning of the new parliament, the formation of a government, the focus of the parliament’s attention on the hostage issue, Queen’s release and the end of Ramadan. Some elements of this new situation already exist; others may come fully into play in a couple of weeks; still others may not jell for a month or more. The strategy discussed incorporates the steps you have already directed as well as other possible initiatives. The attached options paper analyzes what we have done since you approved the last strategy paper early in May4 (pp. 1–5), the present trends in Iran (pp. 6–8), and the full range of options available to us 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 10. Secret; Sensitive. Brzezinski returned a copy of this memorandum to Muskie with Carter’s marginalia. He informed Muskie that Carter’s marginal notes were “on almost every page,” conveying the President’s feeling that the United States should be moving “more aggressively” on a “wide front.” Brzezinski asked Muskie to let him know if he could be helpful in meeting Carter’s requests. (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Muskie, August 5; Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran 1980–81) 2 See Document 331. 3 See footnote 2, Document 331. 4 Document 279.
