Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1117 7. Nazarkin said the Soviet side was prepared to solve the issue of former and retired types on the basis of the U.S. proposal with “some changes.” The Soviet side would be ready to provide its formal proposals soon. 8. Nazarkin said the Soviet side found the contents of a proposed U.S. unilateral statement on the throw-weight of the SS–N–23, which Brooks had provided the previous week,2 “totally unacceptable.” General Ladygin insisted that the issue had been completely settled in Washington based on personal assurances of Secretary Baker. (Comment: Ladygin was wrong. While the U.S. side accepted Soviet throw-weight values, it did not discuss the characterization of the SS–N–23 as a type 1(B) missile under the throw-weight protocol. The Soviet side had earlier said that the U.S. side’s statement was acceptable, and even helpful. Nazarkin confirmed subsequently that it was the arrival of Ladygin which led to the change in the Soviet position. End Comment.) 9. Brooks and Nazarkin agreed that the SS–N–17 would be deleted from the list of existing types (since it would not exist at the time of treaty signature), but retained in the MOU (since it had existed in September 1990). 10. Brooks noted that a listing of letters to be exchanged between the sides prepared by Soviet legal advisor Kalinken had implied that the letter on the phasing of reductions of heavy ICBMs was not legally binding. Brooks asked for confirmation that the Soviet side continued to regard the exchange of letters on the reduction of heavy ICBMs as legally binding. Nazarkin said that the Soviet side did consider the letters legally binding. Nazarkin stressed that he could not, however, alter the texts to make the fact clear. 11. Brooks, drawing on prepared talking points which he then handed over,3 suggested that the negotiating record was confused with respect to the issue of what did and did not constitute force majeure. Rather than seek to clarify the record, the U.S. side proposed a voluntary notification when a party was unable to comply with the requirements of the treaty for any reason. Such a notification would not excuse the violation, unless the other party agreed, but could help explain the circumstances and mitigate any political consequences. Nazarkin said he would study the paper. 12. Brooks said that he wished to raise an issue that he would have raised with Deputy Foreign Minister Obukhov had Obukhov come to Geneva. On the last night of the Washington ministerial, the Soviet side 2 See Document 243. 3 Not found.
