Chapter 4, February–April 1990 647 then communicate to the ministry and if necessary follow up with envoys. Akhromeyev: I could venture to try to write up the package by 6:00. I don’t want to pledge anything, it wouldn’t be any official communication. Bartholomew: Well, the problem of trying to do it that quickly even with the best will in the world, we’re not going to work this out in twenty minutes. Baker: Let the two of them compile a list of agreed and disagreed items. Akhromeyev: Well, if you’re that skeptical, I could still try to put something together. Baker: Give us a package you would propose. We’ve got an entire delegation who thought we were down to three issues. If you’re trying to put together a package, I’ve got to reconvene our Defense and our NSC people and in the next three hours it’s going to be hard to do that. I think what might be most useful would be for you to lay out on the three issues that are outstanding what your position would be if you got a lot of what you want on those issues and how it would affect the other eight issues that you’ve now identified. If you come back with something like this, I could surface that in our delegation and we’ll see if I can get approval on going that way. Akhromeyev: Well, if we follow the Secretary’s approach, then we should go back to Moscow and present you within a week with a formal package. Baker: It doesn’t have to be formal. Shevardnadze: We will go back to Moscow, we’ll think again and consult. But one thing we need to be clear about. Do we want an agreement or do we want it to be postponed? I don’t know the views of the others in my delegation. I don’t think it would be a disaster if we don’t sign it. But I do know what the instructions of both of our Presidents were and therefore I think we ought to find a compromise. Baker: I know our President wants to be in a position where we settle all the major issues by the Summit. Certainly the President expects that. Frankly, I am rather pessimistic but I’m willing to work hard and set up a new process and expand our contacts between now and May. Shevardnadze: This is precisely what I propose that we do and that should be our main work. Let’s clear away the underbrush and get it done before your visit. We’ll come back to you with our views in about a week’s time and we’ll send you our suggestions. We won’t do it in any formal way. End Conversation
