468
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
For that reason, I have been searching for some way to reach out
a friendly hand without either embarrassing him or compromising our
own posture.
Possibly an oral message which could be given to him from you
through the Swiss ambassador which would contain these elements or
some combination of them:
—An expression of goodwill
—Mutual interest to resolve our differences
—We have agreed to reciprocal steps, but if the President ever
decided to move unilaterally on resolving the hostage situation, we
would proceed with the reciprocal steps agreed upon and be reasonable
in resolving the other issues which are important to both countries
—If direct private contact with the President (Bani-Sadr) is ever
desired, you would be willing to send an emissary to Tehran to meet
secretly with him
There may be a different/better way to do this, but it seems that
we need to reinforce whatever desire he may have to proceed to resolve
the hostage situation.
179.
Telegram From the British Embassy in the United States to
the Department of State1
Washington, February 10, 1980, 1712Z
Please pass following to Iran Task Force, Operations Centre, State
Dept. Following received from British Embassy Tehran. Begins:
Secret. Fm: Tehran 100805Z Feb 80. To: Immediate FCO. Telegram
Number 146 of 10 February. Info Immediate Washington.
MIPT: US Embassy—Laingen.
1. The Danish Ambassador was telephoned on Friday, and again
yesterday afternoon2 by Howland, one of Laingen’s companions in the
MFA. Howland was hurried and furtive and was clearly making the
call clandestinely. He said that Laingen had been told officially that
all his contacts with the outside world (but the Danish Ambassador is
not sure if this includes newspapers and radio) were being cut in
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Box 1, Iran NODIS Cables
Feb 1980. Secret; UK Secret; Nodis; Immediate.
2 February 8 and 9.
