320 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II enants. The view that the Iranian draft is intended to have these unfortunate results is reinforced by the co-sponsors’ rejection of most of the proposed Western amendments designed to mitigate and balance the text between references to both mass violations and violations of the person. To the argument set out under option 2 that “mass and flagrant” is the same standard as the “consistent pattern of gross violations” referred to in Resolution 15034 and U.S. legislation, it need only be pointed out that U.S. legislation speaks of such violations as torture, cruel or degrading punishment or other flagrant denial of the right to “life, liberty and the security of the person.” The thrust of U.S. legislation is thus to protect the person and a consistent pattern of violations of the rights of the person is not equivalent to the collective, or “mass” rights which are the priority aim of the Iranian resolution. The co-sponsors’ rejection of proposed amendments makes this distinction clear. (Proposed amendments sent to USUN are contained in cables at Tab 2.)5 (2) Given the above, and the recognized influence of the Iranian resolution on the mandate of any eventual High Commissioner for Human Rights, the U.S. must register the strongest possible disagreement with the Iranian draft, which, particularly if adopted by consensus, would skewer the High Commissioner’s mandate so as to have that Office become another advocate of the NIEO and other favorite causes of the G–77 (colonialism, occupation, self-determination and “full sovereignty over wealth and natural resources”—the last being the code term for confiscation of foreign property), as well as causes of clear human rights concern, notably apartheid and racial discrimination. It should be noted that the NIEO is considered necessary not for the realization of full human rights but even for their promotion. The High Commissioner would thus be required to promote the NIEO as an element of the promotion of human rights. (3) U.S. participation in a consensus for the Iranian resolution would provoke Congressional and other supporters of human rights who would see in this a marked retreat from the Administration’s position on individual human rights. This might stimulate more mandatory legislative structures, such as the recent Long amendments to the IFI legislation. Moreover, right-wing forces in the United States already are mounting a mail campaign against Senate advice and consent to ratification of the UN human rights Covenants on the ground that they do not incorporate the protection of private property of the Universal 4 See footnote 3, Document 2. 5 Tab 2, attached but not printed, contains copies of telegram 273588 to USUN, November 15; telegram 275944 to USUN, November 17; telegram 5082 from USUN, November 30; and telegram 5020 from USUN, November 26.
