Uruguay 1139 Among these problems the following specific irritants have rendered our relations most difficult. Our countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool tops, imposed in 1953, when it was determined that Uruguayan exchange afforded a subsidy to tops exporters, has still to be removed, not necessarily because the subsidy still exists, but because the Uruguayans have failed to maintain a relatively stationary set of rates under which they could establish statistically that the duty is no longer justified. Another source of irritation to Uruguay has been our P.L. 480 Program, which, whether in actual practice it has harmed Uruguay’s experts or not, has provided a convenient whipping boy. Uruguayan leaders have thus been reluctant to accept a program for their country, but in the past year somewhat hesitantly sought Congressional authority to enter an agreement. The bill remains in Congress, with prospects for immediate passage poor. What the Uruguayan economy clearly needs is a series of domestic reforms coupled with a regime of austerity internationally, the whole to be accompanied by a stabilization program. Recognizing the economic need for these steps, but unwilling to face the political price, Uruguayan officials have several times expressed their guarded desire for a sizable United States loan, and have not hidden their pique that one has somehow not been forthcoming. They have never, however, defined their desires in terms of specific projects. The fact that Uruguay has been unable to unwilling to complete its membership in the IMF, and that, even if it did, Congressional ratification of a Government-­to- Government loan would be most difficult to obtain, seem insufficient to relieve us, in some Uruguayan eyes, of our imagined responsibility in this field. Uruguayans have also been critical of our failure to implement three tariff concessions (canned meat, pickled meat, and meat extract) negotiated under GATT in 1949. While Uruguay delayed several years in ratifying these negotiations, and while Uruguay has subsequently violated some of its own commitments, the fact nevertheless remains that Uruguayans believe that we have legal and moral obligations either to proclaim the items or to proceed to re-­negotiation. To counteract this unhappy combination of circumstances, ARA has recently been holding discussions with Uruguayan Ambassador Lacarte with the object of exploring what could be done to increase economic cooperation between the two countries. The Ambassador has followed up these talks with full discussions of potential assistance at the Eximbank, the IBRD, the DLF, and ICA. He now has an excellent idea of just what, from the point of view not only of legal restrictions but also of policy, these institutions can and cannot do in relation to the present Uruguayan situation. This he is reporting to his Government. Equally important, perhaps, will be his report to the effect that not only
