International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 71 it clear that the chances for Congressional approval for this approach are dim. 3. Trade—MTN and Protectionism There is a general fear of protectionism and agreement in principle that the Summit is a good opportunity for the Heads of State to counteract the trend. There is, however, no clear view on what specifically should be done beyond a general endorsement of the value of trade liberalization. Denis Healey implied that the economically stronger countries should liberalize more than the weaker ones, a view which I strongly rejected and which was not supported by other Ministers. Beyond that, a general consensus emerged on the need to focus the MTN importantly on new agreements to limit export subsidization.4 It is felt that this is the new form which protectionism takes around the world and that formal agreement on this question within or parallel with the MTN is perhaps as important as agreement on further tariff reductions and non-tariff barrier commitments. 4. Relations with LDCs There was fairly general agreement on a common approach on Commodity Agreements and on a cautious though positive attitude toward exploring sensible Common Fund5 ideas. I went clearly on record as opposing the German “Stabex” scheme,6 favoring instead the Commodity Agreement Common Fund or other IMF linked approach. Our viewpoint is likely to prevail although we will hear more about Stabex at the Summit. There was general agreement on the commitment to the $1 billion added aid program to be endorsed by the Summit. 5. Portugal The Germans and others signaled their basic sympathies to doing something for Portugal. Chancellor Schmidt will wish to negotiate his country’s commitment with you at the Summit. The other EEC members and the Japanese will come in to varying degrees, following the lead of what the two of you decide. 4 Carter underlined the phrase “export subsidization.” 5 At the end of UNCTAD’s fourth session (UNCTAD IV) in Nairobi in May 1976, it agreed to consider the establishment of a Common Fund to finance a buffer stock program designed to smooth out primary commodity price fluctuations. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Documents 304–306. 6 On February 28, 1975, the EC and 46 LDCs signed the Lome´ Convention, which includes provisions for an earnings stabilization fund for LDC primary commodity exports, known as Stabex, and other development assistance initiatives.
