Haiti 745 determine whether the United States should comply with this request. If the Haitian Government is given an affirmative answer, a supplementary question arises: should we make assignment of the mission subject to certain provisos, notably agreement by President Duvalier to provide satisfactory operation conditions for the mission and to take measures designed to allay current political tensions? Background: President Duvalier requested a Marine Corps Training Mission in late March and has become doubly anxious to have the mission arrive since the revolutionary attempt against his government on July 29. He desires the mission to bring about a permanent improvement in the status and sense of responsibility of the Haitian army as well as to help stabilize his Government and as evidence of U.S. support. A Marine Corps Survey Team which visited Haiti from May 18 to 31 concluded that there is a definite need for a military mission to improve the efficiency and capability of the Haitian army, and to promote stability within the Haitian army and in the Republic of Haiti itself. It recommended that a fairly large mission be sent (an initial minimum of 30 members to be increased to 50) as that advice could be given both at headquarters and field levels. The General Staff of the Haitian army has stated that Haiti’s economy could not support a mission of the recommended size but President Duvalier has privately assured us that the necessary funds would be forthcoming. Discussion: The charge that the U.S. supports Latin American dictators may be brought against us if we send a Marine Training Mission to Haiti. Duvalier’s government has taken on many of the characteristics of a dictatorship; abuses by the secret police, destruction of newspaper plants, arrests of labor leaders and journalists, persecution of political opponents, arbitrary arrests and prolonged imprisonment without trial. However, during the attempted coup on July 29 there was no disaffection in the Haitian army or the general population and the ability to hold power for the foreseeable future whether or not we send a training mission. He justifies his strong-arm tactics on grounds that the opposition is plotting his own violent overthrow and he cites the July 29 attempted coup as proof. Possible criticism of the Marine training mission as U.S. intvervention in Haiti is to be expected from various sources including the USSR propaganda apparatus which voiced this criticism against the recent brief protection of the Guantanamo Base water supply by 60 Marines. Moscow Radio has already taken the line that the involvement of Americans in the attempted coup on July 29 is evidence of U.S. intervention against the Duvalier government. The fact that President Duvalier has specifically
