476  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
With respect to the objective of preventing an unfavorable postwar 
nuclear force balance, the debate turns on what constitutes a balance and on 
the best means for achieving it. Recent changes in the strategic balance 
pose us with a dilemma—­how much of our force should we use in an 
effort to erode the Soviet nuclear threat and how much do we hold 
in reserve to secure a post-­war balance? A substantial portion of the 
forces available for SIOP [less than 1 line not declassified] is used for the 
counter-­nuclear mission even though relatively low damage expectan-
cies are anticipated. Allocating additional weapons with current capa-
bilities would not be productive. Indeed a considerable number of the 
weapons now used are SLBMs which have low DEs [less than 1 line not 
declassified] against hard Soviet missile silos. Furthermore, as ICBMs, 
which have a better hard target capability, become more vulnerable to 
attack, withholding them for use in other missions may only result in 
their loss. Some argue that we should allocate only weapons with the 
best hard target capability to the nuclear threat and not allocate SLBM 
weapons with low DEs to hard targets. Others argue that the present 
scheme of cross-­targeting is a hedge against failure of one leg of the 
TRIAD, and that given uncertainties as to what actually would kill a 
silo (or interfere with reload and force reconstitution), we should con-
tinue to allocate [less than 1 line not declassified] to each silo, (even if some 
have low DEs against the silo itself) at least as long as we have sufficient 
weapons.
Because a substantial portion of the Soviet nuclear threat is hard, a major 
issue is how much and what kind of capability is required for this targeting 
objective. This is an area in which programmed force changes—­and 
acquisition decisions—­and employment policy are closely linked. For 
example, the large ALCM force that will be available by the mid-80’s 
will have the accuracy for a considerable counter-­silo potential if ALCM 
penetrability is high. The US also faces basic decisions about the char-
acteristics of future ICBM and SLBM forces in which the requirement 
for Quick Reaction Hard Target Capability (QRHTC) is a driving factor.
From the standpoint of targeting it seems clear that we ought to 
retain a substantial hard target capability. Such a capability is required 
not only to be able to attack Soviet ICBM silos effectively, but also for 
the growing number of hardened C3 facilities and some other hardened 
installations. Improved HTC would enable us to reallocate weapons 
with low DEs against hard targets to other missions. Whether a sub-
stantial portion of our HTC needs to have a rapid response capability 
cannot be determined on targeting considerations alone. The targeting 
requirements for rapid responses are very scenario dependent. For 
example, if Soviet forces are alert when the US launches a counter-
force attack the probability of their preemption or launch under attack 
is high, and the difference in response time between a few hours and
