National Security Policy 979 the USSR, while viewed in part as the result of Soviet power gains, has generally been welcomed. The President’s visits abroad have done much to evidence US concern for peace and for the welfare of both its major allies and underdeveloped nations. On the Bloc side, the exter­ nal programs of the USSR have met with checks, and the behavior of Communist China has led to wider recognition, especially in Asia, of the value of the US’s countervailing power. 82. Yet the future of US prestige is by no means assured. Since the US will still appear as the principal guarantor of the Free World against the power of the USSR and Communist China, indications that the US was not maintaining a firm and effective military and political posture would lead to a weakening of the resolve of other free nations and encourage them to seek various forms of accommodation. 83. The present period of high-­level negotiations confronts the US both with opportunities and with problems, in maintaining the firm­ ness and cohesion of its major alliances and in keeping before the world a picture of the US as a nation genuinely seeking honorable adjustments through peaceful means. Though the tendency to judge the US by more exacting standards than the USSR is less widespread than in the past, it remains true that our allies and other major free nations expect from the US a combination of flexibility and firmness that is often not realis­ tically attainable. 84. Problems of the US Strategic Posture. The future relationship between the nuclear striking power of the US and that of the USSR is difficult to predict at present, depending as it does on a wide range of technological and policy factors on both sides. In general, however, the growth of Soviet ICBM capabilities is creating a serious problem for the US in maintaining among other Free World nations confidence in US willingness to bring its strategic nuclear capabilities to bear as a pro­ tection for such nations. Particularly in Western Europe, there are signs that this confidence has already been shaken. 85. At the same time, despite the acceptance of reliance on nuclear weapons for basic deterrent purposes, there is strong worldwide sen­ timent against the use of such weapons, particularly in limited con­ flicts. We believe that our major allies, at least, will probably continue to support the use of Western (essentially US) nuclear weapons in situations of clearly major consequence, such as Bloc invasion of the NATO area. But in situations of apparently lesser consequence, any US use or threat of nuclear weapons will encounter strong opposition from a world opinion that will increasingly include major US allies
