Chapter 2, January–June 1989 261 Decision22 START—Nondeployed Missiles (NDMs) Numerical Limits on Nondeployed Missiles. The basic issue is whether and how to limit nondeployed ICBMs and SLBMs.23 Discussion Non-­deployed missiles can pose a threat if used to reload mobile or fixed launchers, or used on makeshift above-­ground launchers erected in a crisis. All agree that mobile missiles and missiles that are designed to be easily transported pose the most significant threat. Options 1 and 2 are more conservative in attempting to capture a broad range of non-­ deployed missiles that might be launched in a crisis. Options 3 and 4 concentrate on constraining Soviet mobile-­capable missiles that concern us most. The JCS favor Option 6 (or Option 5 as a fallback), arguing that numerical limits low enough to constrain the Soviets are not worth the price in terms of forcing U.S. production stretch-­outs, raising procurement costs significantly, and affecting other “operational support” practices. The following options range from including numerical NDM limits on most ballistic missiles to a position that would not numerically limit any NDMs. Option 1. Require numerical limits on nondeployed mobile ICBMs, heavy ICBMs, modern ICBMs (including SS-17 and 19), and all future types of ICBMs or SLBMs. (favored by OSD and Ambassador Rowny) Includes the SS-17, 18, 19, 24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and all future systems; intended to avoid inclusion of the D–5. Option 2. Require numerical limits on nondeployed mobile ICBMs, heavy ICBMs, and modern ICBMs (excluding SS-17 and 19). (Current position) Includes SS-18, 24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future systems meeting the “modern ICBM” definition. Option 3. Require numerical limits on nondeployed mobile ICBMs and modern ICBMs and SLBMs (excluding SS-17 and SS-19). (favored by ACDA.) Includes SS-24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future modern SLBMs or ICBMs. 22 Bush indicated his approval. 23 Bush drew two underlines beneath “ICBMs” and “SLBMs.”
