Summaries of Compilations  LXXXVII
of Canadian oil overland to the United States would help to maintain 
Canadian waterborne imports of Venezuelan oil. (VE–29) At the end of 
1960, President Eisenhower, at the urging of Secretary of the Interior 
Fred Seaton and over the protests of the Department of State, made a 
change to the Executive order giving Seaton power to adjust oil imports 
more closely to domestic consumption, thus posing the possibility of 
further reduction in Venezuela’s sales. (VE–53)
While insisting on U.S. freedom of action with regard to the oil quo-
tas, U.S. officials gave some thought to means of assisting Venezuela eco-
nomically. With its large revenues from oil, Venezuela was not as starved 
for foreign exchange as many developing countries. Nonetheless, 
Venezuelan reserves plummeted in 1958–1959 in response to decreas-
ing worldwide demand for oil—­the same consideration which led to 
the tightening of U.S. import quotas—­and Venezuela was forced to 
declare quantitative restrictions on luxury items, and eventually full 
exchange controls. The United States supported these moves as well 
as Venezuela’s increased willingness to work with the International 
Monetary Fund. (VE–38, 39, 47) The Department of State worked to keep 
technical assistance programs alive, while the Embassy urged toward 
the end of 1960 that if Venezuela’s inexperience in applying for assis-
tance made it impossible for it to meet normal economic criteria, then 
assistance should be provided on political grounds. (VE–36, 37, 47)
Pérez residence in the United States was deeply resented by 
Venezuelans, and may have stimulated some of the violence which 
marred Vice President Nixon’s trip to Venezuela in May 1958. In March 
1959, the Immigration and Naturalization Service issued an expulsion 
order against Pérez, who then pursued legal remedies. The Department 
of State acquiesced in the ruling, but its officials complained that the 
Department had not been consulted. (VE–24) In August, the Venezuelan 
Government informed the Department that it would ask for extradi-
tion on charges of murder and embezzlement, and late in the month 
U.S. authorities carried out a preventive arrest. Venezuela filed a for-
mal extradition petition in September, and extradition procedures were 
completed in August 1963.
One of President Betancourt’s overriding objectives was to rally 
hemisphere opinion against Generalissimo Hector Trujillo Molina of 
the Dominican Republic, who had harassed him and other democratic 
leaders in exile and who was probably behind an assassination attempt 
against Betancourt in June 1960. In August 1960, Venezuela succeeded 
in obtaining a unanimous vote at the Sixth Meeting of Consultation 
of the American Ministers, held in San José, Costa Rica, condemning 
Dominican acts of aggression and intervention. The Foreign Ministers 
resolved to break diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic 
and also to interrupt partially economic relations with it. (VE–43, 46)
