what the outcome of the investigations into the details connected therewith
may be. I shall not attempt to solicit Your Excellency’s final decision
concerning the advisability of an American participation in said loan, so
long as you are not fully convinced that the same is not incompatible with
the protection of prospective American investors and with the general
policy laid down by your Government in regard to foreign loans and
investments.
There are strong reasons for apprehension however that more than usual
delay may be experienced (the more so as the investigations under way on
both sides seem to assume the form of a painstaking scrutiny) and that
Congress may close its session before termination of the inquiry, or, at least,
enter into such an advanced period when pressure of other urgent business
will exclude the passing of a bill dealing with deferment of lien. In that case
Austrian reconstruction would come to a standstill before a mere technical
obstacle, even if the results of the examinations under way may
consequently prove satisfactory.
On behalf of my Government I, therefore, entreat Your Excellency to kindly
cause a legislative measure authorizing deferment of lien to be urgently
recommended to Congress and to postpone judgement as to the merits of
the Austrian loan to a time when the question of American participation
comes up for decision. In complying with this petition Your Excellency by
no means could jeopardize American interests as an authorization by
Congress does not necessarily entail an obligation on the part of the
Secretary of the Treasury to actually defer the lien, if he should not see fit to
do so and, as even after deferment of lien the Department of State, as we
understand, is in a position to effectively dissuade American capital from
participation.
Briefly recapitulating my arguments I beg to request Your Excellency to
take the following points into a favorable consideration: 1.) The undisputed
necessity of an investment loan for Austria; 2.) The intention of having this
loan floated in Europe and not only in the United States; 3.) The fact that a
failure on the part of the United States in joining all our other creditors in
the deferment of lien would kill the entire loan project, not only here but
also in Europe; 4.) The deferment of lien by the United States does not
