64
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
15.
Memorandum From the Chief of the Plans Staff, Near East
and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not
declassified]) to the Acting Chief of the Policy, Plans and
Review Section, Office of Policy Coordination, Directorate of
Plans, Central Intelligence Agency ([name not declassified])1
Washington, April 12, 1951.
SUBJECT
Comments on your memorandum, “The Limitations of Diplomacy,” dated 13
March 19512
1. Iran is an interesting case in the context of the attached corre-
spondence. It should be noted at the outset, however, that Iran does not
fall into the category of countries we have helped too lavishly. We have
in fact given the Iranians very little; they feel this keenly in view of
what we have done for Greece and Turkey, and are genuinely skeptical
of the sincerity of our interest in Iran. Moreover, Iran is threatened with
an actual Soviet invasion (as distinct from an indirect, Soviet-inspired
invasion). So it would be somewhat unrealistic to expect Iran to throw
itself lock, stock, and barrel into the Western camp—particularly in the
absence of military commitments from us.
2. These factors necessarily limit the objectives of a covert pro-
gram. The best we can hope for is to prevent Iran’s falling into Soviet
hands during the cold war period. To this end we are taking various
steps designed to strengthen the present (or any anti-Soviet) regime; to
divide, weaken, and discredit the pro-Soviet Tudeh Party and other
hostile elements; to do the same respecting the intensely nationalistic
and chauvinistic elements which, wittingly or unwittingly, serve Soviet
ends by creating instability; and, in the long run, to bring to Iran a
measure of stability. There is no need at this time to establish an Oppo-
sition in the commonly accepted meaning of that word. We are, how-
ever, actively investigating the possibility of establishing an energetic
progressive party designed to attract the best elements from various
factions (including leftists) and to push the economic and political re-
forms necessary to make the people less vulnerable to the blandish-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO–IMS Files, Job 80–01795R, Box 4, Folder
8, Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) History 1Apr1951–15Apr1951. Top Secret. Drafted
and signed by the Chief of the Plans Staff.
2 Not found.
