Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1039
to the Secretary that, at the moment, Moscow was responding more 
rapidly than Washington. Brooks had also noted, however, that the 
Soviet side had made it clear that in early June a reassessment would 
be conducted. If the Soviet side concluded that the U.S. side was not 
serious, the Soviet side, for both political and financial reasons, would 
reconsider whether continued negotiations were desirable.
8. In response, Brooks continued, Secretary Baker had said that 
both he and the president were committed to completing START this 
summer. The removal of the obstacles now blocking CFE implementa-
tion, was, however, a prerequisite. The U.S. side could not be expected 
to sign START while there was still a question as to whether signing 
treaties with the Soviet Union meant anything. Clearly, the Soviet side 
needed to understand that it could not retroactively alter the plain 
meaning of a signed treaty. Once CFE was resolved, however, Secretary 
Baker seemed confident that START would move rapidly.
9. Obukhov said that he was heartened by what Brooks said, 
but that the Soviet side needed not just political rhetoric but practical 
results. The Soviet initiative had been aimed at closing issues. The U.S. 
side, however, seemed intent on reopening issues and raising complex 
problems. For example, the U.S. side had reintroduced characteristic 
length, though not using the term. The U.S. approach would require 
disassembling of Soviet missiles at great cost. Obukhov was worried 
about the amount of technical detail included in U.S. proposals.
Stage Dimensions
10. Brooks said that the U.S. side had responded constructively to 
Soviet proposals on stage dimensions. The U.S. side had, in essence, 
accepted the Soviet approach. The only extra thing the U.S. side had 
asked for was data on the diameter of upper stages for missiles where 
upper stages have different diameters than first stages. Obukhov might 
not be aware, Brooks said, but the Soviet side had provided such data 
on the SS–13 and SS–25 as part of the MOU data exchange in November. 
This suggested that the data was not sensitive. Brooks urged Obukhov 
to look at the U.S. response.
11. Obukhov repeated his concern with characteristic length. 
Brooks said that if length were to be used to determine whether some-
thing was or was not a new type of missile, it was necessary to be pre-
cise about how it was measured. Under the earlier characteristic length 
approach, the U.S. side proposed using prints and drawings to agree on 
appropriate measurement points for each type of missile. Now, the U.S. 
side had drastically simplified the approach by specifying end dome 
to end dome measurements. The Soviet side said it was interested in 
measurements from end dome to nozzle. Thus, Brooks concluded, the
