3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 388 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI combat forces. The Secretary was familiar with the reasons and explanations Gromyko had provided in connection with Soviet activities in various areas in Africa. He did not want to get into detail now, but did want to answer Gromyko’s question. The appearance of Soviet actions as seen by many people in the United States and by people in other countries, and not only European countries, was giving the impression that the Soviet Union was going around and crudely lighting fires in that area, preventing settlement by peaceful means. A third area which the Secretary believed was one of major concern was the problem arising in connection with human rights, as recently reflected in such incidents as the trial of Mr. Orlov. (Gromyko interjected, “you mean our Mr. Orlov.”) In the Secretary’s view these were the three main areas which gave rise to what Gromyko had called the explosion of concern over the Soviet Union. The Secretary now wanted to address the second big question, the last question Gromyko had asked—what did the United States really want? Did it want to build up good relations with the Soviet Union or did it want a return to the period of the cold war? The Secretary could answer this question unequivocally with clarity and simplicity. The United States did not want to return to a period of tensions and confrontations. We wanted to get the relations between us back on track again and return to better, stronger and closer ties between our two countries. We wanted to see a reduction of tensions, and not only in the military sphere, but in others as well. We wanted to continue building common ground between us. In the Secretary’s view there were a number of ways to move in that direction. Most importantly, it was necessary to make progress on the central issue between us—SALT. He believed that there were many other things which, if brought about, would put both sides in a better position, i. e., if we could move to a better common understanding of the fact that detente had to be a two-way street. If we could find ways to move toward closer relations in trade, in developing cultural exchanges and the like, that would be very important from the standpoint of improving the atmosphere. This was an area in which we had made progress in the past, but had unfortunately been slipping recently. The Secretary would specify certain steps that would be important from this standpoint: (1) progress on SALT; (2) progress in the Vienna MBFR negotiations; (3) progress in other arms limitations on which we were working together; (4) achievement of a better understanding that detente had to be a two-way street, and on how to make it a two-way street; and (5) determination of what other steps could be taken to bring about better exchanges between our people in cultural activities, scientific activities and trade. Finally, in terms of detente being a two-way street, the Secretary believed we would have to come to grips with the African problems and get a better understanding of how to deal with them in such a way as to avoid con-
