324 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II category of human rights should have priority over the others. If a paragraph-by-paragraph vote is denied, abstain on the resolution as a whole (supported by S/P as a fall-back).10 10 There is no indication as to whether Christopher approved or disapproved the recommendation. The United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 32/130 on December 16 by a vote of 123 to 0, with 15 abstentions, including the United States. 95. Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 30, 1977 SUBJECT Human Rights Attached at Tab I is a memorandum for the President outlining a number of steps we might take in the human rights field.2 At Tab A is a new version of the PD we worked on last summer.3 It now includes a directive to channel foreign assistance, insofar as possible (i.e., within the restrictions of statute and previous Presidential directives) to countries with a good record of observing human rights. The PD is included not because it contains so much new policy, but because I have come to believe that it is important to bureaucratic morale. The lack of a PD is more and more often cited as the reason for the lack of direction in our human rights programs. In short, there is a vague feeling in the bureaucracy that something is missing, and perhaps issuance of the PD will allow us to go on from here to fill in some of the other gaps. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 19, PD/ NSC–30. Unclassified. Inderfurth initialed the memorandum. Brzezinski drew an arrow to Tuchman’s name on the first page of the memorandum. 2 Tab I, attached but not printed, is an undated draft memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter containing Brzezinski’s additions to the text. The final version is printed as Document 96. 3 Attached but not printed is an undated version of the draft PD. For additional information concerning the draft PD, see footnote 2, Document 76.
