February 1951–February 1952
181
ularity of the Mossadeq government derives largely from its success in
“liberating” Iran from British interference. However, the unrest which
has found expression through, and has been intensified by, the oil na-
tionalization issue is not likely to subside now that the AIOC has been
ejected. Although Mossadeq will continue to benefit from popular op-
position to the British, he will have increasing difficulty drawing public
attention away from his failure both to fulfill promises of economic im-
provement and to derive significant benefits from Iran’s oil resources.
He is thus likely to be faced with the possibility of losing popular
support.
23. Although the new Majlis will probably continue to support
Mossadeq on the issue of British interference, the National Front ma-
jority is itself likely to split on other issues. The government will almost
certainly have difficulty in agreeing on and in obtaining Majlis support
for measures which would allay popular demand for social and eco-
nomic benefits. Failure to carry through with such measures would
probably lead many supporters of the National Front, both within and
outside the Majlis, to turn to the Tudeh Party, which is the only disci-
plined party in Iran offering a clear-cut program of social and economic
reform. In order to forestall such a development, the National Front
government would probably be forced to adopt authoritarian methods.
24. The tendency of minority groups and provincial leaders to ig-
nore the writ of the central government would also increase if the Na-
tional Front government failed either to keep Majlis support or to adopt
authoritarian methods. Mossadeq apparently distrusts the army and
the gendarme´rie and has given them little support. This may eventu-
ally have a serious effect on their morale and consequently on their will
and ability to maintain the government’s authority over such poten-
tially separatist elements as the Azerbaijanis, the Kurds, the Bakhtiaris,
and the Qashqais, as well as in Tehran. The ability of the government to
maintain frontier security and collect taxes would decline. A weak-
ening of the government’s central authority would greatly enhance the
danger of a substantial increase in Tudeh influence, not only in Tehran
but particularly among the oil workers in the South and the population
of Iran’s northern provinces. There would also be greater opportunities
for Soviet exploitation.
25. It is probable that either Mossadeq or another National Front
leader will continue as Prime Minister, at least for the present. The Shah
has the constitutional power to dissolve the Majlis and can usually re-
move a Prime Minister from office. He also is Commander in Chief of
the Army and has the support of the Army. It is extremely unlikely that
he would use his power to remove Mossadeq as long as the latter has
the support of the Majlis, since such a move might lead to serious civil
disturbances. If Mossadeq’s popular support weakens, the chances of
