298 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I In 1978, there are actions, decisions, and choices which we must make here in America—some of them difficult—which will help determine how such a policy can be nourished and further evolve. Panama Canal Treaties One involves the decision of the U.S. Senate on the Panama Canal treaties—treaties which are the culmination of 14 years’ work by four American Presidents of both major political parties and their Secretaries of State. This is a decision which is being watched not only by all the nations of Latin America—all of which favor the treaties—but by other nations around the world. Through these treaties, we can secure—definitively and permanently—our right to use the canal and to protect it. It is a place for us to put the lie, once and for all, to the wornout charge that we Americans are interested only in making the Southern Hemisphere safe for our own economic interests. Imagine, if you will, that a foreign country controlled and administered a 10-mile-wide strip of land running the length of the Mississippi River. How long do you think the people of this country would willingly accept such a situation? This is an issue requiring understanding and foresight. If we ratify the treaties, we can make clear to the world that disputes can and should be settled peaceably—through the rule of law and negotiation. And, most importantly, we can insure and safeguard the long-term usefulness and viability of the canal itself to all who use it, including ourselves. Economic Relations Another decision we must make is one regarding our economic relations with the rest of the world. In 1978 we shall be moving toward a conclusion of the Tokyo Round of trade negotiations with other importing and exporting countries. In 1962, when President Kennedy argued for the passage of the historic Trade Expansion Act, which led to 10 years of worldwide economic expansion, he rightly pointed out that “a rising tide lifts all boats.”2 Today the world is badly in need of economic recovery. Other major nations are suffering rates of inflation and unemployment which rival or are even higher than ours. The Tokyo Round, of and by itself, will not instantly restore worldwide economic prosperity. It will, how- 2 Kennedy signed the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 (H.R. 11970; P.L. 87–794; 76 Stat. 872) into law on October 11, 1962.
