National Security Policy 709 flying the Polish flag were actually under the ownership or control of the Government of Communist China. He observed that these Chinese Communist-­controlled ships were probably sailing under the Polish flag to deceive the Free World and particularly to deceive the Chinese Nationalists. He said that the Chinese Communists now owned nine or ten such ships and that they propose to achieve ownership of an addi­ tional number of such vessels. He thought that this could cause a prob­ lem for the U.S. if such vessels appeared in our ports. He also thought that an arrangement of this kind raised serious doubt regarding the honesty and integrity of the Poles. Mr. Herter indicated that the Department of State has already noti­ fied the Polish Government of the U.S. position in this regard. He said that the Poles have been warned that action would be taken against any vessel entering the United States under the Polish flag which was in fact owned by Communist China. The President asked if one could always prove such ownership, and the Secretary of State indicated this was not always possible. He said that someone would have to give evidence to the Department of State that such Polish flag vessels are actually owned by the Chinese Communists. The Director of Central Intelligence elaborated on the aforemen­ tioned point, as raised by the Department of Commerce, by giving the Council an oral summary of the CIA report which was circulated to the Council on the Chinese Communist vessels. Thereafter, Secretary Herter emphasized that whenever the Department of State received evidence that a Polish flag vessel entering one of our ports was actually owned by the Chinese Communists, such vessel would be excluded. Mr. Gray indicated that the points raised by the Commerce Department had been discussed by the Planning Board and he briefly summarized that discussion. The President indicated that he was not clear why any change in our present port security program was being suggested at this particular moment and Secretary Herter indicated that this was being done now because of difficulties encountered by the Treasury Department in applying the port security program in particu­ lar situations. He indicated that while we were trying to normalize our situation as regards the Poles, based on our policy of increased trade and increased exchanges, the port security program sometimes mili­ tated against the accomplishments of those objectives. He cited, by way of example, the case of the Polish ship which carried its passengers to a Canadian port rather than the port of New York, for reasons relating in part to our port security policy. Mr. Scribner stated that the Treasury Department wished to urge no change in the policy at this time except in the case of the Polish vessels. He wished to make clear, however, that if the policy on Polish vessels were liberalized, such vessels would continue to be boarded
