Peru  1087
two until the government can bring in additional security forces. They 
demonstrated this capability in Cuzco in 1958.
18. Communists have been less successful elsewhere. They have 
had little direct influence on the government, although there are a few 
Communists in Congress and a number of Communists hold second-
ary or minor government positions. Most of Acción Popular’s congres-
sional representatives have or have had Communist ties. However, the 
PCP has publicly broken with Acción Popular’s leader Belaunde. While 
they control a large minority in the labor movement, Communists have 
failed to break APRA’s hold on the central labor confederation. They 
have demonstrated only limited capability for gaining influence among 
the rural Sierra Indians in central and southern Peru, largely because of 
the isolated and self-­contained nature of the rural Indian society.
19. The major area of political agitation in Peru is organized labor. 
This force of roughly 400,000, mainly affiliated with the central labor 
organization (CTP), is overwhelmingly urban and is largely engaged in 
white collar and service activities, principally in the Lima-Callao area. 
APRA supporters control the executive committee of the CTP and the 
majority of its most vigorous member organizations. However, APRA’s 
entente with the government has resulted in a weakening of its revo-
lutionary coloration and a reduction of APRA’s freedom to press labor 
demands. This has been of direct benefit to the Communists, who have 
been able to consolidate their position in Arequipa and Cuzco and 
have also made some progress, in competition with APRA, in organiz-
ing miners in central Peru. The Communists have also benefited from 
upper class disposition to encourage them as rivals to APRA.
20. Another, though less important, arena for political agitation 
is among university student groups, principally those in Arequipa, 
Cuzco, and Lima. Although Peruvian student groups, like their coun-
terparts in other Latin American countries, are generally a breeding 
ground for radical ideas and action, they suffer from factionalism and 
generally have little voice in national politics. However, they have con-
tributed substantially to political and social unrest, and with the decline 
in APRA’s traditional popularity among student groups matched by a 
rise in Communist influence, the potential for Communist-­inspired stu-
dent agitation is on the increase. This potential was manifested in the 
riots attending Vice President Nixon’s visit in May 1958.
III. Economic Situation
21. Despite the abundance and variety of its resources, Peru is a 
largely undeveloped country in which up to two-­thirds of the popu-
lation (including most inhabitants of the Sierra and Montaña) live at a 
bare subsistence level outside the money economy. Rail and road links 
between the coast and the interior are few and far between and even
