768 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —­with the Intelligence Community, provide the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs by April 1, 1980 terms of reference for a comprehensive comparison of NATO and Warsaw Pact mobilization capabilities and historical levels of effort. (C) —­provide the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs by June 1, 1980 a detailed plan for assessing the adequacy of the newly developed Federal Master Mobilization Plan. To assist in the assessment and to help refine the Master Plan, the Secretary of Defense and the Director of FEMA are to ensure that, to the maximum extent practical, mobilization-­type exercises over the next few years (e.g., NIFTY NUGGET/REX) are designed, conducted, and evaluated in a manner that supports the NSC Study. (C) —­adjust the crisis scenarios, emergency actions, and preparedness activities as necessary during development of the Master Plan to ensure their continued relevance and appropriateness; and seek ways to improve the mobilization planning and implementation ­processes. (U) Zbigniew Brzezinski 178. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, March 7, 1980 SUBJECT Contingency Plans for Increased Strategic Capability (U) (S) Last year’s NIE raised the prospect that the Soviets could pull ahead of us in warheads in the early 1980’s.2 That conclusion was partly because of inconsistent rules for counting U.S. and Soviet SSBNs on sea trials. Furthermore, in the event Soviet deployments of highly fractionated SLBMs and ICBMs have progressed more slowly than the NIE predicted, [1 line not declassified] It now appears unlikely that we will lose our lead in warheads in the early 1980’s. Nonetheless, I share your belief that we must be prepared to take further actions. If SALT II collapses, our planned forces may be inadequate, particularly in the mid- 1980’s before MX can be deployed in numbers. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Doctrine/C3I: 1979–1980. Secret; Restricted Data. 2 See Document 111.
