952
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
government has risked Soviet displeasure by firm measures against the
Tudeh Party and Communist subversion.
56. So long as the Iranian Government continues to expect US eco-
nomic, financial, and military assistance, it will remain responsive to
US influence. As oil revenues are restored and US aid is reduced Ira-
nians may become increasingly determined to manage their own af-
fairs and more resistant to US guidance. We do not believe, however,
that developing Iranian self-reliance is likely to alter significantly the
conviction of the government, and of the Shah in particular, that Iran
requires Western support and friendly relations if it is to avoid isola-
tion and eventual Soviet domination. The Shah is especially desirous of
building up the army and regards the US as the only feasible source of
the military assistance required to do so. He may also believe that ob-
vious US concern about Iran gives him a favorable bargaining position.
Even if he is unsuccessful in obtaining assistance on the scale he be-
lieves necessary to give Iran effective forces, his urgent desire for such
assistance as he can get will continue to give the US bargaining power
with him. The willingness of Iranian Government leaders, including
the Shah, to make firm commitments to the West is likely to be limited,
not by indifference to the Soviet danger but rather by the proximity of
Soviet power, by public distrust and dislike of undue foreign influence,
and by uncertainty as to the effectiveness of Western military support
in the event of war.
Iran and Regional Defense
57. The Shah and many Iranian leaders would like to participate in
a regional defense arrangement backed by the West, and they will
probably continue to advance the idea both for motives of prestige and
as a means of securing maximum US military aid and defense support.
Under present circumstances, however, they would probably be reluc-
tant to join any regional grouping until: (a) the Iranian military estab-
lishment had been substantially strengthened, and (b) they were confi-
dent that such a move would not encounter serious opposition within
Iran. Neither condition is likely to be met within the next year or two at
least. However, Iran might engage in informal staff talks with Iraq and
possibly Turkey or Pakistan within this period.
Relations with the UK
58. Iranian-UK diplomatic relations have been resumed and, with
the oil settlement, tension between the two governments has subsided.
However, widespread suspicions of the British persist. Because of the
fact that most Iranian leaders now tend to look more to the US than to
the UK for support and guidance, the expansion of UK diplomatic in-
fluence is likely to be slow, and the UK will not, in the foreseeable fu-
ture, regain its former position as the dominant Western power in Ira-
