National Security Policy  885
be greater than he had previously realized. He summed up his instruc­
tions regarding the safety tests as telling the AEC to go as far as they can 
without risk of a nuclear explosion. When they reach the point of risk 
they are to come back to him. He emphasized that they should get on 
with this testing and not try to get into political questions.
Dr. Kistiakowsky said the President’s Science Advisory Committee 
has put the greatest amount of study to date into military R & D bud­
get. He will be taking up their findings with Dr. York and Secretary 
McElroy. The group will then be ready to come in and see the President.
The President said he is getting the impression that disarmament 
is not possible in the nuclear field. Probably we must get better and 
better weapons of our own in that field. At the same time he thinks 
that our concept of defending all around the world will not work. It is 
not practicable and is too great a burden for us. Mr. McElroy is plan­
ning to cut 14 air squadrons and 50,000 men in the Air Force. He feels 
that a new conception of defense is needed involving greater reliance 
on the deterrent. We must be able to return a tremendous blow. Short 
of that, a few mobile forces and a few carriers to move out from a 
central reserve must be provided. He does not think we can have such 
a thing as a perfect defense. Dr. Kistiakowsky said that without some 
military concepts, his group finds it impossible to make the judgments 
which need to be made in the scientific field. He was happy to see that 
their thinking runs along the line of the President’s. The President said 
our great problem is that our people want to do everything, and to 
start programs in all directions. Dr. Kistiakowsky said that in the field 
of strategic attack, for example, if everything were done that is now 
being planned and programmed we would have a fantastic overkill 
capability.
Dr. Kistiakowsky next said that there is evident need for a policy 
statement on space activities, since there is great confusion around the 
country. The President asked for a draft of a statement that he might 
make, either at a press conference or otherwise. Dr. Kistiakowsky said 
he would prepare one.
Dr. Kistiakowsky referred to troubles the Titan program is having. 
There has been an eight-­month flight delay. The program is not in good 
shape, and the failure is essentially managerial. The Martin Company 
is spread over too many projects. A group from BMD is now taking 
over the Denver plant, at least long enough to put it on its feet. He said 
there is a good chance that they will still catch up with their schedule. 
The President said this is most surprising to him since the Denver plant 
was most impressive, and that people (including me) had told him that 
the Titan was a better missile than the Atlas. Dr. Kistiakowsky said that
