It is now known that on November 24th General Tuan Chi-jui
provisionally assumed the functions of the Chief Executive of the
Chinese Republic in response to the call of a fair majority of the
practically autonomous province[s] in China and with the
approval of the then existing Government under Mr. Huang Fu.
On the same day he announced the formation of a new Cabinet
composed of men who have long figured prominently in various
factions and provinces. It appears that all these arrangements are
intended to be only provisional and that a more lasting regime is
reserved for discussion and settlement at a national assembly
shortly to be convoked.
The Japanese are not directly concerned in the question who will
assume the reins of government in China or what form of political
institution the proposed national assembly will adopt. Their chief
preoccupation[s] have been in the question whether or not China
will soon be provided with a sufficiently strong government to
maintain law and order within her borders and to discharge her
international obligations.
But it is evident that whatever government may be established in
China cannot possibly endure if it fails to find a way out of its
pressing financial difficulties. Without funds to meet the
expenditure it will be impossible for any government at Peking to
organize an effective administration and to carry out the
disbandment of troops and other measures of readjustment now
urgently needed. Nor in the opinion of the Japanese Government
can the destitution of China’s public treasury be remedied without
the cooperation of foreign powers. In order to secure stabilization
of China it will be necessary for the powers when they [the time?]
becomes opportune to take up the question of financial assistance
to be rendered to the Chinese Government. Such assistance is to
be extended only upon full communication and understanding
among the powers and in case it takes the form of a loan it should
be undertaken in accordance with the principles that govern the
existing consortium.
