1956 1219 736. Telegram 417 from Geneva1 Geneva, October 18, 1956, 7 p.m. 417. From Johnson. 1. I opened 60th with prepared statement: A. During recent meetings, and in your govt’s current series bi-­ weekly press statements recurrent theme has been attempt create false impression responsibility for our failure make further progress these talks and specifically failure thus far reach agreement on fundamen­ tal question renunciation force rests with my side. Emphasis your side places on these unsupported allegations demonstrates uneasy aware­ ness of glaring weakness its position. That is, in final analysis, it comes down to question of comparative good faith of two sides in carrying out presently existing or proposed agreements. Fortunately, people of world who being called upon form opinion on this subject have entirely concrete set facts by which they can judge this matter for selves. World well knows of commitment your side made Sept 10 1955, respect return Americans. World well knows in spite of that clear commitment ten Americans still languish in your prisons. Let us take as example the case just one these Americans, Fr. McCarthy. B. On June 15 1953, Fr. McCarthy’s long devotion to Chinese peo­ ple and desire promote understanding between our two peoples was rewarded by sudden arrest. Without respect for legal norms of any social or political system he was kept in prison for month after month year after year without trial, without charges being proferred, without opportunity obtain defense counsel, without opportunity defend himself, without opportunity have his guilt or innocence determined by impartial tribunal. Finally on Sept 18 1955 Fr. McCarthy is shown by your authorities copy of agreed announcement which you and I issued here eight days previ­ ously. As would any reasonable man, Fr. McCarthy believed this solemn commitment applied him as well as all other imprisoned Americans. He could only have anticipated his expeditious release return to his country accordance with that announcement. C. However, what happens? Instead of promised release, on October 22 1955 he finally given so-­called trial and sentenced spend more years in prison. D. In meanwhile Fr. McCarthy receives letter from UK Charge written and delivered within context of announcement and trans­ mitting copy thereof to him. Again he must have dared hope. On 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–1856. Confidential; Limit Distribution.
