190  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Bolivians present thought that Andrade should have made a scandal, 
but he simply passed over the insult. Andrade stressed the fact that 
we could not ignore the human element. Concerning U.S. officials in 
Bolivia, he said that they must be briefed before going there on the need 
for understanding the Bolivian people.
Mr. Rubottom commented that we were quite aware of the human 
factor, and that undoubtedly human failures creep in. He said that we 
tried to brief officials going to Bolivia, and that patience was certainly 
needed—­on both sides.
Concerning the McClellan Committee hearings,3 Mr. Rubottom 
said that Under Secretary Dillon deserved considerable credit, as did 
Senator McClellan, for the quiet way the Committee meetings were con-
ducted. There was a possibility the Committee would issue a report,4 
and he hoped the Bolivian Government would be prepared to react 
in a “mature” manner to anything which might appear in the report. 
Andrade indicated that he intended to make a call on the Senator, and 
Mr. Rubottom advised him to “let sleeping dogs lie.”
The efforts of the municipality of La Paz to collect a tax from Grace 
& Co. on the disposal by Grace of commodities under the economic 
assistance program was mentioned by Mr. Rubottom. The Foreign 
Minister appeared to be quite familiar with this matter and confirmed 
that if the tax was paid the GOB would simply have to deposit that 
amount in the counterpart account. He concluded his remarks on this 
subject by stating that he would send a cable to La Paz concerning the 
matter. Mr. Silberstein mentioned that the Mutual Security legislation 
was involved and that continuation of the commodity program might 
be affected.
The refusal of Comibol to pay retentions to the Patiño Mines 
Enterprises on tin barter sales was then brought to the Foreign 
Minister’s attention by Mr. Rubottom. He said that we could see no dif-
ference between tin barter sales and ordinary sales, as far as retention 
payments were concerned. Andrade said this was a troublesome mat-
ter, there was some reason to believe the GOB may have already paid 
more than the value of the properties, and there was also the feeling in 
Bolivia that Bolivia had maintained the price of tin on the world market 
by its “sacrifices”. Mr. Silberstein pointed out the advantage to the GOB 
of a final settlement of this problem, and the Foreign Minister replied 
3 Reference is to the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate 
Committee on Government Operation. Documentation relating to the subcommittee is in 
APA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 429, “McClellan Committee.”
4 The referenced report was issued on January 20, 1960, as U.S. Senate, Committee 
on Government Operations, “Administration of United States Foreign Aid Programs in 
Bolivia,” Senate Report No. 1030, 36th Cong., 2d Sess. (Washington, D.C.: Government 
Printing Office, 1969).
