42  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
technology transfer are salient issues. Topical net assessments address 
the following questions, among others:
(1) Overall costs and benefits, short and long term, of increased 
interaction. Will more transactions reduce conflict and aggressiveness, 
or sell the Soviets the rope with which to hang us, or have no effect 
at all? How would greater interdependence affect the Soviet system? 
Should the U.S. government encourage, subsidize, ignore, or discour-
age certain types of interchange?
(2) Types of exchanges most and least advantageous to the U.S. 
Which transactions have highly uncertain outcomes; how predictable 
are the results of increased trade? Which areas of exchange should, in 
these terms, be expanded or contracted?
(3) Criteria for evaluating changes of policy, especially in regard to 
issues such as computer technology, food sales, and production licens-
ing and investment in the USSR or Eastern Europe.
(4) Mechanisms for control. How effective are current ones such as 
COCOM? Are additional mechanisms needed?
(5) How should the U.S. government deal with the private sector in 
regard to issues such as general or selective export policies and banking 
and credit policy controls?
6. Transformation of alliances. Major changes appear to be underway 
in the East-West alliance systems. Issues of relevance for the future are:
(1) What are the trends in the transformation of Soviet and Ameri-
can alliances and the costs and benefits of these for relative Soviet and 
American power?
(2) What impact do these changes have on Soviet and American 
war-­fighting capabilities, especially a conflict limited to Central Europe?
(3) Which Soviet strategies might lead to the accelerated loosening 
of Western alliances? What would be the risks/benefits of a parallel 
American effort in Eastern Europe?
(4) Which factors, domestic or international, might lead to a tight-
ening of alliances in the West as well as the East?
(5) How would broadened alliance membership or changes in the 
central alliance institutions affect the central US-Soviet relationship?
(6) To what extent will conflicting economic interests and national-
ist demands within both alliances affect their cohesiveness for security 
purposes?
IV. REQUIREMENTS FOR NATIONAL STRATEGY
The fundamental purposes of the United States are spelled out in 
the Declaration of the Independence and in the Preamble to the Consti-
tution. A basic national strategy delineates the ways of realizing those 
purposes in the face of foreign threats and hostility. It would be pre-
mature at this point to present specific strategies before the task force
