Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 645 Category III: Systems to Supplement existing in country inventories or to complement weapons received or on order 17 771 Category IV: Major new Equipment transfer and force expansion A. Approval Recommended 10 1,568 B. Deferral Recommended 6 1,368 TOTALS 49 $5,032 Of the cases in Categories I–III, there is only one which raises policy questions: ammunition for Ethiopia. The Ethiopian case relates to our policy in this part of Africa. It should be deferred until we have completed our African policy review, which is now underway. The consequence of deferral is likely to be that the Ethiopians will interpret deferral as denial. The ammunition was requested sometime ago and additional delay in a decision will further strain our bilateral relations. Ethiopia may well turn to other suppliers. Nevertheless, deferral is warranted.6 There are several cases in Category IV that I would recommend for deferral: Jordan—9 AH–1 Cobra Helicopters ($19 million) The sale of helicopter gunships to Jordan was approved in principle some time ago, but was not completed because of Jordan’s financial problems. Notification of this case to Congress is likely to attract Israel’s attention. Because further delay on this case does not pose foreseeable consequences, it should be deferred until the policy review has been completed.7 Iran—7 E–3 Aircraft (AWACs) ($1.2 billion) Iran has received two proposals for an early warning and control system, of which the AWACs (airborne warning and control system) is one. Iran has commissioned a comparative study to determine which of these systems will be chosen. Under these circumstances, further delay will not cause inconvenience. The size and sophistication of this system, on the other hand, would undoubtedly draw Congressional criticism, particularly in view of the general concern about US sales to the Persian Gulf.8 6 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.” 7 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.” 8 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
