Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
645
Category III: Systems to Supplement ex-
isting in country inventories or to com-
plement weapons received or on order
17
771
Category IV: Major new Equipment
transfer and force expansion
A. Approval Recommended
10
1,568
B. Deferral Recommended
6
1,368
TOTALS
49
$5,032
Of the cases in Categories I–III, there is only one which raises pol-
icy questions: ammunition for Ethiopia. The Ethiopian case relates to
our policy in this part of Africa. It should be deferred until we have
completed our African policy review, which is now underway. The
consequence of deferral is likely to be that the Ethiopians will interpret
deferral as denial. The ammunition was requested sometime ago and
additional delay in a decision will further strain our bilateral relations.
Ethiopia may well turn to other suppliers. Nevertheless, deferral is
warranted.6
There are several cases in Category IV that I would recommend for
deferral:
Jordan—9 AH–1 Cobra Helicopters
($19 million)
The sale of helicopter gunships to Jordan was approved in prin-
ciple some time ago, but was not completed because of Jordan’s fi-
nancial problems. Notification of this case to Congress is likely to
attract Israel’s attention. Because further delay on this case does
not pose foreseeable consequences, it should be deferred until the
policy review has been completed.7
Iran—7 E–3 Aircraft (AWACs)
($1.2 billion)
Iran has received two proposals for an early warning and control
system, of which the AWACs (airborne warning and control
system) is one. Iran has commissioned a comparative study to de-
termine which of these systems will be chosen. Under these cir-
cumstances, further delay will not cause inconvenience. The size
and sophistication of this system, on the other hand, would un-
doubtedly draw Congressional criticism, particularly in view of
the general concern about US sales to the Persian Gulf.8
6 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
7 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
8 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
