696
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
more secure if all organs provided for in the Iranian constitution func-
tions with at least a certain degree of harmony.
As to the events of recent days, Mossedeq explained that on the
evening of August 15, Colonel Nasiri had approached his house with
the apparent intention of arresting him. Colonel Nasiri himself, how-
ever, had been arrested and a number of other arrests followed. The
Prime Minister said he had sworn not to try to oust the Shah and that he
would have honored this oath had the Shah not engaged in a venture of
this kind. It was clear that Colonel Nasiri had been sent by the Shah to
arrest him and that the Shah had been prompted by the British.
In reply to a question by Ambassador Henderson as to whether he
had reason to believe that it is true that the Shah had expected a firman
removing Mossedeq and appointing General Zahedi as Prime Minister,
Dr. Mossedeq said that he had never seen such a firman and that if he
had, it would have made no difference. His position for some time had
been that the Shah’s powers were of a ceremonial nature and that the
Shah had no right on his personal responsibility to issue a firman
calling for a change in government. When Ambassador Henderson
pointed out that he was particularly interested in this point and that he
would like to report it carefully to the United States Government, Mos-
sedeq affirmed that: (a) he had no official knowledge that the Shah had
issued a firman removing him as Prime Minister, and (b) even if he
should find that the Shah had issued such a firman, he would consider
it invalid in present circumstances.
Ambassador Henderson reported that Mossedeq appeared in a
much better frame of mind at the end of the talk but that nevertheless,
from his unusual reserve, the Ambassador was inclined to believe that
Mossedeq was suspicious that the United States Government or at least
United States officials were either implicated in the effort to oust him or
were sympathetically aware of such an effort in advance. His remarks
were interspersed with a number of little jibes which although
semi-jocular in character were nonetheless barbed. In general the jibes
hinted that the United States was conniving with the British to remove
him as Prime Minister.
Ambassador Henderson requested that the above be treated as
highly classified information.
