1955  497
meditation that there was in Geneva. Dave Osborn has been on leave 
the last two weeks, which has also complicated things somewhat.
You have a direct personal interest in Dave’s leave, since we sug­
gested he take it now with the thought in mind that he might be sent 
to replace you around December 1. Final decision on that will have to 
be up to Alex, of course, and I want to set down our thinking on this so 
that you can discuss it with him.
As you know, Walter and I both feel that officers in CA profit con­
siderably from this rare experience of first-hand contact with the Chinese 
Communists, and we would like Dave to have that experience. He has 
been informed on the talks from the beginning and we would see that 
he is brought closely into the planning from now until he leaves. This 
experience at the Departmental end of the wire should be helpful to Alex. 
As you know, Dave is a highly competent officer and has had much lon­
ger service in the Department than either you or I. Walter places great 
confidence in him and I am sure Alex would find him a worthy replace­
ment for you. His only disadvantage is his limited knowledge of Chi­
nese. Whether that disadvantage would be serious enough to rule him 
out would be up to Alex to decide. If he believes it essential to have at 
least one of his advisers fully qualified in Chinese, we would send Steve 
Comiskey in Dave’s place. Steve is also a very reliable and capable offi­
cer, although he is somewhat younger and less experienced than Dave. 
We would like to have Alex’s reaction to this proposal as soon as possible 
so we would know which man to bring into the planning for the talks. 
Walter will probably mention this also in his next letter.
We had quite a hassle last week with Defense over Bob Ekvall. After 
Bern turned us down on the proposal to make him Assistant Military 
Attache, Defense was practically ready to recall him and we were con­
sidering sending Al Harding or John Stanley from DRF to replace him. 
However, we knew Alex would be very reluctant to change interpreters 
and Mr. Robertson finally had a talk with Godell, in which the latter 
indicated it would be possible to assign Bob somewhere else in Europe 
and detail him to Geneva. This would enable him to bring his family 
over and remain in Geneva as long as the talks lasted. Mr. Robertson 
sent a letter to General Erskine formally requesting that this be done, 
but we have not yet had a reply. Tell Bob not to think he is the forgotten 
man, because at least 20 people in Washington have been involved in 
some aspect of the discussions concerning him during the past week.
We have a staff meeting coming up and I want to get this into 
today’s pouch, so I will stop here. Best regards and keep up the good 
work.
Sincerely,
Ralph N. Clough
