598
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
As the national discussion takes place, let us be clear about what
the issues are—and are not.
Americans are committed to maintaining a strong defense. That is
not the issue.
We will continue to compete, and compete effectively, with the So-
viet Union. That is not the issue.
The issue is whether we will move ahead with strategic arms con-
trol or resume a relentless nuclear weapons competition. That’s the
choice we face—between an imperfect world with a SALT agreement,
or an imperfect and more dangerous world without a SALT agreement.
With SALT II, we will have significant reductions in Soviet stra-
tegic forces; far greater certainty in our defense planning and in the
knowledge of the threats that we might face; flexibility to meet our own
defense needs; the foundation for further controls on nuclear and con-
ventional arms; and our own self-respect and the earned respect of the
world for a United States demonstrably committed to the works of
peace.
Without SALT, the Soviets will be unconstrained and capable, and
probably committed to an enormous further buildup.
Without SALT, there would have to be a much sharper rise in our
own defense spending, at the expense of other necessary programs for
our people.
Without SALT, we would end up with thousands more strategic
nuclear warheads on both sides, with far greater costs—and far less se-
curity—for our citizens.
Without SALT, we would see improved relations with the Soviet
Union replaced by heightened tensions.
Without SALT, the long, slow process of arms control, so central to
building a safer world, would be dealt a crippling and, perhaps, a fatal
blow.
Without SALT, the world would be forced to conclude that Amer-
ica had chosen confrontation rather than cooperation and peace.
This is an inescapable choice we face. For the fact is that the alter-
native to this treaty is not some perfect agreement, drafted unilaterally
by the United States in which we gain everything and the Soviets gain
nothing; the alternative now, and in the foreseeable future, is no agree-
ment at all.
I am convinced that the United States has a moral and a political
will to control the relentless technology which could constantly devise
new and more destructive weapons to kill human beings. We need not
drift into a dark nightmare of unrestrained arms competition. We
Americans have the wisdom to know that our security depends on
more than just maintaining our unsurpassed defense forces. Our secu-
