1955  235
in order have same wording as his section. We would have to make this 
and other changes if two sections not identical. I said I must make clear 
that suggestion I made was maximum effort our part reach agreement 
and issue announcement. I entirely unable accept his suggestion “now” 
remain in our section and be deleted from his. I made my suggestion 
only on condition that rest of text remained exactly the same and on 
that basis we could issue announcement today.
Wang replied he also wanted promptly settle this question. He 
said inclusion phrase “and will further adopt” in order to make two 
paragraphs identical was reasonable and necessary. This phrase was 
same in both sections because reason for it was same. It indicated that 
in future if nationals two countries encountered difficulties, govern­
ments would assist them in departing. If this phrase were deleted gov­
ernments would not have to help nationals encountering difficulties 
in future. He said he failed to see why not appropriate retain “now” in 
only our paragraph.
I replied I understood he rejected my suggestion regarding dele­
tion “now”.
Wang smiled and said my suggestion resolved only half of problem.
I said I had made very clear I could not consider making this dif­
ference between two sections and suggested we agree on basis my sug­
gestion which I believed met both points of view.
Wang said we had raised two points of difference and that he would 
be willing consider deletion “in any such case” from both sections if we 
would consider his proposal regarding “now”. He believed meaning of 
paragraph 2 (A) sufficiently clear without inclusion “in any such case”.
I said my suggestion regarding deletion “now” was based under­
standing remainder text would remain unchanged. I had met his objec­
tion word “now” and believed text should be issued with that change. 
He might consider phrase “in any such case” unnecessary, but he said 
it was consistent with rest of paragraph and because consistent, and 
in order paragraph remain clear, I insisted that it must be included. I 
said that at last meeting he did not object to principle behind “in any 
such case”; thus after six weeks discussions we came down to one word 
“now” and I had made suggestion it be deleted. I could see no reason 
further discussion or delay agreement on text.
Wang said from outset they had wanted reach agreement. Then 
suggested further compromise in which he would delete both “now” 
and “in any such case” from his section and we would retain both in 
ours. Thus desires both sides would be met and each would meet point 
raised by other. Thus they had given consideration my suggestion.
I said this introduced even greater differences in two paragraphs 
and as soon as we did this we would encounter whole new host of
