554  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
which bureaucracy had come to put in the way of efficient operation of 
the economy.
51. The economic reorganization scheme has been described as 
a decentralization plan, but it was this in only a limited sense. There 
never was any intention to weaken the basic apparatus of centralized 
planning or to give up the political determination of economic priori­
ties in favor of decision-­making at lower levels according to economic 
criteria alone. The plan aimed at eliminating the top-­heavy vertical 
administration of the Moscow industrial ministries. It was hoped that 
this would result in a more efficient response to central plan directives. 
The theory was that, by allowing a greater degree of local initiative and 
by placing the administrators in the regions close to the enterprises 
they were supervising, the implementing of decisions would be more 
realistic and less wasteful.
52. The results obtained thus far probably have included some 
gains of the kind anticipated—­better use of local resources, fuller use 
of transportation facilities, less delay on routine decisions. But the new 
system contains dangers of its own, which have been heavily attacked 
in the Soviet press under the name of “localism.” To the extent that free­
dom to dispose of resources locally has been allowed it has been diffi­
cult to prevent decisions from being taken in local rather than national 
interests. There evidently has been a tendency, aside from some cases of 
outright corruption, for the local authorities to divert resources to plans 
of their own for the greater development of their regions, sometimes to 
the neglect of centrally imposed plans and priorities. The chronic prob­
lem of obtaining conformity to economic goals imposed by political fiat 
from the center, with little regard for local desires or the economic cri­
teria which appeal to the managers of enterprises, seems to persist. We 
believe, therefore, that the regime will continue to experiment with new 
techniques of economic planning and administration.
53. The Soviet leadership under Khrushchev seems confident nev­
ertheless that it has already overcome the difficulties which emerged 
in 1956 when cumulative mistakes in planning caused shortages in 
basic materials and forced abandonment of the Sixth Five-Year Plan. 
The regime has announced a new Seven-Year Plan which again sets 
ambitious goals. It reaffirms the traditional emphases upon the rapid 
growth of heavy industry, and upon maintaining large military pro­
grams. But the Plan also provides for other key programs to which the 
regime has committed itself in recent years. The Soviet leaders intend 
to go forward with increasing living standards. Programs of lesser 
cost will include maintaining Soviet power in Eastern Europe by sup­
porting the Satellite economies as needed, assisting the industrializa­
tion of Communist China, and backing up Soviet political objectives 
in underdeveloped countries with trade and aid programs. The main
