International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
65
that the United States would fail to get major concessions. Our answer
has been to insist on negotiating industry and agriculture together.
Now, however, we have a chance to improve the situation: we should
make agriculture our first priority. Agriculture is central in and by itself
and it also poses the key export subsidy problems.3 Here we have le-
verage since our countervailing waiver authority expires in early 1979.4
We should use this leverage to get well ahead in 1977 on agriculture
generally and to break the subsidy/countervailing duty code problem
by this time next year at the latest.5
In our view, the basic US goals in agriculture should be:
—a grains agreement which provides some price stability, relieves
us of the burden of carrying almost all the world’s reserves and guar-
antees steady US export growth, combined with restraints on EC use of
subsidies on exports into third country markets;
—a modus vivendi on subsidies on EC exports into the United States
(cheese, hams) and other subsidy practices (which could be incorpo-
rated into a subsidies/CVD code);
—tariff reductions on products of special interest to the United
States (citrus, tobacco), preferably as part of an application of the tar-
iff formula to agriculture or, if that fails, in a product-by-product
negotiation.
Grains
Our best chance of results in the grains area lies not in a frontal at-
tack on access but in an agreement cast in the framework of the world
food problem and world trade in grains, but negotiated as part of the
MTN package. We would aim for a reserve agreement with a wide
price fork. This cover can serve US goals by restraining the Commu-
nity’s use of export subsidies on grains, requiring it to share the burden
in adjusting to both surplus and shortage situations, and by dampening
excessive price swings. It will meet the Community’s goals by being in
the form of a commodity agreement with price provisions and by con-
tributing to world grain market stability.
Subsidies
The general problem of export subsidies on industrial goods is not
insurmountable. The real problem is how to include agricultural
products, where the Community considers export subsidies as an inte-
gral part of the Common Agricultural Policy. Arrangements limiting
3 Strauss underlined “Agriculture is central in and by itself” and “poses the key ex-
port subsidy problems.”
4 Congress had granted the President temporary authority to waive the imposition
of countervailing duties on subsidized imports.
5 Strauss wrote “explain?” in the margin adjacent to the final two sentences of this
paragraph.
