1100 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II be adopted in 1980 and in the UN’s consideration of a round of global negotiations on international economic issues. In the months ahead the United States will be faced with extensive negotiations on development issues in the United Nations. We will be preparing for a new round of global negotiations which are likely to be launched by a Special Session of the General Assembly in August 198015 and which will deal with the full range of subjects connected to the economic health of the developing countries. We will also be participating in the drafting of a strategy for the Third Development Decade which is to be adopted by the Special Session. It is important that the United States not view these negotiations as an unnecessary irritant, but rather as an opportunity to present our views on how the world should deal with questions concerning raw materials, energy, trade, development, technology, and finance in the decade of the 1980s. IDCA will work with other interested parts of our government to assure that on each development issue the United States will have a constructive position on how it would like to see the world economy function in the years ahead. An important element in this effort is the design of a U.S. development strategy for the 1980s—another task of IDCA. There is no escaping the fact that, though great strides have already been taken to help developing countries, other steps will be needed in the years ahead if significant progress is to be made in reducing world poverty. Of one thing we can be sure—the world will not be the same when the next decade ends. The question before us is how constructive a role we play in helping to shape the outcome. Scientific and Technological Cooperation —With U.S. support, the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development called for the creation of a special interim fund for science and technology, to be administered by the UN Development Program (UNDP). Your initiative in proposing the new Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation (ISTC) will enable the United States to maintain its leadership in fostering research and development of knowledge and skills for peaceful and humanitarian purposes. The UN Conference on Science and Technology, held in Vienna in August 1979, set a target goal of $250 million for the UN Interim Fund for Science and Technology. The Fund, which is to begin implementing the program of the UNCSTD Plan of Action recommendations in 1980, 15 See footnote 6, Document 348. The 11th Special Session of the UN General Assembly was held August 25–September 15.
