which attended the Washington Conference and which would be practically a continuation of that Conference involving the limitation in construction of other naval craft such as cruisers and submarines. It is the opinion of this Government that a naval conference confined to practical lines could make substantial progress in further limiting naval armament. Consideration of Certain Criteria which do not afford an acceptable Basis for the Reduction of Armaments. Any attempt to limit the ultimate war strength of a nation would be futile. The factors which enter into the potential war strength of a nation are in many respects the same as those which form an essential part of the normal activities of a State in time of peace. No country would agree to curtail or limit its natural resources or its capacity to prepare for a national emergency. It follows from the foregoing that the United States representation should not agree to the application to this country of any formula for the limitation of armaments which is based upon an estimate of the potential war strength of a nation. You should likewise under no circumstances concur in the adoption of any formula for the limitation of armaments which is based upon expenditure. Any comparison on this basis is apt to be extremely misleading. For example, the item of base pay varies largely with the character of service, whether voluntary, militia, or conscriptive. The base pay of the lowest rating in the United States Army is fifty-eight times the minimum base pay of the lowest rating in the forces of one of the great powers whose service is based on conscription. The effect of this on comparative expenditures is obvious. In addition, it costs more to feed, clothe, and shelter an American soldier or sailor than one of any other nationality. Monetary expenditure for the creation and maintenance of military establishments does not afford either a true measure of armaments or a fair basis of comparison for limitation of armaments. Further, an attempt to limit armaments on the basis of an inverse ratio to national wealth or population, or an attempt to equalize the military power of nations by allotting to smaller and weaker nations forces equal to or greater than those possessed by larger and more powerful nations, is an
