Afghanistan 307 small group of university students. This particular advantage, however, would perhaps be counterbalanced by the loss of support within the Khalqi-leaning military which a Parcham accession would entail. Despite the events of the past eighteen hours, we see no reason to alter this analysis, and can only conclude that Babrak will have no better chance to advance the revolution than did his predecessors, and that his base of support could even be much narrower than Amin’s in his last days. 6. The means by which Babrak came to power virtually guarantees instability, strife, and bloodshed here. By having ridden to power on the guns of the Soviet Army, Babrak will hardly have many admirers among Afghans, and this episode could conceivably provide the catalyst the various insurgent groups need to form their own united front against the “new” central government. A delayed reaction against the Soviet forces may still explode. The cohesion of what remains of the Afghan Army in the field is also questionable, as we anticipate that many individuals and units may wonder why they should continue fighting fellow Afghans for the sake of a leadership forcibly imposed by Moscow. A collapse of the army cannot be ruled out. 7. Because we must presume that the Soviets are aware of the risks of the “Parchamist option,” we have difficulty discerning convincing reasons for Moscow’s decision to intervene militarily to overthrow one regime and impose another, a move which hardly enhances Soviet prestige around the world and, in Afghanistan would appear a blunder of great magnitude. It could be, of course, that the Soviets were in a desperate quandary: for example, to continue with Amin represented likely disaster, while forcing a change in the Afghan regime may have been viewed as at least holding out the possibility of improving the chances of the revolution, despite the real potential disaster outlined above. At the same time, the episode may well underscore Moscow’s commitment that the world’s “correlation of forces” now favors the USSR, thereby demonstrating to the world the risks the Kremlin is willing to run in order to preclude reversal of a socialist revolution, especially on the USSR’s borders. Whether or not the Soviet action was designed as some sort of “signal” related to the Iranian or other international situation is for others to assess, but we think it was not, primarily because beating up on the Afghan Army does not necessarily represent a feat of arms that would [garble—concern?] major or even medium powers. 8. Despite the uncertainties surrounding Moscow’s decision to undertake this aggressive action—and we assume Hafizullah Amin believed the thousands of Soviet troops airlifted into Kabul were destined to assist him, not put him in his grave—an active Soviet military role in Afghanistan in support of the puppet government of Babrak
