828
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Annex A2
[2 pages not declassified]
Annex B3
Insurgency in Afghan Provinces
Badakshan
Government control of Badakshan, perhaps the most remote of
Afghanistan’s provinces, has always been tenuous, and the government
and the Soviets appear to control only the main road from Qonduz to
Feyzabad, the provincial capital, and the valley from Feyzabad south to
Jorm. Even this degree of control, however, represents an improvement
from the government position at the time of the Soviet invasion. The
government then controlled only Feyzabad, where the garrison was
surrounded and close to surrendering before Soviet troops came to
their relief in early February. A major clearing operation in June—
possibly the largest staged so far by the Soviets—extended control
beyond the Feyzabad area.
Konarha
At the time of the invasion, the government position in Konarha
was desperate. The few isolated posts it held were besieged and in
danger of falling. The major garrison in the province—at Asmar—had
defected in August after being besieged intermittently for six months.
The Nuristanis of the province resisted the government primarily out of
religious beliefs, although cultural differences with most other Afghans
probably made them even more resentful of control from Kabul than
most tribesmen.
Since that time, at least two major Soviet sweep operations in March
and May in the Konar Valley in the southern part of the province have
improved the situation. Asmar has been retaken, and the main villages
in the province are in danger from insurgents. In the main valley,
movement along roads is still hazardous but is at least possible for
armed government convoys. Although insurgent activity resumed
quickly after each Soviet sweep, the insurgents have not been able to
regain their complete control in the countryside. The more rugged and
2 Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
3 Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
