620  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Bartholomew: Do I understand also that you offered a trade in 
which the US would accept an agreed level in return for which the 
Soviet side is prepared to drop verification. Akhromeyev: This is a 
strange picture. On the one hand you say you disagree with agreed 
limits because of verification grounds, then you oppose all verification.
Bartholomew: This is not from our side. I am trying to understand 
and faithfully report your position. Akhromeyev: You understand me 
correctly. If we reach agreement on a SLCM limit, we would drop the 
verification part.
Bartholomew: It is necessary not to mislead you. Questions we ask 
for clarification should not be taken to indicate interest. I just want to 
make sure I understood your position correctly.
Akhromeyev: I understand that you just wanted to clarify. I want 
to clarify something myself, and say once again these talks tonight are 
completely informal in character. We will present our conclusions as 
informal conclusions. It is up to the ministers to decide whether to pun-
ish us or execute us or give mercy.
103.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 6, 1990, 8:30–9:30 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of European Affairs, Office of Russian Affairs, 
Russia Desk Files, Lot 99D344, Baker-Shevardnadze Washington 4/4–6/90. Secret. The 
meeting took place in the Secretary’s Office at the Department of State.
2 See Document 102.
U.S.:
Secretary Baker
Ambassador Bartholomew
Dennis B. Ross, Notetaker
Interpreter
USSR:
Eduard Shevardnadze
General Akhromeyev
Pavel Palazhenko
Sergey Tarasenko, Notetaker
Interpreter
Shevardnadze: I would like Akhromeyev to report to you on the dis-
cussion that he and Bartholomew had last evening.2
Baker: Fine. Please proceed.
Akhromeyev: As you and the Minister instructed us, we informally 
had a discussion last night and this discussion was clearly something 
that bound neither side. It was purely informal, and we discussed the 
ALCM issue and also SLCM issue. Both Bartholomew and I decided
