1600  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
441.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, March 17, 1959
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary Herter
General Goodpaster
The President said there seems to be growing evidence that testing 
is having bad physiological effects. He referred to recent articles about 
contamination by strontium 90. He is coming to the conclusion that our 
position should be that we will not test in the atmosphere. We will leave 
the underground and outer space tests out of any treaty. His thinking 
was that we should go for a system which both sides agree would 
work. To do so we would have to agree that small weapons could be 
tested under ground and in outer space. In his mind the biggest gain 
to be derived from such an agreement is the establishment of a system 
that could operate without veto, on a basis in which both sides could 
have confidence.
The President said he thought the scientists will in due time come 
to the position that the large-­scale use of nuclear weapons in the north­
ern hemisphere is an impossible solution to military problems. He 
thinks we must come to a test ban not as extensive as initially planned. 
Governor Herter said we are studying many combinations. He thought 
that perhaps we should take out of the treaty any coverage of the under­
ground tests and refer that matter to the United Nations, simply agree­
ing to atmospheric testing. He thought, however, the Soviets would 
disagree to this proposal since they are more interested in sweeping 
pronunciamentos than in tightly designed systems. The President said 
if we don’t try to get an agreement that gives the right of inspection, we 
really have nothing.
The President next asked as to the status of the Surprise Attack 
negotiations. Mr. Herter said that he felt that some further studies 
should be made on the basis of which the negotiations could then go 
forward. Defense, however, is resisting this proposal at least to the 
extent that they do not wish studies made by the same group that was 
in Geneva, but rather by the established agencies. The President asked 
Mr. Herter for a memorandum on this matter.
The President next suggested that Mr. Herter ask Ambassador Cac­
cia what the British want to take up while they are at Camp David, and 
1 Source: Nuclear testing suspension talks, surprise attack negotiations. Secret. 2 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on March 20.
