1224  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
public funds on unproductive projects, ostentatious high living, and the 
enrichment of favored personages. Its favorite industrial projects, a steel 
mill and a petrochemicals industry were unsuited to the present stage of 
Venezuelan economic development.11 Pérez Jiménez’ rate of expenditure 
exceeded even Venezuela’s handsome income. He left unpaid accounts 
amounting to over a billion dollars and unfinished projects that will 
require further large expenditures before they can go into operation.
50. The present administration is paying off the arrears of its pre-
decessor in part from current revenue, in part from treasury reserves 
(which have been drawn down to an unprecedentedly low level), in 
part from internal and foreign private loans. It cannot radically curtail 
expenditures to fear of increasing the unemployment which has already 
become a problem. Its plans call for further retrenchment in some areas, 
but increased expenditures on more worthy projects, such as education.
51. The financial predicament of the present government will 
intensify political demands for a greater share of petroleum profits. No 
party proposes nationalization of the oil industry—­the dependence of 
Venezuelan exports on the distributive facilities of the existing compa-
nies is a strong deterrent—­but both Acción Democrática and COPEI have 
declared that they will seek a larger share of the profits for Venezuela. No 
representative Venezuelan government could follow any other course.
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
52. With the fall of Pérez Jiménez, Venezuela moved from the 
camp of the dictatorships into that of the democracies. In consequence, 
friendly relations have been reestablished with Argentina, Uruguay, 
Chile, and Costa Rica, while relations with the Dominican Republic, 
Nicaragua, and Cuba have cooled. Within the Latin American commu-
nity, a democratic Venezuela can be expected to work against dictator-
ships in the Caribbean area, to seek common market agreements, and to 
advocate united action in dealing with the United States.
53. In world affairs, Venezuela will continue to side generally with 
the West against the Soviet Bloc, in the UN and elsewhere, but this sup-
port will not be dependable in situations in which Western imperial-
ism in underdeveloped countries is alleged. Venezuela is unlikely to 
resume diplomatic relations with the Soviet Bloc in the near future, nor 
is there likely to be any significant increase in Venezuelan trade with 
the Bloc. Venezuelan exports compete with those of the Bloc.
54. In Venezuela, strong popular feeling, manifested in the Nixon 
incident, holds the U.S. accountable for undue intimacy with the detested 
Pérez Jiménez dictatorship and for a supposed general preference for 
11 Because of limited internal demand for their products, these industries would 
have to export to prosper, because of a lack of skilled manpower and high costs of pro-
duction, they could not compete in external markets without the support of substantial 
government subsidies. [Footnote is in the source text.]
