Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 361 Nazarkin, regarding element 2B (“no more than 10 road-­mobile launchers of ICBMs shall be based or located in a restricted area”), proposed replacing “shall” with “may.” Burt said this seemed acceptable as long as it was understood that neither side could deploy more than 10. Nazarkin said 2C was acceptable, but that the Soviet side had problems with 3A. It was not understandable. Burt suggested that, because of the late time, the sides return to the issue later. Nazarkin nodded his approval. Burt summed up by saying the work of the sub-­group had been very productive. He thanked the Soviet side for its cooperation. Nazarkin said he was also satisfied with the work of the sub-­group and thanked the U.S. side for its constructive approach. 49. Letter From Soviet General Secretary Gorbachev to President Bush1 Washington, undated Unofficial Translation Dear Mr. President, I think that the letter you sent me on June 202 opens a new and important stage in our private exchanges. I share your view that direct contacts between us are indispensable, particularly as regards exchanges on the substance of the most important problems whose 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, Special Separate USSR Notes Files, Gorbachev Files, OA/ID 91126–002, Gorbachev (Dobrynin) Sensitive 1989–June 1990 [2]. No classification marking. A typed notation at the top of the letter reads “Unofficial translation.” Shevardnadze handed the letter to Bush on the afternoon of September 21. The complete letter is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post- Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. The memorandum of conversation for their 2–3:05 p.m. meeting with U.S. and Soviet officials, by which time Shevardnadze had already delivered the letter to Bush, is scheduled for publication ibid. Following the meeting, Shevardnadze and Baker got on a plane to fly to Jackson Hole. The memoranda of their conversations on the plane, as well as during their September 22 meetings in Wyoming, are scheduled for publication ibid. 2 See Document 34.
