1334 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 398. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, August 12, 1980 SUBJECT Scenario for the Autonomy Talks (U) At Tab A is a memorandum Chris prepared, based on a meeting2 I held yesterday on the way forward on the autonomy talks. It lays out a scenario for getting the talks restarted—one which, however, is highly dependent on reactions by both Sadat and Begin. Sol concurs in this approach. (S) If you approve it, we would like to begin implementation immediately, since Roy Atherton may be seeing Sadat as early as tomorrow morning,3 and his being able to lay out our thinking to Sadat could be critical in shaping the Egyptian reaction to the recent Begin letter. The Egyptians are already talking of Sadat’s responding to Begin tomorrow, in view of the Israelis’ having published the Begin letter. (S) The letter to Sadat which you requested (Tab B)4 would not be delivered, under the proposed scenario, until the last week of August; thus it can be revised further in light of developments. At that time, you might want to write it out longhand. (S) If the proposed scenario worked, there could be as many as three public events in the near future to demonstrate that the peace process is moving forward: —public announcement of continuing bilateral technical talks (late August); —announcement in three capitals, during Sol’s next trip, on restarting the talks (early September); and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 5, Autonomy Talks: 8/80. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Carter wrote “Zbig. J” in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum. 2 A Senior Level Meeting, attended by Brzezinski, Christopher, Linowitz, Saunders and Hunter, took place in the White House Situation Room from 2:58 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. on August 11. A memorandum of conversation of this meeting was not found. A set of handwritten notes, likely prepared by Hunter, recording the meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 6, Autonomy Talks: Senior Level 8/11/80 Meeting: 8/80. 3 Atherton met with Sadat in Alexandria on August 18. Atherton summarized the meeting in telegram 18065 from Cairo, August 18. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–1557) 4 Attached but not printed.
