International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
55
18.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Letter from Bob Strauss to Carry to Prime Minister Fukuda
The State Department and STR believe that the 2.5 million restraint
figure on Japanese color TV exports to the US, which you told Prime
Minister Fukuda was acceptable to us,2 would in fact be seen by do-
mestic industry and labor as too high. The ITC finding, which (by
raising tariffs) implies an import level of 2.5 million for all countries,
would probably mean a 1.9 million level for Japan. At Tab A is a letter
to Fukuda, which Strauss would like to deliver personally;3 it indicates
that after your examination of the International Trade Commission’s
report and the most recent trade figures (roughly 25% above compa-
rable months last year), you believe that the figure which you men-
tioned to Fukuda would prove unrealistic in the US, and that the
problem needs a fresh look to arrive at a figure below this level. It ex-
presses the hope that this can be worked out on Strauss’ visit to Tokyo.
In seeking to reopen these discussions, we are, of course, going
back on the figure you proposed to Fukuda as a US position. But failure
to reduce this number would likely provoke a hostile domestic reac-
tion, which would be harmful to our longer-term trade policy and
Japan’s interests as well.
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the letter at Tab A.4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda,
2–12/77. No classification marking.
2 See Document 12.
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned letter from Carter to
Fukuda. Strauss visited Tokyo April 6–8 for talks with Japanese officials.
4 A handwritten notation at the bottom of the page reads: “signed revised letter
4/4/77.” According to the memorandum’s NSC Correspondence Profile, Carter signed a
revised version of the letter; a handwritten note on the profile reads: “Sorry. Copies are
not available in the NSC/S [NSC Secretariat]. It was [signed] & is being hand carried by
Strauss.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Cor-
respondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda,
2–12/77)
