North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
1065
336.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, November 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Statutory Constraints on Foreign Assistance Which May Impede U.S. Efforts to
Counter Soviet-Cuban Adventurism
In response to your question on this subject, let me first briefly re-
view our accomplishments and setbacks on the “legislative con-
straints” front since my memorandum to you on this issue last year
(attached).2
Working closely with Henry Owen and AID, we have succeeded
in getting Congress to eliminate outright or ease a number of con-
straints on our use of development and security assistance in areas
where Soviet and Cuban activity is growing. These include:
—repeal of the prohibition on furnishing long-term development
assistance and short-term economic support (security supporting assist-
ance) to any country in a single fiscal year (Sec. 115 of the Foreign As-
sistance Act of 1961, as amended—the FAA);
—authorization for the President to draw on Defense Department
stocks for emergency military assistance needs involving vital U.S. se-
curity interests, without the former requirement for appropriation act
language each year before this authority is actually available to the
President (Sec. 506 of the FAA);
—repeal of the $40 million ceiling on aggregate military assistance
and foreign military sale (FMS) financing that can be provided to Af-
rican countries in a single fiscal year (Sec. 33 of the Arms Export Con-
trol Act);
—removal of limits on the amount of military assistance and FMS
sales and financing for Turkey in a single fiscal year (although the Pres-
ident must still first certify that defense articles provided are necessary
for Turkey to meet its NATO defense responsibilities) (Sec. 620(x) and
620(C) of the FAA);
—expansion of the President’s authority to transfer funds from the
Economic Support Fund account under the FAA to the Peacekeeping
account, and to use Peacekeeping funds to pay for Defense Department
expenses incurred in supporting UN activities.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 25, Foreign Assistance: 6–11/79. Secret. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
The memorandum was sent to Carter under cover of a December 3 memorandum from
Owen, who indicated his agreement “with Cy’s case-by-case approach to the removal of
constraints and will work with him, Tom Ehrlich, and others on a strategy for 1980.”
Owen also wrote: “This is an uphill battle but our achievements thus far show that some
headway can be made.” Carter initialed Owen’s memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 Printed as Tab A to Document 305.
