Chile  229
strong and friendly ally, we may have to accept certain Chilean failings 
and find ways to pursue our policy in spite of them, rather than slow 
down or halt our help while waiting for Chileans to change character.
U.S.-Latin American policy, while recognized as basically sound 
and accepted as helpful by most Chileans, has nevertheless exhausted 
its overt appeal here. We solved our major hemispheric political prob-
lems and supplemented that action with a welcome reciprocal trade 
program during the Thirties and Forties, thus creating a reservoir of 
good will which has carried us a long way and still has significant back-
ground values, but which is no longer exploitable. Our part in World 
War II also helped to build our reputation.
With the political problems mostly out of the way, economic diffi-
culties have taken over the stage. In our efforts to help solve these by 
loans, grants, technical assistance, and arguing the virtues of private 
enterprise, we have had only limited success. What we have done has 
been appreciated, but it has been badly overshadowed by the volume 
of our assistance to the rest of the world, and by the fact that economic 
problems larger than any we have helped solve keep appearing. The 
net effect is one of relative neglect. At the same time, unfortunately, 
our expressions of willingness to help and our largesse throughout the 
world have created an atmosphere of paternalism which has caused 
Chile to expect much more from us than we have delivered, and at the 
same time to fail to recognize its corresponding obligations.
Specific complaints
Major Chilean complaints boil down to the following:
1) U.S. resistance against commodity arrangements to guarantee 
reasonable copper prices, while keeping presumed Soviet bloc demand 
uneffective, leaving Chile, so extremely dependent on foreign trade in 
copper, to shoulder a cold war burden re this strategic commodity far 
beyond its capacity.
2) U.S. tendency to revert to protectionism at the expense of its 
friends in the face of what to Chile appear relatively minor domestic 
economic problems, thus forgetting our position and obligations as the 
leading world power.
3) Failure of the U.S.—­or of international financial agencies which 
the U.S. could apparently influence heavily—­in spite of declared inten-
tions to the contrary, to provide development capital sufficient to enable 
Chile to progress enough to keep up with growth rates elsewhere and 
especially in the U.S, not to mention reducing the vast distance between 
our standards of living.
4) Failure of the U.S. to distinguish within the hemisphere between 
truly democratic friends such as Chile and dictatorships.
