890  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PM–8.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of 
the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs 
(Leggett)1

Washington, October 8, 1958.
SUBJECT
U.S.-Panamanian Relations and the Canal Zone
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
His Excellency Señor Lic. Miguel J. Moreno, Minister of Foreign Relations 
of Panama
His Excellency Señor Don Ricardo M. Arias E., Ambassador of Panama
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
OAP—Mr. Leggett
Calling at his own request, Foreign Minister Moreno began by 
expressing his admiration for the skill and firmness displayed by 
the Secretary in dealing with the current crisis in the Far East2 and 
stated that his Government fully endorsed the position adopted by the 
United States.
He then turned to certain aspects of U.S.-Panamanian relations 
concerning the Canal Zone, and expressed his appreciation at having 
received the opportunity to bring this matter to the Secretary’s personal 
attention. He said that his Government was under severe pressure from 
student groups and other elements and that these pressures, although 
political in expression, were basically economic in origin. They repre-
sented, the Foreign Minister went on to say, a desire for better education, 
improved living conditions, and a higher standard of living. To meet 
these demands, the Panamanian Government found it essential, he said, 
to achieve a more favorable economic relationship with the Canal Zone.
The basic difficulty lay in the differing interpretation placed by 
United States Government agencies and the Government of Panama 
on the Treaty of 1955 between the two governments and the related 
Memorandum of Understandings Reached. Of primary importance to 
Panama, he went on to say, were the questions of importation of mer-
chandise for resale in the Zone, manufacturing and processing activities 
in the Zone, application of the single wage scale to all Zone employees, 
remission to the Government of Panama of duties collected on liquor 
sold in the Zone, and the question of the location of the proposed new 
passenger terminal by the Panama Railroad Company.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.1913/10–858. Confidential.
2 For documentation on U.S. policy with respect to the Chinese offshore island crisis 
of 1958, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XVI, East Asia-Pacific Region; Cambodia; 
Laos.
