1066  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
3. We are getting vibrations that, for political reasons, holding the 
summit in June may be an overriding goal. The conventional wisdom 
here on both sides has been for a long time that holding the next sum-
mit and not signing the treaty would be disastrous for the negotiations 
and perhaps kill the treaty altogether. Naturally, such a worst case sce-
nario would not come to pass if a June summit were followed in July 
or August by another summit/signing ceremony at which START were 
concluded. The main thing that is needed, from our point of view, is 
to set a firm date for completion of the treaty. I understand that this 
is somewhat of a chicken and egg problem—on the one hand there is 
some risk in setting a date before one is absolutely certain that it is 
achievable, but on the other hand without the pressure of a date certain, 
the remaining problems never will be solved.
4. The references to a “framework agreement” have caused a bit 
of a stir here on the Soviet side, according to Roslyakov. Given the 
baggage carried by this phrase, it should be avoided. In particular, the 
USG violently opposed a framework agreement three or four years ago, 
claiming that the negotiations had gone far beyond the stage where 
this would be useful. The Soviets remember this very well. Likewise, 
“agreement in principle” would not be a felicitous phrase to use, since 
we have had an agreement in principle on the START treaty for an even 
longer period. The device which has been, and could continue to be 
used to signal solutions of difficult problems is the elements of com-
mon ground. A document with this or a similar title which resolved 
issues like data denial, downloading, production units, new types, etc. 
could be useful at or before an otherwise STARTless summit.
5. I understand from Roslyakov that the Soviets have proposed that 
the ungroup come to Geneva to meet with Obukhov. Roslyakov said 
that Moiseyev might attend such a meeting. In terms of timing, you 
should know that Nazarkin, Katayev and Koltunov are now in Moscow 
and are not expected back here before June 9 at the earliest. If such a 
meeting occurs in the near future, it should have an agenda agreed in 
advance and should include at least some of the big items mentioned 
above. The only one of these that I might be able to provide some new 
information on would be production units. Within the last two days, 
several of us have gotten indications that there is more to come on pro-
duction units and that it may well involve changes in current Soviet 
practices which will ease our concerns. Thus, we should not overreact 
to what we have heard thus far from Obukhov, which is certainly not 
the complete story. Significantly, Roslyakov told me that it may be that 
production units do not exist or, if they do exist at present, perhaps they 
will not exist after entry into force. The solution which is emerging may 
be that solid rocket motors would be sent directly from the production 
facility to the test facility, where the nozzles and any other components
