Chapter 2, January–June 1989  227
The second approach to verification would explicitly strike a bal-
ance among the competing considerations by considering not simply 
the chances of cheating, but the military risks posed by potential cheating 
were it to occur. This is what traditionally has been meant by “effective 
verification” or “adequate verification.” It is a standard that requires 
that we be able to discover militarily significant cheating in time to take 
appropriate responses. It acknowledges that not all cheating is militar-
ily significant (although it would have obvious political implications). 
It also implies that we would apply different verification measures to 
different START provisions, depending on best balance among budget 
costs, intelligence risks, military constraints, and verification require-
ments in each case.
Such an approach requires a “military risk” assessment for each 
case. An implicit “military risk” assessment underlies our current posi-
tion on airbreathing systems although no explicit analysis is available. 
Military risk assessments of other START provisions could lead to more 
or less stringent verification requirements than those embedded in our 
current positions. The JCS is in the best position to perform such anal-
yses and to testify about them during ratification hearings. The Chiefs, 
however, have evidenced great difficulty in the past in making these 
judgments.
The approach taken in the INF Treaty, especially during the rati-
fication hearings, was more in the direction of “political verification.” 
The Senate also made clear during ratification hearings that it would 
hold the Administration to a higher verification standard in START. It 
will be difficult to persuade the Senate to shift from a “political verifica-
tion” approach to a harder to understand and more subjective “effective 
verification” approach. Unless military risk assessments that can with-
stand Congressional scrutiny are performed, however, there is likely to 
be no practical alternative to a “political” approach to verification. On 
the other hand, it may not be feasible to meet the standards imposed by 
“political verification,” even if it were desirable.
Mobile Missiles. You have proposed to Congress that we deploy 
two mobile missiles. Our current START position would ban all mobile 
ICBMs.
You need to decide whether and when to drop our proposed START ban 
on mobile missiles. If so, you need to decide what if any constraints to impose 
on mobile ICBMs.
START ban on mobile ICBMs. Many will see a fundamental contra-
diction between an emphasis in START on strengthening strategic sta-
bility on the one hand, and on the other hand banning mobile missiles. 
They will see a similar contradiction between the strategic rationale—­
enhanced stability through increased ICBM survivability—­that led you 
to propose that Congress fund two such mobile ICBM programs, and
