1070
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gram as a requirement for continued nuclear cooperation with the US.2
It became clear during recent talks with Argentine nuclear officials in
Washington3 that any success in achieving deferral of Argentina’s re-
processing program will depend heavily on what we can accomplish
with the Brazilians.
Nonetheless, the postponement of your visit to Brasilia, and a
number of other recent developments, lead me to believe that we
should take a somewhat more attenuated and indirect approach in
pursuing our non-proliferation strategy with Brazil than originally
planned.
Schmidt’s unwillingness to support our ideas for resolving the
Argentine/Brazil problem will stiffen Brazilian resistance, and Geisel is
likely to reject out of hand any package of proposals we present at this
time. France’s recent decision not to complete the Pakistani repro-
cessing plant and to press the FRG for a similar policy in Brazil, cou-
pled with increasing disenchantment within the Brazilian scientific
community with the FRG/Brazil agreement, suggest that the climate
for a satisfactory solution may improve if these factors are given more
time to work.
I believe that the best approach at this time is to avoid specific dis-
cussion of the FRG/Brazil agreement, to set out our ideas in the context
of seeking Brazil’s views on how to deal with a hemispheric security
problem, and to leave specific solutions for a later stage.4 The main ele-
ments of our thinking could thus be presented and left for Geisel to
consider, without being prematurely offered as an American solution.
I attach a more detailed outline of this approach5 which I would
propose to use as the basis for the Brazil talks if you approve.
2 An unknown hand underlined this sentence.
3 Not found.
4 An unknown hand underlined the sentence “set out our ideas in the context of
seeking Brazil’s views on how to deal with a hemispheric security problem, and to leave
specific solutions for a later stage” in this paragraph.
5 Attached but not printed.
