892
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
for Russian occupation of the Iranian plateau. Nazi-Soviet diplomatic
conversations resulted in 1940 in a draft agreement “that the area south
of Batum and Baku in the general direction of the Persian Gulf is recog-
nized as the center of aspirations of the Soviet Union.”8 The USSR is ex-
tremely sensitive to developments along its borders. It usually has
sought to protect its frontiers with a cordon of satellite states. Efforts to
retain Soviet troops in Iran after the end of the last World War and to
establish a puppet communist government in Azerbaijan in 1946
proved Soviet interest in obtaining control of at least the northern area
of Iran. Further evidence of Soviet concern over the vulnerable Iranian
frontier has been a series of truculent Soviet notes to recent Iranian
Governments protesting the presence of American military missions
and oil drillers in Iran. Each note referred, as a basis for the protest, to
Article VI of the 1921 treaty between the USSR and Iran (see Part 6).
9. If air bases were to become available to the USSR in Iran, light
bombers of the Soviet Air Force would be able to operate throughout
the region of the Persian Gulf. Iranian bases could also support Soviet
ground and air attacks against the upper Tigris-Euphrates valley and
thence westward toward the Mediterranean. East-west lines of com-
munications would be threatened. Communist control of Iran would
also provide an excellent base for political penetration of Pakistan on
the east and the Arab states on the west. Communist theoreticians have
described the conquest of Iran as the key to the success of communist
designs on Asia, and particularly India.9
10. While the USSR does not require the oil reserves and facilities
of Iran for further development of her peacetime economy or to insure
her ability to wage war, the acquisition or control by the Soviets of
these reserves and facilities would have the following estimated effects:
a. In time of peace
(1) Serve to augment existing Soviet oil and gasoline stocks thereby
boosting Communist economy and preparations for war.
(2) Provide additional power to wage economic warfare through
“dumping” methods designed to disrupt the oil markets of the West.
b. In time of war
(1) Provide oil and gasoline stocks for local military operations in
the Middle East and for Soviet submarine refueling in the Persian Gulf.
(2) Deny the use of the Iranian fields to the allied coalition as a war-
time petroleum source.
8 Nazi-Soviet Relations 1939–1941, Documents from the Archives of the German Foreign
Office. [Footnote is in the original.]
9 G. Lenczowski, Russia and the West in Iran. [Footnote is in the original.]
