721.2315/180: Telegram
[Document 300]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
WASHINGTON, March 3, 1925—6 p.m.
10. Your 12, March 3, noon. Señor Velarde has received instructions as set forth in your
telegram. The words “in the sense that” are objected to on behalf of Colombia as
conducive to misunderstanding and cannot be accepted without specific instructions.
There is thus serious risk of breakdown of negotiations at critical moment without
compensating results to Peru. There will be an opportunity to sign through tomorrow
afternoon and it is earnestly hoped Peruvian Government will agree to delete the words
objected to. The statement in the third paragraph of your undated telegram No. 10,16
would be acceptable as would any of the following three alternatives: 1.
“Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to
express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State
had just made and that as a consequence his Government would immediately
advise the Peruvian Congress thereof, repeating at the same time its
recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with Colombia.”
2. Same as No. 1 through words “had just made” and then the, following words “and
that his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress thereof,
repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with
Colombia.”
3. Same as No. 1 through words “had just made” then following “and that his
Government would repeat to the Peruvian Congress its recommendation that it approve
the boundary treaty with Colombia.”
Department unable to understand this multitude of changes. If the Peruvian
Government does not desire to enter into the Procès Verbal Department would prefer to
have it say so frankly. If it does desire to do so Department hopes it will send
instructions this evening if possible to the Peruvian Ambassador to accept one of the
formulae above proposed.
HUGHES
16 Telegram No. 10 dated Mar. 1, 10 p.m., p. 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc.
293].
