Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
805
—At President Carter’s initiative, NATO adopted, in 1978, a com-
prehensive Long-Term Defense Program to upgrade its forces in ten spe-
cific areas, from air defense to command and control.2
—Following U.S. leadership, the Alliance members committed
themselves to 3% annual increases in real defense spending through the
mid-1980’s.
—In December 1979, NATO agreed to modernize and upgrade its
long-range theater nuclear forces by deploying Pershing II and ground-
launched cruise missiles in Europe.
—With recent reintegration of Greece into NATO, the southeastern
flank of the alliance is strengthened.
—Congressional repeal of Turkish arms embargo, at urging of Ad-
ministration, resulted in reopening of U.S. installations there; strength-
ening of NATO’s southeastern flank.
—Recently agreed with Great Britain to assist it in modernizing its
nuclear arsenal.
—Steady growth in our strategic relationship with Japan. New Joint
Defense Guidelines of 1978.
—Renegotiated base agreement with Philippines which stabilizes mil-
itary presence in Southeast Asia through 1991.
Non-allied contingencies
—Engaged in significant enhancement of our capability to move
forces rapidly to distant trouble spots, particularly Persian Gulf.
—Increased our naval presence in Indian Ocean.
—Prepositioning military equipment in region.
—Negotiating access rights to key local port and airfield facilities in
region; concluded agreements with Kenya and Oman.
—Expanding airlift capability through development of new CX
cargo aircraft.
—Establishing new Rapid Deployment Force, composed of units
from all services.
—Persuading our allies to assume more of defense burden in their
own regions as we shift resources to Southwest Asia-Persian Gulf
contingencies.
2. Balanced, enforceable arms control to reduce enormous dangers and costs
of an all-out nuclear arms race.
—After nearly seven years of negotiation by three Presidents, Pres-
ident Carter concluded SALT II Treaty. Would make us more secure by
2 See footnote 10, Document 90.
