El Salvador  639
posts. They are aware of background these people and reached unani-
mous decision appoint them after long debate. After conversing many 
serious Salvadorans I conclude there are sharply diverging opinions 
about whether doubtful individuals are Communists. In any event, 
Junta is aware our concern for some appointees and Osorio welcomed 
memorandum [text not declassified]4 When translated “Osorio suggested 
it be given to Minister Interior Escamilla.
4) Osorio and Junta are for free elections. They think Democratic 
forces can overwhelm Leftists at polls, and Osorio starts organizing 
new party to attract bulk of PRUD on Friday, with big convention 
around December 15. Civilian Junta members told me they discussed 
two types overthrow in first stages of plotting, namely à la Castro or 
à la Betancourt. Decided on latter because by Democratic forces in 
Venezuela won out later in free elections. Said this formula also had 
been successful in Guatemala and Honduras. Osorio said PRAM and 
CGTS will be controlled. Close friend one of military members Junta 
and of Minister Interior said these two strongly confirmed this fact to 
him. However, same source, evidencing his own concern, added that he 
had asked his friends if they sure they not being used.
5) Junta admits its functions as caretaker Government while 
Congressional elections prepared is not enough and must make start 
on social program. Osorio said he had ideas along this line.
6) Reaction among Salvadorans with whom I talked is regret for 
departure constitutional process but strong to mild feeling Lemus bun-
gled student disturbances so badly his removal was logical aftermath. 
Return to constitutional Government is avowed unanimous desire.
7) Consensus opinion is that any succeeding Government would 
be rightist military Junta. Some observers viewed this with alarm, say-
ing it would not be accepted by liberal elements and masses, with con-
sequent trouble.
8) I am most impressed with attitude of intelligent Salvadorans 
who realize dangers of present situation and wish cooperate with Junta 
in finding solution along peaceful lines. Meanwhile working class con-
tinues at tasks without interruption. Cumbersome six-­man Junta may 
be streamlined but I believe only after satisfactory agreement between 
civilians and military.
9) Osorio made plea for recognition and Junta members were most 
eager get over point they wish to work with U.S. and need our support.
Downs
4 The paper entitled, “Cuban Subersive Activities in E1 Salvador,” was not found in 
Department of State files.
