922 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV our “vital interests,” we also may need to consider the precedential or “domino” effect of not protecting our interests in some countries of little intrinsic interest. In either case, there may be a wide geographical spread between areas where we wish to project force. b. It is easy to conceive of conditions in which a rapidly deployable ground force could face superior force, e.g., Iran. The ability to counterattack at some distant point more to our advantage could be important here. “Horizontal escalation” may require that we be able to move ground, air, or naval forces quickly to widely dispersed areas to cut off the supply line from the Soviet Union or its surrogates to governments hostile to us, e.g., points of egress into the open oceans and areas in which they hold advance positions such as Cuba, Libya and Ethiopia. [portion marking not declassified] 8. What are the non-­military elements of this strategy? It is a recognition that one of our greatest strengths is the potential of our agricultural and industrial prowess to exert influence around the world. It is a willingness blatantly to use our agricultural surpluses and advanced industrial technologies to pressure other nations into conformance with our objectives. It is a capability that neither the Soviets nor most other probable adversaries possess. The negative side of a policy of economic sanctions is that it is difficult to execute, and the results problematic. Experience suggests that positive economic inducements are more likely to be successful than sanctions. A full and coordinated economic strategy has never been attempted. Despite the attendant uncertainties, it is a unique American potential that is worth considerable effort to explore. [portion marking not declassified] 9. The attachments discuss some of the specific steps to move into a strategy of mobile military and economic leverage. [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner3

Appendix 1

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4 Washington, undated Steps to move to a mobile military strategy for the United States in the 1980s: 1. Establish a sense of strategic priorities: 3 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above this typed signature. 4 Secret.
