National Security Policy 737 President said he understood that this action is being proposed on the basis that beyond the programs being recommended additions would not be very useful. Mr. McElroy confirmed this, stating that since we prepared these programs the threat has changed. We now visualize that enemy bombers, if they attack, would do so after we had been hit by long-­range missiles. Dr. Killian asked whether the proposals reflect an acceleration of the BOMARC B program. Mr. Holaday said that they did not because the SAGE system and the bases would not be ready in time. He added that the program includes a recommendation to spend an additional $250 million to bring the peripheral SAGE areas up to “high grade SAGE” capabilities through the addition of radars, gap fillers, etc. In the interior, SAGE would be cut back to “minimum capability SAGE.” Mr. McElroy added that the decision not to deploy the BOMARC in the central areas of the United States reduces the requirement for high-­ grade SAGE. The minimum that is being proposed is needed to guide interceptors, SAC bombers, etc. He added that the FAA will make use of the minimum SAGE system in its peacetime operations. Dr. Killian commented that in order to put the BOMARC bases in Canada it would be necessary to extend the SAGE system and the base support structure up into that area. Mr. McElroy said what the Canadians principally need is to modernize the interceptors in their Air Force. The President asked whether we do not think that the BOMARC is an improvement on interceptors—otherwise why would we have gone to the BOMARC. The President asked if the problem of identifi­ cation had been solved—whether we have perfected the IFF. General White said that we had not, and do not have a solution to the problem. We continue to work on it. The President asked General Lemnitzer whether he thought this plan was reasonable. General Lemnitzer said that it involved a cut-­back in previously planned programs but that he did think it was a reason­ able solution to the problem; he commented that the threat is changing as had been previously mentioned. At this point the President said that he feels there must be one great, over-­all operational command to which the air defense weapons, regardless of the service providing them, must be assigned. He said it made little difference to him which service provided the forces; some one commander must be in full control, however. Admiral Burke said that General Partridge has the command but wants a great deal more in resources than can be provided. General White disagreed as to the ade­ quacy of General Partridge’s command authority; he commented that he does not believe that General Partridge has the authority he needs. The President stated strongly “then he should have it.” Admiral Burke
