1955  605
87. Wang said I had said if Mrs. Huizer was Dutch, would PRC 
have prevented her departure. He could only conclude that it is a delib­
erate distortion for U.S. side to state matter in this manner.
88. Wang said as to need for establishing friendly atmosphere 
around talks, this was always objective of PRC side. But in order estab­
lish friendly atmosphere both sides must make common effort. It would 
be illusion for one side to insist on making charges while it wants other 
side keep silent. Statement PRC side is going to make has been com­
pelled by U.S. propaganda.
89. I asked whether Wang could give me copy of statement.
90. Wang replied he did not now have a copy.
91. I said I wished again to deny emphatically that any Chinese in 
U.S. are being required to proceed to Taiwan.
92. Wang said this denial would have practical effect only after INS 
repealed its requirement on Chinese students.
93. I said there was no INS requirement that any Chinese student 
go to Taiwan.
94. Wang said requirement compelling students make such appli­
cation is nothing but forcing them to proceed to Taiwan.
95. I said students could satisfy requirement in any number of 
ways. Wang must be aware that all Chinese who entered U.S. in recent 
years entered under Government of Republic of China passports. If 
those passports have expired, it is perfectly natural for these people 
to obtain renewal of their passports. However, whether they fulfill 
requirement that way or not, nothing compels them go to Taiwan.
96. Wang said as he had pointed out he could not regard this meas­
ure as justifiable.
97. I said I had nothing further on this subject. However, I was 
seriously disturbed over PRC side placing our talks on this subject 
into propaganda field. In view of action his government and in view 
of approaching holiday season for both of us, I wondered whether 
it would be preferable have few weeks interval before next meeting. 
Action of his government is inevitably going to entangle two items our 
agenda and our discussion. Perhaps if we were not to meet for a short 
period it might reduce public speculation and get us back to situation 
where we could make progress. I was throwing this suggestion out as 
sincere effort try reduce impact action his government and in hope it 
will enable us make further progress. Would appreciate his views.
98. Wang said what period of time did I have in mind in proposing 
a short recess.
99. I said we might meet again either on 5th or 12th January.
100. Wang said there are two aspects to question. According to 
what I had said, I desired recess and I was trying justify this recess by
