1140  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
The United States of America recognizes that requirements under 
the treaty referred to in this statement will also apply with equal force to 
heavy bombers, both of the United States of America and of the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, of any new type from none of which a 
long-range nuclear ALCM has been flight-tested.
U.S. Statement on Underground Structures
The U.S. side believes that construction of any additional under-
ground structures adjacent to waters in which ballistic missile sub-
marines operate and comparable in size and configuration to the ones 
located in the immediate vicinity of the Ara Inlet, the Yagel’ Naya 
Submarine Base, and the Pavlovskoye Submarine Base, would raise 
concerns regarding compliance with the obligation provided for in 
Article V, paragraph 26 of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation 
of Strategic Offensive Arms. For its part, the United States does not 
have such underground structures, does not plan to construct and 
will not construct any such underground structures while the START 
treaty remains in force. The U.S. side proceeds from the premise that 
the Soviet side will exercise similar restraint.
(End text of statements)
11. The Ambassadors agreed that the texts of the statements would 
be included in the negotiating record as reflecting the positions of the 
sides. (Comment: The sides had previously agreed that all statements 
exchanged at the final plenary would be made public. End comment.) 
Having completed the agenda for the final START plenary, the sides 
adjourned at 11:52 a.m. to complete the preparation of the treaty for 
signature in Moscow.
12. Documents exchanged:
A. U.S. side: Text of Ambassador Brooks’ public statement; texts of 
joint, reciprocal, and U.S. unilateral statements.
B. Soviet side: Text of Ambassador Nazarkin’s public statement; 
texts of joint and reciprocol statements.
13. List of delegation attendees:
U.S	
USSR
Mr. T.R. Sample	
Mr. L.A. Masterkov
Dr. E.M. Ifft	
Mr. V.V. Zharkov
Dr. N.M. O’Fallon	
Gen-Lt N.N. Detinov
Mr. D.A. Jones	
LtCol G.D. D’Yachenko
Bgen G.L. Curtin	
Mr. G.A. Zaytsev
Mr. W.E. Furniss	
Col V.S. Koltunov
Dr. J.L. Kangas	
Mr. S.V. Kryuchkov
Dr. E.J. Dowdy	
Mr. Yu. I. Roslyakov
Mr. T. Graham Jr.	
Col S.L. Shemyakin
