Chapter 2, January–June 1989  265
that a START proposal that would ban rail-­garrison MX will break 
apart the Congressional coalition and lead to the defeat of both of your 
mobile ICBM programs.
Option 1.  Maintain a formal ban on mobile ICBMs pending resolution 
of our verification concerns. (favored by OSD, JCS, State and 
Ambassador Rowny)
Option 2.  Propose a ban on all MIRV mobile ICBMs, while allowing 
single warhead mobiles, subject to appropriate sublimits.
Option 3.  Modify the U.S. position to allow both single-­warhead and 
MIRVed mobile ICBMs, subject to appropriate sublimits 
(favored by ACDA).
Decision26
Defense & Space
In Defense & Space you face two issues: (1) options to protect our 
right to develop and test SDI within the “broad interpretation” of the 
ABM Treaty during a period of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty; 
and, (2) options to protect a right to deploy defenses after the non-­
withdrawal period.
1. Testing Rights During a Non-­withdrawal Period. The issue is how 
best to guarantee U.S. rights to conduct SDI testing in space.
Option 1.  Our current position. It provides a unilateral U.S. assurance 
that the number of satellites orbited for ABM weapons test-
ing at any one time will not exceed 15. Further, the U.S. and 
the Soviet Union would agree to specific notification pro-
cedures regarding those satellites. (favored by State, OSD, 
ACDA, Amb. Rowny, and the Defense & Space Negotiator)
This package is intended to address stated Soviet concerns that 
U.S. ABM testing in space could become de facto deployment. It is 
designed to be fully consistent with the “broad interpretation” of the 
ABM Treaty and thus would not require negotiating any amendments 
to the ABM Treaty.
The U.S has held that if the Soviets agree to a Treaty requiring noti-
fication of ABM tests in space, it would demonstrate understanding 
and acceptance of the U.S. position that ABM testing in space is permit-
ted under the ABM Treaty.
Those who support this option believe that it would: gain implicit 
Soviet acknowledgment of certain ABM Treaty testing rights during the 
26 Bush indicated his approval of Option 1.
