1462  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
D. Influential groups in the United States, both inside and outside 
the Government, are desirous of test cessation on a variety of grounds, 
largely represented as moral, humanitarian, etc.
Discussion
Of the considerations listed under A above, it may be said that they 
represent a substantial, though not fully agreed and not fully evalu­
ated, cost and danger to the United States.
Of the considerations listed under B above, it may be said that the 
genetic effects are extremely small (most recent scientific findings indi­
cate that the products of testing are below the threshold at which genetic 
effects would appear) and that the Soviets and those who have helped 
them have thereby achieved the end of influencing policy through false 
propaganda; with regard to the lessening of tensions, question exists 
whether partial suspension, or suspension that can be only partially 
policed, will achieve this end; also whether in an era of protracted 
conflict waged by the Communists against the West, in which tension 
arises from the conflict of Soviet aggressive aims with free world intent 
to defend and maintain itself, the lessening of tension is an objective 
that has validity for the free world. These considerations represent a 
propaganda defeat for the United States, which may well require to be 
retrieved by concessions at the cost of our security, if our diplomacy is 
to have satisfactory results.
The considerations listed under C above, to the extent we may 
have expectation that they will in fact be achieved, represent a true off­
set to the costs of suspension to our security.
It seems a fair summary that the United States has proposed action 
which, if taken, balances on the one hand a net cost and risk to U.S. 
security against, on the other, the necessity for some relief from Soviet 
propaganda successes, some hope of further disarmament steps and of 
tendencies toward liberalization in the Soviet bloc, and the satisfaction 
of the desires and objectives of certain influential groups within the 
United States.
There is some belief in some quarters that the Soviets may not 
accept an agreement on cessation of testing which satisfies the min­
imum terms acceptable to the United States, and that as a result of 
this whole exercise, the United States will have scored gains in world 
opinion and in propaganda without security cost to itself. Such gains, 
arising from a recognition of Soviet intransigence as the cause for fail­
ure to reach agreement, would have to be offset by any world opinion 
that may exist that the United States should have lowered its require­
ments in order to reach agreement. The danger must be foreseen that 
the United States, confronted with such later strands in world opinion, 
might progressively reduce its requirements and thereby incur greater 
danger of Soviet test evasion and other costs to U.S. security.
