212
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
though the law prohibiting the Tudeh Party is still in force. Mosadeq is
playing a difficult game of encouraging Russia officially while at-
tempting, by street riots, to prevent communist action.
America And Aid Mosadeq has shown himself rather too realistic
where Iran’s relations with the United States are concerned. He has
used and abused American good will, encouraging the United States to
play the “honest broker” in the oil dispute in order to lay upon the
shoulders of Ambassador Grady, then Mr. Harriman, then Assistant
Secretary McGhee, the blame for failure to “persuade” the British to
Mosadeq’s point of view. He gambles on Iran’s strategic and political
importance in America’s “containment” policy to force American
budgetary aid. He views American efforts to give him aid as evidence
of some international desperation to prop him up. He realizes that
American “desperation” apparently will grow as the Soviet threat to
Iran increases. Therefore, he throws his hands up, in conversations
with American officials, and says in substance “It is too late for me to
change (any of several drastic actions such as driving the British oil
technicians from Abadan, expelling a New York Times correspondent,
closing British consulates in Iran). . . . You Americans must save Iran
anyhow”.
Asiatic “Neutrals” The neutralism of India and the theory of a “neu-
tral” bloc of Moslem states meets the approval of the National Front
and many Persians. Kashani often speaks of an international Moslem
union, presumably under his command. Mosadeq, in Egypt, called for
mutual, though essentially moral, support between Middle Eastern na-
tions. It is doubtful if these vague thoughts will soon become particu-
larly concrete. Certainly, at this moment, the influence of neighboring
Moslem countries is negligible in Iran. But Mosadeq, by paying defer-
ence to this subject of some popular and official interest, shows his re-
alism in handling internal propaganda but shows great ignorance in
believing “neutralism” as a policy will serve the interests of Iran.
V. Conclusion
In military terminology the history of the National Front would be
described as “assembly” and “approach” in 1949 and 1950, “assault” in
the first months of 1951, success in “taking the position” on April 30,
1951 and subsequent “consolidation”, a phase which is now ending as
elections to the 17th Majlis are being held under National Front control.
Study of the characteristics and political techniques of Mohammad Mo-
sadeq shows how the National Front used its political environment to
come to power. A drastic change in this environment may bring forth
new techniques and new leaders; but, if Iran continues approximately
in its present course, even given revenue from oil or other sources, it is
likely that Mosadeq’s example will be followed in the future.
