1956 1205 introduced on question contacts persons and cultural exchange capa­ ble of satisfying desire of American people. Present action of US Government runs counter to such desire of American people. This evi­ denced by fact American people not making protest against Chinese Government but rather against American Government on question contacts of people and cultural exchange. Policy pursued by American Government on question of contacts of peoples and cultural exchange can show whether this government has any confidence in own system. Refusal on part US Government to proposal of cultural exchange and contact of peoples shows American Government has lost confidence in own people as well as its own system. It out of friendly spirit his side proposed contact of people and cultural exchange. Refusal of US Government to give favorable consideration this proposal would make them consider it necessary make public their proposal so public could judge. 20. I replied as he had once well said here, these negotiations not football game. They could not be judged, neither would world judge them on basis of number balls tossed out on field. Could only be judged, and world would judge on basis substantive positions each side had taken. It US which proposed unconditionally we make it clear our differences be settled only by peaceful means. No amount proposals or words could obscure fact his side still rejects that sim­ ple proposition. No amount proposals or words could obscure fact his side still procrastinated in accepting that fundamental principle. No amount words can obscure fact his government still failing carry out its undertaking permit Americans return. I regretted that instead facing up to resolving these basic matters his government intended again resort to forum public statements. However I continued be entirely willing let world judge issues. I entirely willing let world judge whether it and American people had faith in our system which had endured for almost two centuries and brought to our people and world standards of material and spiritual well-­being and freedom unparalleled in world’s history. 21. Wang said he had presented his views this morning and had no more to add. He sure people able judge who trying solve issues and who obstructing. 22. I had no more and suggested Thursday, October 18 for next meeting. He agreed. Gowen
