Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II ernment leaders who are relatively unmoved by claims of human rights as such are increasingly sensitive to the dangers to stability—and so to Western economic and security interests—posed by repressive regimes. Country strategies should also focus on how we can encourage private American groups to develop ties with foreign counterparts (press, lawyers, teachers, business) which might be forces for pluralism and peaceful political progress. Good examples include recent State Department facilitation of contacts between groups of African lawyers and American bar groups, and an AID grant to the President of the Institute for Law and Social Policy (a former US Ambassador) for exchanges with African legal groups. Such strategies obviously would be most useful before a country reaches the explosive stage. B. Strengthening Regional Organizations Five-Year Goal: Regional organizations which understand the link between human rights and stability, and are willing and able to take primary responsibility for their areas. The Andean Pact states and OAS got involved in Nicaragua, and ASEAN started cooperating on refugee problems, at least as much from a concern about regional stability as about human rights as such. African awareness of the potential danger posed to regional stability by that continent’s Emperor Bokassas or Sargent Does is one reason for tentative gropings by the OAU for a human rights policy. We should try to build on this appreciation of the link between human rights and stability, and look for ways to strengthen efforts by all regional bodies. This would have the added benefit of further multilateralizing human rights efforts, and creating a greater sense of responsibility for them on the part of Third World nations and organizations. Efforts on our part will need to be skillful, and carefully calculated to specific cases, to avoid smothering regional efforts with a Big Brother embrace. The OAS, for example, already has an active human rights policy. While continuing to make clear we support it, we should increasingly let Latin American states take the lead. In regional cooperation among ASEAN members there is little resonance for “human rights” under that label. What they most need from us, and other industrialized democracies, is money to help with crushing refugee burdens. The cause of human rights is likely to fare better in the OAU if we continue to let UN officials and African moderates take the lead. We can best help by facilitating the kind of contacts in individual African states sketched above, and by economic assistance to get at one of the prime causes of instability and repression.
