1980  927
war, but the Soviets might gain a hold on both Europe and East Asia 
if they could achieve control of the oil resources in the Persian Gulf 
region. Therefore, this region would be more attractive for a Soviet 
offensive. Thus it makes sense for us to give it higher priority in build-
ing a deterrent capability. (S)
One way to pressure the Europeans and the Japanese to do more 
for defense is to make our emphasis on Southwest Asia explicit to them 
and tell them that they must fill the gap we are leaving by shifting the 
priority on our reserves for deployment abroad. If they don’t build up 
to replace our reserves, then they create greater risks for themselves. (S)
The President said that is a key point—­how firmly to push our 
allies. We could inform them that we reserve the right to move our 
forces from Europe to the Persian Gulf, make that explicit to them. (S)
Brown replied that this is further than his paper goes. (C)
The President continued that although legally he can pull U.S. 
forces from Europe, threatening the allies with a greater risk of Soviet 
aggression, we have not yet succeeded in getting them to do more to 
defend themselves. Perhaps it would be more proper for the U.S. to say 
that these troops are subject to call to the Persian Gulf. Therefore, you 
must do more for your own defense. (S)
Brown said that is very strong, if it is believable, but how believ-
able it is, he doesn’t know. If they do not see it as a credible threat, we 
would be worse off. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had made an important point 
but not one he is sure he agrees with. If our purpose is to defend the Per-
sian Gulf, the Europeans may let us do that while they pursue detente 
with the Soviet Union in Europe at the expense of defense of Europe. 
Dr. Brzezinski said that he prefers that Europe be included in helping 
us defend the Persian Gulf, thereby denying the allies the option to do 
less in Europe. (S)
The President said that these two points are not incompatible. 
Europe has been getting worse, not better in the defense area. We have 
reached the limit with our allies. We have also reached the limit in the 
forces we can hold for contingency purposes for East Asia and the Per-
sian Gulf as well as in Europe. It is easy for us to tell the Europeans not 
to slacken their efforts, but it may not have any effect. (S)
The President continued that our primary goal is not to force 
the Europeans to do more but to defend the Persian Gulf within the 
resources of this country. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski agreed but insisted that we must also get them to do 
more. He said he did not know how specifically, but it is essential. (S)
