Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
695
a clearer stand, and lately Soviet commentary has evinced a slight tilt
toward Iran. (S)
Although they could use the threat of Iraqi military intervention
as a pretext to invoke paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Treaty of 19213 to
justify their own intervention, the Agency thinks the chance of their
doing so is remote—in large part because of the danger that the US
might respond militarily. They feel that the Soviets are more likely to
try to maintain a balanced policy and attempt to preserve—and where
possible extend—their influence in both countries through conven-
tional diplomacy and economic means. (S)
The paper does not deal with a number of recent developments
which suggest an attempt by the Soviets to exploit the instability in Iran
and to prepare for possible limited military intervention. These include:
—[1½ lines not declassified]
—the dispatch of large numbers of ethnic Azerbaijanis back from
the USSR, including prominent exiles dating back from the post-war
Soviet sponsored Azerbaijan Democratic Republic;
—the apparent reactivization of the Azerbaijani Democratic Party
which closely cooperates with the Tudeh;
—aid to ethnic dissident groups, including arms and guerrilla
training;
—[1 line not declassified]
—upgrading of combat readiness of units in Transcaucasus MD.
(TS)
These developments do not provide hard evidence that the Soviets
have decided to intervene. The Soviets may well only be engaging in
prudent contingency planning. But the Soviets could conceivably also
be positioning themselves to take military action when and if it becomes
desirable or necessary. (C)
The Soviets are now pinning their hopes in Iran on the ability of
the Tudeh to increase its strength and eventually assume a position of
power. The Tudeh is, for example, in far better shape today than the
Bolsheviks were in the autumn of 1916. The Tudeh has consistently
supported Khomeini for tactical reasons; in return Khomeini has
granted the Tudeh a degree of freedom and autonomy not allowed
other Leftist parties. The Soviets undoubtedly hope that this strategy
will allow the Tudeh to dominate a post-Khomeini coalition. It is the
best organized and best armed party in Iran. While it still lacks a
strong popular following, it has been increasing its strength among
key elements in society, especially the intellectuals and labor groups,
and it recently has been actively attempting to recruit among the
military. (S)
3 See footnote 3, Document 248.
