3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
733
255.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 7, 1980
SUBJECT
US-Soviet Relations During the Remainder of the First Carter Administration:
The Domestic Angle (U)
The turnaround in the polls demonstrates—if any demonstration
was needed—that the country wants the President to exercise firm, vig-
orous leadership in foreign affairs. The crisis in Afghanistan will en-
hance this desire. US-Soviet relations are, of course, central to Amer-
ican foreign policy. In the popular mind no aspect of our foreign
relations is more important than how the President handles the Rus-
sians. This has been true for every President since Truman. (C)
But we should face the fact that, despite its enormous achieve-
ments, this Administration does not get the credit it deserves for
handling foreign policy. A central factor in this, in my view, is that
there exists a commonly-held perception that this Administration
speaks with two voices on Soviet affairs. Kennedy and other Adminis-
tration critics have repeatedly charged that the President cannot make
up his mind as to what he believes about the Soviets; that consequently
the Annapolis speech2 was the greatest “paste job” in our diplomatic
history; and that Moscow therefore reads us as weak, divided, and ir-
resolute and does not hesitate to take advantage of our irresolution. (S)
The Afghanistan situation gives us a priceless opportunity to turn
this perception around. To do so, it is essential that from this point on-
ward the Administration speak with one voice about US-Soviet affairs.
If we could accomplish this, then we would be in a position to make the
following case on a private, background basis to key opinion molders:
—At one point there was considerable substance to the charges
that the Administration was divided on Soviet affairs and as a result
the President was receiving divided counsel on the subject;
—This was reflected in the Annapolis speech;
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-
tial Advisory Board, Box 84, Sensitive XX, 1/80. Secret. Sent for information.
2 Reference is to Carter’s June 7, 1978, commencement speech delivered at the U.S.
Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland. In this speech, Carter emphasized de´tente and
the desired finalization of a SALT II Treaty. In his conclusion he stated, “The Soviet
Union can choose either confrontation or cooperation. The United States is adequately
prepared to meet either choice.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 1052–1057)
