Afghanistan
117
42.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
Islamabad, March 28, 1979, 1200Z
3713. Subject: Soviet Démarche on Alleged GOP Assistance to
Afghan Dissidents: GOP Requests U.S. Clarification of 1959 Bilateral.
1. (S) Entire text. FGI throughout.
2. Summary: On March 28 GOP Advisor on Foreign Affairs Agha
Shahi passed to me substance of a strongly worded Soviet démarche
which was made by the Soviet Ambassador to President Zia ul-Haq
March 26. In the démarche, the Soviets accuse the GOP of “connivance”
in the activities of the Afghan dissidents against the Kabul regime, and
say that they “cannot remain indifferent” to armed attacks on a country
with which they are allied by treaty.
3. Shahi also read me Zia’s reply, in which the President strongly
denied the Soviet accusation, and challenged Moscow to make the
Kabul government show more restraint so that the refugees—who were
fleeing “repression”—would no longer be a problem. Zia also told the
Soviet Ambassador that Afghan hostility toward Pakistan would not
be tolerated, and that the next DRA plane to violate Pak airspace
“would be shot down.”
4. Shahi said that the GOP takes the Soviet démarche “very seri-
ously” and asked that we “clarify fully” the USG position on our 1959
bilateral agreement.2 End summary.
5. Agha Shahi called me to the MFA mid-day March 28 to “inform”
the USG about a Soviet démarche delivered by Soviet Ambassador
Azimov to President Zia on March 26. Shahi read carefully from the
démarche, which began by referring to the Soviet role in “trying to
promote the normalization of Pak-Afghan relations,” and to President
Zia’s recent statements that the GOP wants neighborly relations with
all states.
6. The Soviet note then went on to say that “groups hostile to the
Democratic Government of Afghanistan (DRA) had settled in Paki-
stan,” and that “armed gangs of saboteurs and terrorists were penetrat-
ing into Afghanistan.” The Soviet note described these groups as “coun-
ter-revolutionaries,” who “freely roamed up and down the Pak-Afghan
border,” and were on the attack because of their opposition to “the
reforms” now being carried out in Afghanistan by the DRA. The note
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1/77–3/79. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis.
2 See footnote 6, Document 21.
