United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  93
ETA–34.	
Memorandum from Henry C. Ramsey of the Policy 
Planning Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Policy Planning (Smith)1

Washington, July 6, 1960.
SUBJECT
Latin American Initiative: Mr. Mann’s Reaction
I showed Tom Mann the S/P memorandum of July 5 on a new 
Latin American initiative last evening. After reading it and expressing 
great enthusiasm, he made four points:
1. It would be “good politics” to ask for $500 million. Loans should be 
soft. After a good deal of discussion, he concluded it would be best to chan-
nel the loans through the Inter-American Development Bank but, since 
the Bank has not opened for business, he thinks Congress may demand 
some DLF veto on loans over a certain amount. We should make clear 
that the fund would finance social overhead projects and that it would 
supplement hard loans through the World Bank, Ex-Im Bank and IADB.
2. Psychologically and politically, it is very important that the new 
fund be earmarked for social overhead projects and be used as leverage 
to develop sound projects.
3. We must carefully draft a broad statement which would make 
it crystal clear that the U.S. purpose in making the fund available is 
to enable countries to finance projects which will lead to a more equi-
table distribution of the national income. One of the criteria for loans 
from the fund should be that they advance the well-­being of the lower 
classes. Mann thinks we should use the fund as leverage to accomplish, 
among other things, more equitable tax structures.
4. It is also highly important that we support land reform but 
that we not set our sights too high or make it appear that land reform 
will solve the un- and under-­employment problem. Mann thinks land 
reform will alleviate the employment problem and is vital in view of 
the population explosion but that we cannot expect new recipients of 
land to rise above the subsistence level too soon. (His views on this 
subject coincide with those of Milo Perkins.2)
-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -
1 Source: Department of State, PPS Files, Lot 67 D 543, “American Republics 1960–
1961.” Confidential. Drafted by Ramsey.
2 Milo R. Perkins was a foreign investment consultant who had held various posi-
tions in the Department of Agriculture, 1935–1941, and also served as Executive Director, 
Board of Economic Warfare in 1941.
