National Security Policy 1001 dual purpose, capable of employing nuclear or nonnuclear weapons, as circumstances dictate. 12. In addition to the buildup of long-­range missile capabilities there will be a number of other major developments in the Soviet forces over the period of this estimate. The effectiveness of the air defense sys­ tem against bomber aircraft will be increased by the new surface-­to-­air missiles now being installed on a considerable scale for the defense of vital areas, and by additional control and warning systems to improve reaction times. The most significant developments in the ground forces will be the widespread introduction of missiles for tactical use and the achievement of greater mobility resulting from new motorized equip­ ment, transport aircraft, and helicopters. The Soviet Navy will probably continue to give priority attention to the development of submarines, and the buildup of a nuclear-­powered and missile-­launching submarine force will be the most important addition to Soviet naval capabilities. Economic Developments 13. Although the continuing rapid expansion of the Soviet economy aimed at in the Seven-­Year Plan (1959–1965) will encounter a number of serious problems, we believe that the goal of an 8.6 percent annual increase in industrial output will in the main be achieved. As in the past the plan in agriculture will not be achieved, and net output is likely to rise by about one-­fifth in the seven-­year period as against a proclaimed goal of about 55–60 percent. The position of the Soviet consumer will continue to improve, though at a somewhat slower rate; consumption goods and services per capita will probably increase about 26 percent during the plan period as compared with a 40 percent gain over the preceding seven years. 14. Even though some goals of the Seven-­Year Plan may not be achieved in full, Soviet gross national product (GNP) will probably continue to grow at about 6.0 percent per annum. Such a rate of growth is impressive by any absolute standards and will bring the Soviet econ­ omy measurably closer in size and strength to that of the US. Assuming that the US maintains an average annual rate of growth in GNP of about 3.5–4.0 percent, Soviet GNP measured in dollars will increase from about 45 percent that of the US at present to about half that of the US by 1965. However, more important than this rough comparison of the gross size of the two economies is a comparison of the uses to which national resources are put. The smaller Soviet economy has in recent years supported military expenditures which, measured in dol­ lars, were about equal to those of the US. Likewise Soviet investment in the economy as a whole is currently almost equal to that in the US, and Soviet investment in industry may be somewhat greater. As a result of this steady allocation of large resources to growth, by 1965 the absolute annual increment to GNP in the USSR will approach that in the US.
