First Responses
147
satisfactory resolution of this crisis; I know that SALT II will certainly
not move ahead in the present atmosphere;2
—The world community which presently supports us will begin
to fall off given its heavy dependence on Mideast oil and their desire
to avoid an international conflict;
—The crisis is taking a toll on your Presidency and your ability to
lead. Politically, a protracted crisis will prevent you from doing the very
minimal things that you need to do to win the Democratic nomination;
I don’t have a sure sense of how it is done, but I would argue that
there are many good reasons for trying to bring this thing to a head
at the earliest possible date. Most of the Iranian/Moslem experts seem
to agree that we should wait until after Ashura and the December 2nd
Constitutional vote to take those steps. Again, this is a difficult decision,
but at some point in time, you are going to have to take some risks
and make some very difficult decisions, I believe that the risks and
difficulty of those decisions will increase with the passage of time.
(You should read the most recent cable from Laingen if you have not
already seen it.)3
Secondly, I share your concern about the negotiations and the UN channel.
I don’t think that we have much choice but to try that approach, but
I personally hope that it does not succeed. Despite our best efforts to
explain and defend, I believe that we will be savaged politically for
signing a document permitting a trial of the Shah by an international
tribunal. Our participating in that exercise comes very close to violating
the principles that we have adhered to throughout this crisis.
If those four principles are the basis for the safe release of our
hostages,4 it will make it all the more important that we take some
punitive steps against Iran. For the balance sheet will not be even, and
the UN trial will be seized upon by our critics at home and abroad as
evidence of our lack of strength and resolve.
Review with me the results of this crisis precipitated by Iran:
—The national humiliation of our country and its ability to protect
our diplomatic interests;
—The crisis has required actions on our part—Iranian oil embargo
and the freezing of assets—that will work a very specific hardship on
our people and has had some adverse impact on friendly nations (like
Saudi Arabia).
—Emotional wear and tear on our people at the Embassy. I saw a
“terror psychologist” on television last week who said that a good
2 Carter sent the SALT II Treaty and Protocol and related documents to the Senate
for advice and ratification on June 22.
3 See Document 46.
4 See footnote 4, Document 47.
