306 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX treaty negotiations complicated by disagreements over details on the West Bank and Gaza. The President said that he would be available day or night. If there were any problems that could not be resolved, Ambassador Atherton could call on him. He would be prepared to come over or to receive the delegations at the White House. The President hopes as much agreement as possible can be reached at the outset. The President would then help resolve areas of disagreement. He has already reviewed maps and believes that the lines suggested are fair, but these are just suggestions. The lines suggested are somewhat favorable to Egypt, and Israel may oppose them. The President has tried to meet President Sadat’s needs, but the Israelis have not yet seen the map. Mr. al-Baz said that the Egyptians are assuming that the negotiations will go forward in the new spirit of cooperation and they should not be particularly difficult. The President said that the Egyptians should feel free to turn to him whenever necessary. Ambassador Atherton understands this. He asked Minister Hassan Ali to convey his deep friendship to President Sadat and his appreciation for Sadat’s constructive attitude. He reiterated that he is very eager for early success. The meeting ended at 6:15 p.m. 84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Egypt and Israel1 Washington, October 13, 1978, 0057Z 259062. For Ambassadors from Atherton and Saunders. Subject: First Day of Blair House Talks—Oct. 12, 1978. 1. We had a very productive first day of talks, marked by more substantive progress than we had anticipated and the early identification of some potential problem areas. 2. Following opening ceremonies at the White House, we had a plenary session that served to pin down general procedural questions. Both sides agreed to meet as full delegations rather than subdividing into working groups, although there have already been private 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 113, 10/1–16/78. Secret; Sensitive; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Drafted by Kirby; cleared by Richard Castrodale (S/S–O) and Atherton; approved by Saunders. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840156–2252)
