Yugoslavia
799
interest to the Yugoslavs, and the last may be the key to a successful
relationship.
17. With the number of high-level visits last year and proposed
for this year, the pace has never been so high. In 1977 SecDef Brown
and CNO Holloway came to Yugoslavia and Yugoslav Air Force C/S
Cemalovic visited the U.S. This year visits are being planned for USAF
C/S Jones to Yugoslavia and Yugoslav DefMin Ljubicic and Army
C/S Potocar to the U.S. These visits afford opportunities to instill
confidence in U.S. strength and intentions and to develop personal
relationships between the leaders of the respective defense establish-
ments. In addition, from the Yugoslav side, the sales question is always
high on the discussion list, and thereby has become an important
element of the confidence equation.
18. Beginning with dependence on the Soviets from 1945 to 1948,
the GOY has turned alternately to East and West for its military equip-
ment and training. After the massive U.S. grant military assistance
program of the 1950’s, the GOY chose not to renew the assistance
agreement. Once again the Soviets became Yugoslavia’s main foreign
military supply source. It still is, although the GOY has built a domestic
military industry providing the JNA with between 65 and 85 percent
of its military needs. However, after the Soviet invasion of Czechoslova-
kia in 1968 the GOY started looking beyond the USSR toward Western
Europe and the U.S. for other foreign sources. A sore point with the
U.S. has been the GOY’s desire for equipment of sensitive (and often
classified) technology and the USG’s reluctance to provide this sort of
equipment to the Yugoslavs. However, USG policy decisions in the
last few years, the most recent in 1977 by President Carter, have encour-
aged a modest sales program increase including the consideration of
sophisticated equipment on a case-by-case basis. Nevertheless, the only
major items on which we have been forthcoming have been those
which do not contain the latest technology. While it may take years to
reduce the Yugoslav dependence on the USSR in many areas, this is
a Yugoslav goal, and we, together with other Western nations, should
do what we can to assist. Consequently, we have recommended that
a policy decision be taken to free at least one major item of Yugoslav
interest. Up to now the totality of turndowns on sophisticated equip-
ment must evoke a sorry image in the Yugoslav view. To alter this
impression we must demonstrate that we are more than willing to
support a qualitative change in the relationship.
Consular:
19. A continuing source of concern in the area of Consular relations
is the absence of agreement concerning U.S. access to detained Ameri-
cans who are dual nationals. In 1972 the Embassy attempted to negotiate
an agreement, in the spirit of Article 36 of the Vienna Convention,
