December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
657
President Carter: That would be a completely unwarranted inter-
pretation of the current drafts.
Prime Minister Begin: I am sorry, but that is our view. We are re-
sponsible for the lives of our people. We need arms, not American sol-
diers. We need to be careful. There is a red line that we cannot cross. We
cannot legitimatize an attack from a country that signs a peace treaty
with us. If there is a breach in the peace treaty, we will fight. President
Sadat gave me a pledge of “no war”, but that is not real peace. If he
breaks his pledge, Israel will fight its way across the Suez Canal. But Is-
rael cannot knowingly sign a treaty which would give legitimacy to an
attack on her or to an abrogation of the treaty. To say that Israel is ada-
mant after all the concessions that we have made, the removal of settle-
ments and all of that, is unfair. When I went home after Camp David, I
read that if the settlements question was not resolved that Camp David
would be null and void. I took a stand and I made the sacrifice for the
treaty. I will bear the pain of this to my grave. It is the most painful de-
cision that I have ever made since my days in the underground. I will
go visit the settlers in Sinai. They have made the desert blossom. Now
we must uproot them, 3,000 of them. How can there be charges of
adamancy against Israel? Our only compensation is that we may get a
real peace treaty, but we can’t cross the red line.
Dr. Brzezinski: As I see it, the dilemma is the following: For you any
language in Article 6 that does not fully meet your needs is inadequate,
because it may legitimize the use of force against you. The very need
for Article 6 requires the most binding of language from your point of
view. By its nature, that language means that Egypt is not signing a
treaty with Israel, but is also explicitly disavowing its political and mili-
tary relations with other Arabs. So Sadat wants to dilute the language,
which you cannot accept. I think the fact that Sadat is signing the treaty
will be a fundamental breakthrough and it will cause a split between
Egypt and the other Arabs. To ask him to acknowledge this publicly is
too much. Not only is Sadat being asked to make peace with Israel, but
he is also being asked to renounce his ties to the other Arabs. The peace
treaty itself is a de facto disengagement by Egypt from the other Arabs.
This is a genuine dilemma which cannot be solved by any language. It
might, therefore, be better to eliminate the article entirely. That would
be better than having weak language.
Prime Minister Begin: Thank you for your understanding of our
point of view. There is no word in Article 6 that derogates from Egypt’s
commitments to the Arab world. We don’t ask for any abrogation of
these commitments. The real interpretation of Article 6 is that those
commitments should be able to stand, except in the case of conflict.
Without this, Egypt would be able to make legitimate war against
Israel.
