About the Series  V
Editorial Methodology
This documents are presented chronologically according to time in 
Washington, DC. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to 
the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memo-
randum was drafted.
Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Rela-
tions series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance 
from the General Editor and the Chief of the Declassification and Pub-
lishing Division. The original document is reproduced as exactly as 
possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described 
in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted 
conventions for the publication of historical documents within the lim-
itations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the 
editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitaliza-
tion, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except 
that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes 
and omissions in the documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: 
a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or 
phrases underlined in the original document are printed in italics. 
Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the original 
text, and a list of abbreviations and terms is included in the front mat-
ter of each volume. In telegrams, the telegram number (including spe-
cial designators such as Secto) is printed at the start of the text of the 
telegram.
Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that 
deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classi-
fied after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and, where 
possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been noted by 
indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omitted. Entire 
documents withheld after declassification review have been accounted 
for and are listed in their chronological place with headings, source 
notes, and the number of pages not declassified.
All brackets that appear in the original document are so identified 
in the footnotes. All ellipses are in the original documents.
The first footnote to each document indicates the sources of the 
document and its original classification, distribution, and drafting 
information. This note also provides the background of important doc-
uments and policies and indicates whether the President or his major 
policy advisers read the document.
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent 
material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional 
documentary sources, provide references to important related doc-
uments printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide 
summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and
