Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —There is strong sentiment in Congress that the Jackson-Vanik amendment13 has been counter-productive, and that something should be changed, although no one knows exactly what. I hear phrases like: “step-by-step dismantling”. —The administration must also decide what it intends to do by way of implementing “Basket III” of the Helsinki Agreement.14 This decision must balance the need to avoid a double standard, with a realistic appraisal of what we can in fact accomplish. 9. Presidential Speech. Because this is an issue on which Administration policy may differ radically from past policies, President Carter may want to consider making a major speech on this issue in the near future. Such a speech would not only serve as a signal to the Congress, the federal bureaucracy, and the American public of the President’s new policies, but would also be an important tool in informing foreign governments of the Administration’s serious intention to see that human rights are served by more than rhetoric. 10. Congressional Coordination. The Administration will enjoy much greater flexibility and cooperation from Congress if efforts are made from the very beginning to undo past damage and to keep the key Congressional leaders on this issue fully informed. They are, in the House: Democrats Fraser, Lee Hamilton, Koch and Drinan; and Republicans Buchanan and Whalen. In the Senate: Jackson, Humphrey, McGovern, Cranston and Kennedy and Republicans Percy and Javits. 13 During the spring of 1973, the House Ways and Means Committee initiated hearings and markups on the Nixon administration’s trade legislation. The House version of the legislation (H.R. 10710) contained an amendment introduced by Vanik, which prohibited most-favored nation (MFN) status to Communist nations unless the President certified to Congress that the recipient nation had not imposed restrictive emigration policies. Jackson introduced similar legislation in the Senate. On October 18, 1974, the Ford administration and the Senate reached a compromise. Jackson offered an amendment to the bill that allowed the President to waive the ban on MFN and export credits for 18 months if Ford could report to Congress that the Soviet Union had made progress in relaxing emigration curbs. Both houses of Congress approved the Trade Act of 1974 (H.R.
