International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1091
5. Increased Efficiency and Effectiveness
—In the case of AID, an increased assistance program will be car-
ried out with reduced staff by improving the efficiency of AID’s efforts.
The International Development Cooperation Agency was created
in order to construct and coordinate national policies that promote the
development prospects of the poorer countries.6 As discussed in the re-
mainder of this statement, the programs and policies recommended
here address the most challenging problems we face. They are our
agenda for 1980.
DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Developing a country is an extraordinarily complex social, eco-
nomic, and political task. The major responsibility for the task falls on a
country’s people and government. Foreign donors have a limited,
though important, role to play. Assisting a country’s development re-
quires patience and varied techniques and talents. The United States
has supported development efforts through the United Nations’ spe-
cialized agencies, the multilateral development banks, and our own bi-
lateral assistance.
This document does not review and analyze those programs.
Rather, it highlights our emphases and priorities for the year ahead.
1. Accelerate the Attack on Global Poverty
Agriculture
—Major changes should be set in motion to carry out the recom-
mendations of the Hunger Commission by increasing the attention de-
voted to agricultural development and food security by international in-
stitutions as well as by our own bilateral programs.
In the face of rapidly increasing population and widespread mal-
nutrition, attaining minimal levels of food production and consump-
tion spells the difference between starvation and survival in devel-
6 See footnote 17, Document 245. In a March 7, 1979, message to Congress pro-
posing IDCA’s creation, the President indicated that the IDCA’s Director would “report
both to me and to the Secretary of State, and would serve as our principal international
development adviser.” After outlining the various responsibilities accruing to IDCA, the
President noted: “I believe these steps will substantially strengthen the coordination of
U.S. policies affecting the developing world, and will lead to a more coherent strategy of
development and the more effective use of the various bilateral and multilateral instru-
ments by which the U.S. can encourage the growth of developing economies. I am
pleased that these actions and proposals are similar to those proposed last year by the late
Senator Hubert H. Humphrey. I look forward to joining with you to put them into opera-
tion.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, March 12, 1979, pp. 395–396) Carter
issued Executive Order 12163 on September 29, 1979, formally establishing IDCA, which
began its operations on October 1, 1979. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp.
1792–1800)
