Haiti 775 HA–21. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State (Dillon) to the President1  Washington, June 9, 1960. SUBJECT Determinations under Sections 105(b)(4) and 451(a) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954,2 as amended, permitting the furnishing of military assistance to Haiti3 The purpose of this memorandum is to recommend that you make the requisite determinations under Sections 105(b)(4) and 451(a) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”), to permit the furnishing of military assistance to Haiti. The proposed military assistance is needed principally to increase the capability of Haiti for defense against foreign-­based attack such as was launched from Cuba against Haiti in August 1959. The aggressive attitude of the Cuban Government and increasing political unrest in the Dominican Republic make it urgently desirable to strengthen Haiti’s capability for defense against new attacks and also to enable it to resist political pressures from these aggressive neighbors. Haiti is especially vulnerable to attack and political pressure because of its geographic position, its military weakness, and the persistent economic and budgetary problems which prevent Haiti from remedying military deficiencies from its own resources. In these circumstances, it is considered to be important to the security of the United States to promote stability in the Caribbean area by furnishing military assistance to Haiti primarily for its legitimate self-­defense without regard to the requirement of section 105(b)(4) of the Act that such assistance be furnished only in furtherance of Western Hemisphere defense missions, and secondarily for its internal security upon a determination under Section 105(b)(4) of the Act that internal security requirements may be the basis, in part, of this program. Enclosed is a detailed discussion of the background and justification of this program, the implementation of which is estimated to require the expenditure of up to $300,000 of funds available under the Act for military assistance; a small amount of excess equipment may be included. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files. Secret. 2 68 Stat. 832. 3 The Haitian Government had requested United States assistance for military equipment in notes from the Foreign Office and the General Staff to the Embassy at Port-­ au-Prince in early September 1959. (Dispatch 100 from Port-­au-Prince, September 5, 1959; 738.5–MSP/9–559)
