Yugoslavia
953
soil. But, he added, Yugoslav Ambassadors and diplomats have been
attacked abroad and killed. Their Ambassador to Sweden had been
brutally murdered in 1971 and “his murderers have been roaming
around free.” In this the U.S. shares a common, sad experience.
19. At this point, Kolisevski thought, enough has been said about
this unfortunate topic. He inquired about the prospects for relations
between the U.S. and USSR. He asked if the Vice President thought
detente would survive. In recent discussions with Guinean President
Sekou Toure it had been decided to try to “consolidate” efforts within
the non-aligned to see if something cannot be done to restore momen-
tum toward detente. However, Kolisevski observed, much more
depends on the U.S. and USSR.
20. Vice President Mondale recalled that the Carter administration
entered into office profoundly committed to detente, to concluding
negotiations for SALT II, Force Reductions in Europe, and the Compre-
hensive Test Ban. We were prepared to expand our political relation-
ship with the Soviet Union. “I regret to say,” the Vice President stated,
“that no other aspect in our administration has proven more disap-
pointing.” SALT II, the centerpiece of our relationship with the Soviet
Union, was going to be ratified. As presiding officer of the Senate he
had been working on this, and was then confident that it would be
ratified. Now, the Soviets had invaded a neighbor. “In my opinion this
is one of the worst international acts since World War II.” This has
soured feelings greatly in America, as Ambassador Belovski knows.
21. The Vice President said Americans must now ponder the impact
of the Soviet action. If the Soviet Union can invade Afghanistan today
why not some other country tomorrow? This is profoundly disturbing.
22. The Vice President continued, we nonetheless want to find a
solution to world problems, and we have offered that our new Secretary
of State, Ed Muskie, meet with Gromyko this month in Vienna. We
have not had a response from the Soviets yet.
23. The Vice President observed that the U.S. had found it disap-
pointing, as he supposes it was disappointing to Tito himself, that in
this extremely complex situation the Non-Aligned Movement has not
been able to assert leadership. Can the principles of international
respect and non-intervention be restored? These are fundamental prin-
ciples for humanity. If these are not observed what are the prospects
for peace in the long run?
24. President Kolisevski noted that, since the Afghan invasion,
Foreign Secretary Vhrovec has visited India, Bangladesh and Iraq. This
question has risen everywhere. The Afghan crisis is not essentially a
crisis within the Non-Aligned Movement but its coordinator is Cuba
and this complicates matters. Yugoslavia has suggested a Non-Aligned
Ministerial meeting to focus on general principles and not on specific
