September 18–December 16, 1978
361
the U.N. Charter, in Article 103,6 has such status of being superior to all
other commitments. The most difficult problem for Egypt are the secu-
rity pacts. Some have expired, but at least one from 1950 on joint de-
fense and economic cooperation embodies the idea of collective
self-defense against aggression. This would cause great difficulties for
Egypt and the Arab word if this treaty had to be renounced.
The President referred to the Israeli consultation with American ex-
perts on international law. They had agreed the American draft lan-
guage was not adequate. The President suggested that el-Erian and
Barak might get together with some international lawyers to work out
adequate language. El-Erian said that the problem was not entirely a
legal one. Egypt does not want to appear to be washing its hands of the
Arab league. Mr. Aaron said the reference to the U.N. Charter was met
to protect Egypt’s right to collective self-defense. El-Erian acknowl-
edged that this was helpful. Hansell added that in the event of Israeli
aggression, the reference to the U.N. Charter would allow Egypt to re-
spect its commitment under the mutual defense pacts. El-Erian said
that he recognized the validity of this point and this would make it
easier for Egypt to accept. Egypt would like, however, to avoid any ap-
pearance of referring specifically to domestic law. This is covered by
the Egyptian constitution. The President suggested that the reference to
internal law be deleted. El-Erian said that in that case, Egypt could live
with the language as drafted. El-Erian asked if the language “will pre-
vail” could also be removed. Egypt agrees on the concept, but would
like different words. The President said that he wanted to get this re-
solved now. He wants Barak to be able to say that these issues have
been resolved. The Israeli delegation should recommend the entire text
to the Cabinet. El-Erian said that this would be a major issue for them.
Hansell confirmed that the United States had used similar wording in
the NATO treaties, particularly that “there will be no conflict”. El-Erian
said that instead of “will prevail”, language such as “shall be honored”
might be used. The President urged him to try to work this out. We
would agree that the reference to internal law should be deleted. The
President also thought the words “shall be honored” could be used.
Boutros Ghali asked about the possibility of U.N. Security Council
endorsement, and the President said that this was already in the Camp
David agreements. He suggested that in the exchange of letters the
Egyptians might refer to this paragraph. Boutros Ghali said that would
be acceptable.
6 The full text of Article 103, stipulating the primacy of the UN Charter over obliga-
tions to any other international agreement for UN member states, is printed in Yearbook of
the United Nations, 1946–47, p. 842.
