North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1019
—LDC Capacity for Development;
—Institutional Reforms for Development.
If handled properly, these substantive packages might marry our
long-term development objectives with the more immediate concerns
of the LDCs. Certainly each of the suggested areas of US concentration
involve questions relating to resources availability, knowledge, and in-
stitutions. The issues are of interest to all LDCs; specific proposals are
designed to meet the needs of different specific clusters of LDCs,
ranging from the poorer to upper tier countries. We will, of course,
have to be able to address specific LDC proposals and the existing
agendas of such forums as UNCTAD V and the COW. But if in our
speeches on North-South issues, in our legislative and domestic agency
priorities, and in our bilateral and multilateral activities, we can em-
phasize the themes suggested above, we may be able to slowly shift the
North-South dialogue from an almost exclusive preoccupation with
mechanisms to greater attention to specific goals.
We should note, of course, that our ability to conduct such a
North-South strategy will depend in large part on our performance in
meeting past obligations and living up to our own stated current pol-
icies. Thus our adherence to trade liberalization, our ability to meet
past commitments in commodity agreements and our moving forward
with new ones, our efforts in increasing our bilateral and multilateral
assistance along the lines of the Presidential commitment for 1982, and
our success in making up arrearages with the MDBs, will all have an
impact on the credibility of our leadership efforts in the North-South
dialogue and the interest with which initiatives such as those outlined
below are greeted.
ENERGY
Of the substantive areas we wish to highlight in the North-South
dialogue, energy offers the most scope for positive initiatives. This is
also an area where our domestic interest in helping LDCs reduce their
reliance on petroleum-based energy is clear. We have several sugges-
tions for action, of which the most important are:
—International Renewable Energy Program: We are taking the lead in
fulfilling the Bonn Summit commitment to coordinate individual
country bilateral programs on renewable energy for the LDCs. We are
encouraging particular attention to R and D programs on biomass con-
version, non-electrical applications of solar energy, and forestry pro-
grams which include firewood and charcoal as important components.
—Renewable Energy Financing Mechanisms:* As unconventional re-
newable energy technologies become more cost effective, there may be
a gradually increasing need for expanded or new mechanisms to assist
LDCs finance such technologies, which tend to have relatively high ini-
