842  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
from New Delhi they may well make move towards break or even carry 
out break at next meeting.
4. Would appreciate being informed any developments at New 
Delhi that would assist me in anticipating or assessing situation here.
Gowen
526.	 Telegram 1615 from Geneva1
Geneva, March 8, 1956, 8 p.m.
1615. From Johnson.
1. I opened 40th meeting by telling Wang I had given very careful 
study to position of his government as outlined in his statements at 
our last meeting and his government’s public statement of March 4. 
I continued from prepared statement:
A. I have searched hard for some evidence that your government is 
genuinely willing to respond to proposal of my government for renun­
ciation of force—proposal that meets aspirations of peoples of all polit­
ical persuasions throughout world, who seek an end to discredited and 
outmoded means of attempting settle disputes by an appeal to force.
B. Essential purpose of my proposal was to remove overhanging 
threat of appeal to force by one side and thus make possible free dis­
cussion differences and search for their fair and equitable solution by 
peaceful means. I had felt that in spite our difficulties we were largely 
in agreement in principle and that with sincere desire both sides make 
progress there was real hope of narrowing and finally eliminating our 
area of disagreement. I have been doing my best to approach matter 
from this standpoint and to spend whatever time was required in 
patient effort to clear up misunderstandings and to remove doubts.
C. However, I find your statement at our last meeting and action of 
your government in releasing its statement of March 4 very disturbing. 
I cannot but feel that your position is intentionally or unintentionally 
dragging our talks on this subject backwards.
D. I hope that this trend can be promptly reversed and that we can 
again move forward. I do not believe that way to progress lies in issuance 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/3–856. Confidential; Limit Dis­
tribution. The telegram is unsigned.
