Minister of Foreign Affairs in his reply of December 6, 1918, contented himself with a
parenthetical assertion of the “liberty of the press.” In the memorandum of the Peruvian
Minister of Foreign Affairs of February 14, 1919, there appear extracts from a
memorial which certain Peruvian citizens are said to have “just presented to the
President of the Republic and which Government investigation proves to be absolutely
accurate.” In the course of this memorial it is stated “this persecution was exemplified
…37 by the assault and destruction of the Union Club Building in 1911 and by that of
the printing offices of La Voz del Sur, El Tacora and El Morro de Arica during the same
year.”
While there is no sufficient evidence in the record to show that Chile has either
suppressed or censored the Peruvian press of Tacna and Arica by operation of law or by
action of the Chilean Government, there is satisfactory evidence to show that Peruvian
newspapers were destroyed by mob violence in 1911. Although it is not possible on the
evidence to charge this action to the Government of Chile, it does appear that the
Peruvian newspapers have not been reestablished and the situation thus existing
demands consideration in fixing the conditions of a possible plebiscite.
Depriving Peruvians of the Right to Assemble and Display the Peruvian Flag. The
principal incidents brought forward in support of this charge are ancient and trivial. The
charge fails on the dual ground that it is not sufficiently supported by the record, and
that it is not shown that any regulations which may have been made were not within the
reasonable discretion of the Chilean Government in the circumstances obtaining in
Tacna and Arica.
Boycotting of Peruvian Labor. This is a charge which is easy to make, hard to prove,
and almost equally hard to disprove affirmatively. It is made by Peru repeatedly in
official documents and in the affidavits of private parties. It is denied by Chile except
as to preference on public works such as the Arica-La Paz Railway. In these
circumstances it has been necessary to examine in detail the individual cases in which
Peru has endeavored to establish the boycotting of workmen. Among twenty-seven
specific cases of expulsion, persecution, etc., which are presented in the Peruvian Case
and contested in the Chilean Counter Case and which therefore afford the best basis for
testing the contentions of the parties, there are two cases in which Peru has endeavored
to establish the boycotting of workmen, the cases of Roberto Nalvarte and Alberto
Forero Marquez, In both of these instances Peru distinctly fails to make out a case.
Among the three hundred and forty cases of expulsion set forth in the Peruvian Counter
Case there are some cases in which it is alleged that the affiant was deprived of
employment because he was a Peruvian. Bearing in mind that these are ex parte
affidavits to which Chile has had no opportunity to reply, there are very few of these
affidavits which, in the opinion of the Arbitrator, make out a sufficient case prima facie
and there is evidence elsewhere in the record which casts serious doubt upon some of
these. In other words, there is a paltry showing of specific cases of boycotting of
