North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 the President said that he will take a more responsible and active role in these North-South issues from then on. President Perez then expressed his absolute solidarity with Prime Minister Manley’s words. Since President Carter was elected, we have been hearing from the U.S. a voice of sincerity and a will to contribute to these actions which we have not heard before. It is true that the tone is not always appropriate in our rhetoric, but often times other considerations play a part in this. At the same time, however, Perez believes that we have reached a grave situation. On the one hand, the industrialized countries appear to be becoming preoccupied with East-West problems and have begun to ignore North-South issues, which are more profound. If this continues, the President is likely to hear screams instead of rhetoric. President Perez said that he fears that we will move backward, and he said that he hopes that President Carter will stimulate his advisors instead of quieting them. President Carter responded by saying that he would like to have someone representing himself take an outline of what he intends to propose in Bonn. After consulting with Deputy Secretary Christopher, he said that probably would be Dick Cooper. Prime Minister Manley confirmed that the first documents would be coming from the United States. Then President Carter said that we would try to get a document to the Jamaicans as early as we can so that we have time to discuss this issue before the Summit. He very much valued Prime Minister Manley’s comments on this document and repeated that he wanted to present the points of agreement, the points of disagreement, and within the latter, our position and the G–77 position. He said that he wanted Prime Minister Manley to correct our interpretation of the G–77 position if that was warranted. 307. Editorial Note In his June 22, 1978, Evening Report to President Jimmy Carter, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance discussed the status of the bilateral consultations on North-South issues to which Carter and Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley had agreed during their June 17 discussion in Panama City (see Document 306). Vance reported that the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard Cooper, would travel to Jamaica in July for the proposed consultations. In the meantime, the Department of State had given Jamaican Foreign Minister P.J. Patterson
