March–August 1953 7. Social groups None of these groups could be expected to pursue an active role in the replacement of Mossadeq. However, individual members might be sources of funds or aid in maintaining internal stability. a. Government officials With the exception of members of the Iran Party, the higher officials would tend to remain neutral with respect to Mossadeq. The lower levels, subject to increasing economic uncertainty, would be glad to see him go. b. Merchants Kashani can muster the support of a large segment of the leading merchants in the bazaar. The top level, engaged in foreign trade, might well furnish funds for activity against Mossadeq and Zahedi claims to have the financial backing of one member of this group. The mass of small shopkeepers, without influence, support Mossadeq. c. Landowners The majority of the landowners are opposed to Mossadeq and would employ their influence to attempt to keep order in the provinces in the event of his overthrow. d. The General Public Zahedi claims the support of the “majority of the people”, but it is far more likely that the man in the street continues to admire Mossadeq for his strong stand against the British and as a symbol of resurgent nationalism. However, this element is of no practical value to either side unless effectively organized and led. Action by this element will come only from the groups already listed in earlier headings. III. Assets which may be directed toward the replacement of Mossadeq These assets should be mobilized only in relation to a detailed plan of operations and such a plan would be the primary responsibility of the field station. Should all these assets be engaged in an all-out effort, it is certain that some of them would be exposed. Should the operation fail, some of these assets might be totally destroyed. A. [1 line not declassified] 1. General Factors [2 paragraphs (7 lines) not declassified] 2. Political Assets [6 paragraphs (19 lines) not declassified] 3. Military Assets [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
