3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
695
Moscow expects that the US leadership on its part will show re-
straint and composure. One should take into consideration that the de-
velopments in Iran are of a very complicated nature. As is known, they
represent entanglement of numerous political, economic, and religious
factors. As a result, passions are raging high there.
The Soviet leadership and L.I. Brezhnev personally are convinced
that under the circumstances it is especially important not to yield to
emotions, to display restraint. We say this because various sorts of dis-
quieting reports are appearing also with reference to US officials on a
possibility of some actions on the part of the United States with regard
to Iran which are far from a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
We hope that the US leadership and President Carter personally
will understand rightly these considerations of ours prompted by real-
istic motivations. It is clear that a conflict in relations between any two
countries carries an element of a dangerous tension, not only for both of
them. And, in this case, such a risk is the more considerable since one of
the parties to the existing dispute is a big power.
We would like to especially point out that we express these consid-
erations as if from aside, but naturally for understandable reasons we
cannot be indifferent to what is going on.
End text.
Vance
237.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, December 8, 1979, 0112Z
315754. Subject: US Reply to Soviet Communication of December 4
on Iran. Ref: State 312888.2
1. (S-entire text)
2. You should seek appointment with Gromyko or highest alterna-
tive level at Foreign Ministry and deliver following US oral communi-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 4, CV/AD, 12/5/79. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Barry; cleared
by Shulman, Raymond Seitz (S/S), and Henry Precht (NEA/IWG); approved by Vance.
2 See Document 236.
