56
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ence. Purposeful interference with operational space systems shall be
viewed as an infringement upon sovereign rights. (U)
e. The United States will pursue activities in space in support of its
right of self-defense. (U)
f. The United States will maintain a national intelligence space pro-
gram. (C)
g. The United States will pursue space activities to increase scien-
tific knowledge, develop useful civil applications of space technology,
and maintain United States leadership in space. (U)
h. The United States will conduct international cooperative space-
related activities that are beneficial to the United States scientifically,
politically, economically, and/or militarily. (U)
i. The United States will develop and operate on a global basis ac-
tive and passive remote sensing operations in support of civil, military,
and national intelligence objectives. Such operations will occur under
conditions which protect classified technology, deny sensitive data,
and promote acceptance and legitimacy of such activities. (C)
j. The United States will maintain current responsibility and man-
agement relationships among the sectors focused on civil, defense, and
national intelligence objectives. (C)
k. Close coordination, cooperation, and information exchange will
be maintained among the space sectors to avoid unnecessary duplica-
tion and to allow maximum cross-utilization, in compliance with secu-
rity and policy guidance, of all capabilities. (U)
2. The United States will conduct those activities in space which
are necessary to national defense. The military space program shall
support such functions as command and control, communications,
navigation, environmental monitoring, warning, tactical intelligence,
targeting, ocean and battlefield surveillance, and space defense. In ad-
dition, defense space programs shall contribute to the satisfaction of
national intelligence requirements. The following policies shall govern
the conduct of the military space programs. (C)
a. Security. The military space program, including dissemination of
data, shall be conducted in accordance with Executive Orders and ap-
plicable directives for protection of national security information, and
commensurate with both the missions performed and the security
measures necessary to protect related (national intelligence) space
activities. (C)
b. [6 lines not declassified]
c. Survivability. Survivability of space systems, including all system
elements, will be pursued commensurate with the planned need in
crisis and war, the threat, and the availability of other assets to perform
the mission. Identified deficiencies will be eliminated and an aggres-
