International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 531 British officials are an exception to some of the reactions described above: They seem to set more store on guidelines than the Continental countries; they fear overly restrictive US monetary and fiscal policies; and some of them doubt that domestic US policies, alone, will meet the need—international monetary action is required, as well, in their view. But they are a minority in the overall reported European reaction. 175. Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs (Hormats) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Market Reacts to Measures to Support the Dollar Market reaction to the forceful measures announced this morning (Tab 1) was immediate.2 The dollar experienced a strong recovery in hectic trading. Within an hour after the announcement, the dollar moved by as much as 5 percent against major currencies. The deutschemark/dollar rate moved by mid-morning from yesterday’s fixing of 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs, 1978–1980 Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents, External Research, Etc., Lot 81D145, Box 1, Exchange Rates. Limited Official Use. Drafted on November 1 by John Lefgren (EB/IFD/OMA) and cleared by Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Finance and Development Michael Ely. Printed from a copy that does not bear Hormats’ initials. A handwritten notation at the top of the page reads: “Tab 2, Nov. 1, 1978.” The memorandum was Tab 2 of a November 1 memorandum from Thomas Forbord of the Office of Monetary Affairs to Cooper; Forbord’s memorandum notes that Hormats’ memorandum had been prepared at Christopher’s request. (Ibid.) 2 Tab 1, attached but not printed, is an undated paper describing the administration’s dollar support program. On November 1, Blumenthal announced a series of measures designed to shore up the value of the dollar. The program included an increase in the Federal Reserve discount rate from 8.5 percent to 9.5 percent; imposition by the Federal Reserve of a 2 percent supplementary reserve requirement on time deposits exceeding $100,000; increases in monthly Treasury gold sales; and coordinated foreign exchange market invention by the United States, West Germany, Japan, and Switzerland. Backing this market intervention were facilities in the amount of $30 billion, secured through a U.S. drawing on the IMF; SDR sales to West Germany, Japan, and Switzerland; increases in U.S. swap arrangements with West Germany, Japan, and Switzerland; and issuance of U.S. securities denominated in foreign currencies. For the text of Blumenthal’s announcement of the program, as well as Carter’s introductory remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1908–1910.
