Afghanistan 281 Aaron: The paper seems to write off Pakistan. Vance: That is a key issue. We have to get down to that. The paper doesn’t suggest writing it off but following a middle course. We recognize however that Zia may not last. Christopher: Perhaps the point is overstated. Aaron: The alternative, getting close to India, is extremely difficult. Brown: What will the Indians say about the Soviet activities in Afghanistan? Saunders: They would be very concerned but they are in the midst of an election campaign and are not likely to do or say much. Brown: What if Afghanistan becomes another Czechoslovakia? Will that affect Indian attitudes towards the Soviets and the United States? Saunders: It will be a cause for concern for them but . . . Christopher: We think that the Indians won’t like it but are not likely to say much. Turner: We agree with that. They will be concerned but it won’t change their policies much nor will it lead to a warming of relations with us. The paper makes the prospect of Pakistan more pessimistic than is warranted. We could probably maintain relations with a post Zia military regime or even with the PPP. Vance: True enough but that would not last long. There would be an election, then the PPP which would be more hostile. Newsom: I agree that it is badly written. Claytor: It becomes clearer later on. Vance: Let us turn to the “alternate frameworks.” Should we go all out with the major program in Pakistan, write them off, or take an in-between position? Some discussion of this would help. Brown: There are many nuances in the in-between position. For instance we could untie aid from nuclear policy. Then we could have a bigger or smaller program. Under the present framework there is very little that we can do. Vance: You are wrong. It depends on the kind of equipment that we can offer, as Agha Shahi told us.4 Brown: Would or can we sell to them outside of FMS? Vance: We can sell whatever we want. Aaron: But what would the Congressional reaction be? 4 Presumably during Shahi’s October 16–17 visit; see footnote 2, Document 79. Documentation on the visit is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
