the wishes of the Chinese Government and that he could not see how it would be encouraging or discouraging to anybody to state the amount. The point was not decided and the subcommittee passed on to the question of impounding the funds, the Luxury List and other phases of the resolutions. Colonel Peel supported the American resolution and he suggested a committee of experts to consider the question of classification of luxuries and the simplifying of procedure in administering the Customs laws. In this connection Mr. Strawn suggested that a simple way of disposing of the matter would be to prepare a list of commodities paying 5 per cent and then to have all other commodities pay 2½ per cent. His idea was to make the luxuries definite so that there would be no difficulty for the Customs Administration to determine which were luxuries and which necessities. Dr. Yen remarked that the idea of the American Delegation that the levying of both surtaxes should commence at the same time was an excellent one and Mr. Strawn, in reply to a suggestion from Colonel Peel that there would be a further long period of waiting unless the Delegates were given a simple list of luxuries, said that the idea the American Delegation had in mind was that China was just as much entitled to the 5 per cent as to the 2½ per cent and the quicker this was granted the better it would be.

Mr. Hioki at this point raised a question as to the effective date of surtaxes, and Mr. Strawn said that it would be two months after the signing of the resolution, provided, however, that goods shipped into China before the expiration of two months should pay only the duties then in force. Mr. Hioki thought that it would be fair that the levy should begin on the arrival of the goods since if they should decide to make the new duties effective on the date of shipment the Japanese goods would arrive in China much earlier than goods shipped from Europe. Mr. Strawn remarked that if the case were otherwise Japan would have two months’ advantage over the other countries. It seemed to Mr. Oudendijk, also, that if the case were otherwise it would give Japan a much longer period during which Japanese goods could still come in at the lower rate. Mr. Strawn said that the sole purpose was to place every country on a parity. As this question gave promise of prolonged debate without arriving at any definite decision, Mr. Strawn passed on to the next paragraph of the American proposal which provided
