VI  Preface
ing documents, the editors developed a research plan based on the top-
ics to be included and on official records and other documentation in 
the Department of State and at the Dwight D. Eisenhower Library at 
Abilene, Kansas.
The documents included in the printed volume and in the micro-
fiche supplement present the record of basic U.S. policies toward South 
America, Central America, and the Caribbean area, and of the major 
incidents in U.S. relations with the nations in the region. The documen-
tation on multilateral issues and regional U.S. policies contained in the 
printed volume focuses on U.S. concern in the years 1958–1960 over 
economic development problems, political instability, the Castro regime 
in Cuba, Communist activity, the U.S. role in hemisphere defense, and 
the role of the Organization of American States in promoting stability 
and peace in the region. The goodwill trips by President Eisenhower, 
Vice President Nixon, and Dr. Milton Eisenhower, which reflect this 
concern, are documented in some detail. U.S. bilateral relations with 
Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico are also covered. A summary of the print 
volume is printed on pages 47–53. U.S. relations with Cuba and the U.S. 
attitude toward the regime of Fidel Castro are extensively documented 
in volume VI.
This microfiche supplement presents documents on U.S. economic 
policies toward the region, including technical assistance, and bilat-
eral relations with the nations of Central and South America and the 
Caribbean area, except Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, and Cuba. Summaries 
of the compilations included in the microfiche supplement, with refer-
ences to specific documents, are printed on pages XLIX–LXXXVIII.
This guide to the microfiche supplement contains lists of sources, 
persons, and abbreviations and a comprehensive index of all the docu-
ments, as well as the summaries noted above. The print volume and the 
microfiche supplement have separate indexes.
Compilations on bilateral relations in this volume and in the micro-
fiche supplement include the texts of telegrams from the Department of 
State to posts in the region containing instructions and policy guidance, 
telegrams from posts to the Department of State containing reports, 
analyses, and recommendations; the texts of policy memoranda and 
reports, and memoranda of conversation between U.S. and foreign 
officials.
In selecting documents for the print volume and microfiche sup-
plement, the editors concentrated on National Security Council and 
Cabinet meetings, NSC and Department of State policy papers and 
memoranda that set forth policy options. The editors also selected 
finished intelligence reports (such as National Intelligence Estimates 
and intelligence briefings to the NSC) on which policy decisions were 
made, communications with foreign governments and international
