648
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Andrei noted that Romania had not made these actions public nor had
many party members been informed of details of the actions because
the Romanian leadership did not wish to overcharge the atmosphere
or create an incident. However, the Romanians would like to see such
actions stopped.
The third issue raised by Mr. Andrei concerned economic relations,
which he noted were generally developing quite well. However, it
would be most helpful if the processing of export licenses could be
accelerated. He also noted that President Carter’s letter had been
well received.3
Dr. Brzezinski then responded to the points raised by Mr. Andrei.
He began by stressing the importance that the U.S. attached to relations
with Romania and the respect which the U.S. had for President Ceau-
sescu. The U.S. considered Ceausescu an important international States-
man and a friend. Dr. Brzezinski emphasized that relations between
Romania and the United States were good and that it was in this
perspective that he wished to speak.
On the question of economic relations, Dr. Brzezinski pointed out
that President Carter had ordered an acceleration of the processing of
export licenses and he asked Mr. Larrabee to check on this. Dr. Brzezin-
ski then raised the case of Dr. Vlad Georgescu, who had been invited
to spend a year at the Woodrow Wilson Center but whose visa had
yet to be approved.4 Mr. Andrei said that the case had been raised
during his conversation with Counselor Nimetz the preceding day;
he would discuss this with President Ceausescu when he returned
to Romania.5
Regarding Mr. Andrei’s complaints about alleged agitation on the
part of employees of the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest, Dr. Brzezinski
said he was skeptical of such reports and would be very surprised if
they were true. It was possible they arose out of some misunderstand-
3 See footnote 2, Document 204.
4 Earlier on September 30, Larrabee sent Brzezinski a memorandum with talking
points for his meeting with Andrei on the Pacepa case, export licensing, and Vlad
Georgescu, a Romanian scholar and dissident who was invited by the Woodrow Wilson
Center on a one-year fellowship in Washington and whose exit visa was being denied
by the Romanian Government. The meeting with Brzezinski was intended to follow a
meeting with Vance in New York the previous day but it had been canceled at the last
minute. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
Box 66, Romania: 6/78–3/79)
5 In telegram 257186 to Bucharest, October 11, the Department reported the discus-
sions on bilateral issues between Nimetz and Andrei in New York on September 29.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780415–1130) The private discus-
sion on Pacepa was reported in telegram 252848 to Bucharest. See footnote 5, Docu-
ment 207.
