Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX vince the Egyptians to accept the word “prevail.” The Secretary said no; the Egyptians had not even accepted the present language but we thought they could be persuaded to. Begin said he would recommend that the Cabinet accept the present text as written while the United States checked to see if the title could be changed. The Secretary remarked that we were making real progress. Dayan noted that, in addition to the treaty text, we needed to complete the annexes and the appendix to Annex I. The Secretary said the Egyptians wanted an appendix, and we did not know if we could get them to move off that position. Begin then noted that the Israeli Minister of Energy had come to the United States to deal with the oil problem. This was a serious matter, and he hoped the United States could help; Israel needs Egyptian oil at market prices. The Secretary said there would be no problem about market prices. Dayan then commented that, leaving the annex aside, there were three problems which he thought could be worked out in Washington: the preamble, the Gaza language and the side letter. The Secretary said he thought the problem of the letter could be solved. Dayan said this still leaves two points. Egypt cannot simply say that if Israel does not agree to the present language, there will be no treaty. A further effort is needed to overcome these problems. The Gaza problem is meaningless. If the preamble is the only problem, we need to seek agreement on this. On the whole, Dayan said, we are not doing badly if the gap is down to one and one-half issues. The Secretary said this is real progress to which Begin replied “I came to make progress.” Begin then turned the conversation to bilateral issues. Begin began by noting that we are at a turning point in the history of the Middle East with the coming of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. The parties will go on to the next stage in the peace process but nevertheless this is a turning point. Israel must face what is going to happen with the evacuation of tens of thousands of Israeli troops from the Sinai and the relocation of installations in the Negev, Begin said. It is a matter of gravest concern if Israel cannot deal with the financial aspects of this move. He noted that he is not an economist, but he does understand the tremendous burden which will fall upon Israel as a result of these moves. “We don’t want to bring about a peace treaty which would be accompanied by complete bankruptcy.” It is not an objective possibility for Israel to bear the full costs of this move. Israel has therefore decided to request from the United States a loan to cover these costs. Israel is not seeking a grant; Israel’s record on repaying its debts is perfect. In this case, Israel would seek a loan for 25
