International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
435
proposed at Bremen was very broad and general. Given that limitation,
this memorandum (i) discusses the background for the proposal;
(ii) outlines it; (iii) evaluates the likely impact of alternative formula-
tions of the proposal on the United States’ and world economy; and
(iv) states my view on what our reaction should be. Before the Summit,
you will receive an interagency memorandum with further discussion
and agreed-upon talking points.
I. Background for the New Proposal
The new European Monetary System (EMS) proposals must be
seen in light of both a long history of the functioning and subsequent
breakdown of the Bretton Woods system, and the current frustrations
with economic policy in Europe today. A short history of postwar inter-
national monetary arrangements is given in an Appendix.2
Why are the European governments proposing EMS now? First, most
high officials in Europe do not like floating exchange rates. Second, Eu-
ropeans believe that U.S. “benign neglect” of exchange rates (our view
that market-determined, floating rates are appropriate) reflects an en-
during lack of concern about exchange market instability. They believe,
therefore, that measures to achieve greater exchange rate stability must
be taken without active U.S. participation.
Most important, I suspect that this is a brilliant ploy for deflecting
criticism from the failure of European economic policy. The central
need in Europe and most of the world today, outside the U.S., is to re-
store economic recovery. By taking the initiative on a dramatic and
bold new action and focusing everyone’s attention on EMS, Schmidt
may well remove the sting of German failure to promote adequate eco-
nomic growth. It should be emphasized, however, that exchange rate
instability cannot be reasonably counted as the central cause of eco-
nomic weakness in Europe. The cause is basically failure to take appro-
priate monetary and fiscal policies.
Schmidt does genuinely believe that exchange rate instability has
been a significant drag on economic growth, especially in Germany. In
fact, there is little evidence to date that exchange rate appreciation has
markedly dampened German exports (and therefore growth). Ex-
change rate instability is a symptom of fundamental disparities in eco-
nomic conditions among countries. Moreover, attempts to impose ex-
warded to Carter a July 15 memorandum from Blumenthal that provided more informa-
tion on the EMS. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 13, President, Germany, 7/13–17/78: Economic Summit [II])
2 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “A Short History of Postwar
International Monetary Arrangements.”
