394 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —Proposing a strategy for future U.S. actions which will place primary emphasis on the use of our “voice” rather than our vote; attempt to influence the Bank’s actions as early as possible in the loan process; seek to engage the support of other nations and multilateral organizations.15 7. The Interagency Group shall prepare and submit for review by the PRC/NSC, a paper analyzing the appropriateness of using other sanctions or incentives to further the goals defined in this directive. 15 The President rewrote this paragraph to read: “—Proposing a strategy for future U.S. actions which will utilize most effectively both our voice and our vote, understand and attempt to influence the Bank’s actions as early as possible in the loan process, and seek to engage the support of other nations and multilateral organizations.” 114. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Human Rights Foundation (HRF) 1. Reasons for an HRF2 In addition to performing the important functions listed in Section 2 below, there are several good reasons for establishing an HRF as an Administrative initiative: —In the furtherance of human rights, we have relied most heavily on exhortation and on punitive sanctions imposed through our foreign assistance programs. Though useful and necessary, these techniques often conflict with other legitimate foreign policy objectives and risk creating a climate in which American commitment to human rights is judged solely by the frequency of public denunciations or aid cut-offs. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 19, PD/ NSC–30. Confidential. Sent for action. The President’s handwritten notation on the first page of the memorandum reads: “Zbig—Let’s hold this—J.” Tuchman sent an earlier version of this memorandum to Brzezinski on January 24; see Document 107 and footnote 8 thereto. 2 The President changed the article “an” to “a” and, next to the abbreviation HRF, wrote: “(spell out).”
