1980  803
—Surviving Soviet ICBM warheads, on the other hand, could 
destroy a substantial number of US silos, as well as US hardened com-
mand and control facilities in quick-­reaction retaliatory strikes. They 
could destroy only a small fraction of the US MX shelters available in 
1989, however.
54. Finally we have examined the surviving potentials of the SALT-­
limited forces of each side to destroy nonsilo military targets, which 
vary widely in area and hardness. Throughout the 1980s under SALT 
circumstances, each side would have the surviving potential to destroy 
a large percentage of these targets on the other side. For the United 
States, the bulk of this potential would reside in either its surviving 
SLBM warheads or its bomber weapons. For the USSR, the potential 
would reside in either its surviving ICBM or SLBM warheads.
Implications
55. With regard to absolute residual capabilities the quasi-­dynamic 
analysis indicates that, throughout the period of the Estimate, the SALT-­
limited forces of each side could devastate the other side in retaliation 
after absorbing a first strike.
56. With regard to relative residual capabilities:
—The analysis shows that, if they struck first with SALT-­
constrained forces, the Soviets could have a substantial advantage in 
residual potentials through the middle 1980s. The United States would 
begin to narrow the gap thereafter and, in the late 1980s, would achieve 
residual potentials about equal to those of the USSR. Thus, the United 
States is at a disadvantage through the middle 1980s and the situation 
then improves.
—From the point of view of Soviet concern about the possibility 
of a US first strike, again with SALT-­constrained forces, the analysis 
indicates that Soviet residuals would be the greater in the middle 1980s, 
but would fall well below those of the United States by the late 1980s.
57. With regard to the very broad trends under SALT II conditions:
—The analysis shows a substantial Soviet improvement in the next 
few years, reaching a plateau in the early and middle 1980s or peaking 
in the middle 1980s. It shows a slight US decline in the early 1980s and 
a sharp improvement in the US position in the late 1980s.
—These trends are caused by the combined effects of heavy Soviet 
reliance on fixed land-­based ICBMs, US force diversity and planned 
modernization, and SALT II limitations if extended through the decade.
F. Capabilities of Soviet Strategic Defenses
58. In light of the improving Soviet intercontinental offensive 
capabilities, the extent to which Soviet strategic defenses—­air and mis-
sile defenses, antisubmarine warfare forces, and civil defense—­could 
reduce the damage to the USSR from US retaliatory strikes is becom-
ing even more important. Currently, Soviet strategic defenses would
