Peru  1133
Minister Porras said that Peru rejected the interference of extra-­
continental powers in the hemisphere, not to serve the interests of the 
United States but to defend itself. He said that although he believed 
that the Monroe Doctrine had failed on occasion, there was a perma-
nent time of events in history that showed its efficacy.
[illegible in the original] almost all of the political parties in Latin 
America, and was warmly accepted by the masses. He said that there-
fore the measures taken by Castro should be viewed not as to their 
effect in Cuba but as a part of the international picture.
Minister Porras said that he was convinced that the impact of Fidel 
Castro on world and Latin American public opinion was the result of 
the work of American newsmen. He said that what would otherwise be 
a case of a cardillo of a small Caribbean island with a ridiculous beard 
had been made into an idol by American correspondents exploiting the 
Cuban revolution.
PE–49.	
Telegram from the Chargé in Peru (Neal) to the 
Department of State1

Lima, September 2, 1960, 4 p.m.
163. Prime Minister Beltran called me in yesterday to discuss his pos-
sible resignation and the question of his attending Bogotá conference.2
He was at very low ebb mainly, I feel, because of overwork on 
interpellation and was hurt by coldness with which Senate personally 
treated him. Said he was reluctant to continue in Cabinet and wanted 
my opinion.
I told him our polls indicated assurance final vote favorable and 
that APRA leader had only last night predicted his victory after per-
sonal abuse. I said opposition playing politics with him and his friends 
were hesitant to publicly indicate their feeling but vote would tell.3
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 723.13/9–260. Confidential; Priority.
2 Reference is to the third meeting of the Committee of 21 at Bogotá, September 
5–13. For documentation, see Documents ETA–32–34, 38, 42, 44, 47–49, 55; CT–31; HA–29; 
NI–11.
3 In telegram 171 from Lima, September 5, the Embassy reported that Prime Minister 
Beltrán received a confidence vote of 78 to 29 in the Chamber of Deputies on September 
4 following in interpellation, (formal questioning of [illegible in the original] policy in 
the legislature) begun on September 2, during which he answered 41 questions by the 
opposition Partido Democráta-Cristiano on his program. (723.13/9–560)
