616  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
for conventional ALCMs. The base is 1.5 meters for nuclear ALCMs, 
2 meters for conventional ALCMs. (Using a styrofoam cup, he made 
clear that he was talking about a portion of the top of the missile where 
it is attached to the aircraft.) Nuclear and conventional ALCMs should 
be distinguished by this feature.
Burt: That would be one example of differences visible to OSI. 
Peresypkin: The warhead attachment and interface is also different. 
Bartholomew: This is also an example of a difference visible to on-­site 
inspection. This seems to fit the concept. Burt: I suggest you talk to our 
general.
Akhromeyev (referring to the five tics on distinguishability and 
inspection in the Moscow elements of common ground): These are the 
points that are acceptable on the whole, in general.
Bartholomew: May I try to reformulate that, and see if you agree. 
Can I say that you agree with the points on distinguishability and 
inspection that we talked about, but of course there are elements that 
will need to be developed, to be fleshed out? Akrhomeyev: We have 
agreement on the first five points. As for the other five points, we accept 
them in general but they are still to be fleshed out. That is right.
Akhromeyev: We say 100, you say 115. Burt: We say continuing 
right. Peresypkin: That continuing right applies to older bombers. In 
Moscow the US position was different, it referred to the B–1 and B–2. 
Burt: We say that looking into the future, bombers that today are new 
will then be older, and B–1s or B–2s could be converted to a conven-
tional role. For now B–52s will be converted. This is what we mean by 
a continuing right. Bombers other than the B–52 could be converted in 
the future.
Akhromeyev: What we have in mind is determining at each point 
how to determine older types. Burt: If you accept the concept of a con-
tinuing right, we could talk about criteria for bombers that could be put 
in this category.
Akhromeyev: This can be done. For example, a bomber that has 
been in service over 15 years. We will specify that definition. Burt: That 
kind of criterion can be considered.
Bartholomew: Let us look at the number 115 versus 100. Burt: I 
think we can resolve this. You have another position. You want extra 
bombers for jamming, tanking, and reconnaissance. Peresypkin: We do 
not want an additional number for these purposes. Burt: Why not put 
together a category of converted conventional bombers, jammers, tank-
ers, and reconnaissance aircraft, all under a 115 limit.
Peresypkin: You did not understand correctly. We do not want to 
throw these other aircraft into the category of conventional bombers.
