March 27–December 31, 1979
961
but we should avoid leaks coming from Egypt before the Hill had been
informed. (S)
297.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the Embassy in Jordan1
New York, September 26, 1979, 2324Z
Secto 8020. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With King Hussein.
1. S (Entire text)
2. Summary: Secretary and King Hussein reviewed Mid East de-
velopments and King discussed at length, though in little detail, his
goal of seeking Arab consensus which would bring the Palestinians/
PLO to a position with which they, other Arabs, United States and
eventually Israel could live. Hussein said that PLO ready now to talk
about future of Palestinian-Jordanian relations, perhaps a confedera-
tion, and that PLO also seeking Jordanian advice on broader questions
of PLO relations within and beyond Arab world. Jordan’s current pos-
ture is to respond to PLO proposals. Secretary welcomed Hussein’s de-
scription of these developments and stressed his view that what Hus-
sein was suggesting was not necessarily in conflict with what U.S.,
Egypt and Israel now doing. Challenge is to assure that they do not be-
come contradictory but converge later in time. Key to success in this re-
gard will be timing: what we are now doing concerns transitional pe-
riod, which we all are agreed is needed, and what King is engaged in
concerns shape of eventual final settlement. Our process will continue
to go forward and as King develops his concepts it should be as parallel
track with view to eventual convergence of the two in most helpful
way. On Lebanon, King agreed that improvement there critically im-
portant and said that he would be as helpful as he could; he welcomed
suggestion that we keep in touch to assure that our Lebanon efforts are
complementary. Secretary and King touched also on tank sales—King
said deal with U.K. should be completed in week or so—on Maqarin
Dam and on regional security. End summary.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 56, Jordan: 7–11/79. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Imme-
diate to Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda, London, and Tel Aviv. Printed from a copy that
indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Vance was in
New York to address the opening of the United Nations General Assembly. A hand-
written notation in the right-hand margin reads: “important talk.”
