1502  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
atmosphere. This can be done without the establishment of the 
cumbersome, if not entirely impractical, system of inspection and 
control proposed by the experts. Presently installed systems have 
already demonstrated technical efficiency in detection of atmospheric 
detonations.
It is respectfully suggested, therefore, that the President announce 
the unconditional and unilateral cessation of all nuclear tests in the 
earth’s atmosphere for a specific period, say three years, ask similar 
action by other nuclear powers and suggest that the Geneva Confer­
ence proceed immediately to negotiate a treaty among the nuclear pow­
ers for a permanent stoppage of atmospheric tests.
Thereafter, the conference can proceed to negotiate for the discon­
tinuance of other types of nuclear weapon tests—underground, outer 
space and sub-­oceanic—with an adequate system of inspection and 
control, making the necessary exceptions for “threshold” and space 
tests. Technicians have advised that it is possible to develop improved 
low-­yield weapons through underground tests and that it may be pos­
sible to conduct tests beyond the earth’s atmosphere. The argument for 
cessation of these types of tests is essentially an argument for disarma­
ment and can be considered as a part of the whole involved problem of 
disarmament.
The course of action herein recommended has the possibility 
of bringing three important advantages to the United States: (1) an 
improvement of the moral and political position of the U.S. in the 
world; (2) the drawing of a clear distinction between the anti-­social 
contamination of the atmosphere for which the United States is being 
sorely blamed, on the one hand, and other types of nuclear weapons 
tests, on the other; (3) possibly laying the groundwork for a successful 
conference at Geneva, or, at least, mitigating or saving the United States 
from blame for its failure.
Since the conference evolved from the President’s pronouncement 
of August 22, there is no way that the U.S. can be disassociated from 
either the success or the failure of the conference. Our prestige and 
responsibility are involved.
Moreover, one important forward step toward peace and interna­
tional cooperation might lead to others in our time.
