3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
661
number of US troops on foreign territory, that number was 465,000 all
told. Gromyko asked rhetorically whether the Soviet Union was raising
questions in connection with these large numbers of US forces, such as
the questions raised by the US with respect to the instruction center in
Cuba. Was the Soviet Union referring to various understandings and
making a noisy campaign out of it? The US had presented demands to
the effect that the Soviet Union must do such and such with respect to
these armed forces in a country adjacent to the US, and yet those forces
were there for training purposes only, unlike the combat forces of the
US.
If the matter were approached with minimum objectivity, the Sec-
retary would realize how the US appeared in the eyes of any objectively
thinking individual, and not only in the eyes of the highest Soviet lead-
ership or L.I. Brezhnev personally. As Gromyko had said at the outset,
the Soviet leadership could only reach one of two conclusions in this
connection. Either this whole matter had been artificially and deliber-
ately concocted by the US Administration for reasons which he could
not fathom, or the US Administration had been badly misled. Person-
ally, he would not want to ascribe any personal motives to the Presi-
dent or to the Secretary, or to assert that the US had deliberately con-
cocted these statements or allegations at some desk in the White House.
Gromyko said he was simply analyzing the questions that had arisen
without ascribing any malicious intentions to anyone specifically.
Gromyko asked the Secretary to tell President Carter (since he
would not have an opportunity of seeing the President during his cur-
rent visit) that in Moscow the Soviet leadership generally, including
L.I. Brezhnev personally, had given appropriate attention to this entire
matter. Brezhnev was surprised and perplexed as to the reasons why
all of this was being done without any foundation. Brezhnev had asked
Gromyko to convey to the President and to the Secretary that the Soviet
leadership as such, and Brezhnev personally, cannot meet the wishes
and demands made in this connection. The Soviet leadership was
firmly convinced that the United States has no grounds whatsoever to
interfere in an affair that concerned only the Soviet Union and Cuba.
Gromyko personally was convinced that there were no legitimate
grounds at all for this matter having been raised in the first place. He
was saying all this without any ill feelings toward the United States.
Quite the contrary, the Soviet leadership had taken a very positive view
of everything that had been achieved in Soviet-American relations re-
cently, and the Soviet leadership and Brezhnev personally had ex-
pected that the President of the United States and his Administration
and all other US organizations involved in foreign policy would follow
the path that had been charted in Vienna, an achievement that had been
preceded by an enormous amount of preparatory work. Now every-
