46 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 4. In both the revised NDM paper and the revised ALCM paper agency positions will be omitted. The papers will set out and discuss options. START Technical Review 1. The START Backstopping Committee technical review of the Joint Draft Text should identify policy issues for the Arms Control PCC, but should not attempt to resolve them or prepare decision papers on them pending further guidance from the PCC. 14. Letter From Secretary of Defense Cheney to Secretary of State Baker1 Washington, May 5, 1989 Dear Jim: We had a very good discussion2 to prepare for your meeting next week with Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. I am sure that the first ministerial meeting with the Soviets in this Administration will be both important and very successful. I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the understandings we reached on your approach to key arms control issues in the Moscow discussions. On START, Shevardnadze will undoubtedly press you to be as specific as possible on individual issues. We should keep our options open, and make clear that we reserve the right to modify our positions in the future. We should not imply that major changes will soon be forthcoming regarding our proposed ban on mobile ICBMs or other key elements of our START position. We must also make clear to the Soviets that this Administration demands scrupulous compliance with all arms control agreements. They should understand that their failure to complete the agreed procedures for destruction of the ABM radars at Gomel and Moscow 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, STARS, Document Number 198930120-0. Secret. Copied to Scowcroft. 2 Under cover of a briefing memorandum of May 3, Ridgway sent Baker talking points for a May 4 White House meeting to discuss the upcoming Moscow Ministerial. (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, STARS, Document Number 198909978-0) According to the President’s Daily Diary, Bush met with Baker, Cheney, Webster, Crowe, Gates, and Sununu in the Oval Office from 2:23 to 2:55 p.m. on May 4. No minutes were found.
