North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
895
The staff work and consultations related to the direct contribution
issue could be undertaken by the inter-agency Commodity Task Force,
which will provide guidance and instructions to the US delegation in
Geneva.
Issue 2: If the PRC believes that the approach outlined under Issue
2 is satisfactory, this issue and the determination of the manner and
moment of its presentation in Geneva could be referred to the Com-
modities Task Force.
285.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Under Secretary of
the Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon)1
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting on the Common Fund
The PRC will meet on Friday, November 11 to discuss various al-
ternatives that might be used to augment the U.S. proposal for a
Common Fund. At the last meeting on November 4, the PRC requested
that the various “sweeteners” to the U.S. proposal (see paragraphs
10–15 of the discussion paper at tab B)2 be elaborated and the advan-
tages and disadvantages outlined.
The attached NSC paper (tab A)3 does not quite meet the request
made by the PRC. It discusses two possible approaches to the issue of
direct contributions to the Common Fund and does not elaborate much
of the detail. In addition, the discussion of possible measures other than
buffer stocks, although wordier than in the first presentation, does not
add further to the substance.
On the matter of overdraft possibilities and the size of the cash de-
posits which ICAs might put with the Common Fund, the staff group
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, Meetings (Mtg’s) 1977. No
classification marking. Drafted by Junz and Hazen Gale, Director of the Office of Raw
Materials and Ocean Policy, Department of the Treasury. A stamped notation reads:
“Noted by Mr. Solomon.”
2 Printed as Tab A to Document 280.
3 Printed as Tab I to Document 284.
