1456  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
heat application to be developed by experiment in one of the Carlsbad 
salt domes. The President commented that we ought to be quite careful 
while negotiations are going on. We will reserve the right to conduct 
these tests. Once the techniques have been proved out he was confi­
dent the world would demand that they be utilized, so that civilization 
could obtain the benefits of this activity.
Mr. McCone said it is clear that we are overcommitted on the pur­
chase of uranium during the period between now and 1962. He would 
propose to lengthen the term of the commitment, while holding its total 
unchanged, thus lopping off the “peak” now in prospect. The President 
commented that if these experiments turn out successfully, and large 
demands for peaceful uses arise, we could use a lot of uranium. He felt 
we should keep up long-­range interest in providing this product. He 
would see no objection to going to 1970 in order to bring the procure­
ment into a better schedule.
Mr. McCone concluded by saying that he is working with Mr. 
Quarles to reach agreement on the problem of long-­range requirements 
for atomic weapons—out of which needs for plutonium and hence for 
added plutonium capacity can be determined. The President thought 
this was a good project and hoped that it would forestall a reoccurrence 
of this year’s situation when the individual Chiefs gave testimony at 
variance with the over-­all Defense position.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
386.	 Note From Gray to Goodpaster1
Washington, October 11, 1958
GENERAL GOODPASTER:
I thought you might like for your files a copy of the Memoran­
dum of Conversation with Dr. Edward Teller, which has been reworked 
a little further since you saw it. I have sought to incorporate your 
1 Source: Conveys memoranda of conversation between the President and Teller 
and Bradbury, dealing with detecting nuclear tests. Top Secret enclosures. 11 pp. Eisen­
hower Library, White House Office Files, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, 
Nuclear Testing.
