858 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI domestic political cover if it were accepted. You should try the idea of a Soviet deMIRVing commitment with your counterparts to see whether it gets a more positive response. Throw-­weight The prospect of a “50 percent” reduction in aggregate Soviet throw-­ weight remains one of the most oft-­cited payoffs of a START treaty. The Soviets, however, have always been careful to commit themselves only to a reduction of “approximately” 50 percent. In Geneva, they are interpreting “approximately 50 percent reduction” to mean a 45 precent reduction. Rick has given them reason to believe that, in exchange for Soviet acceptance of other elements of the U.S. position on throw-­ weight (of which OSD was the strong champion), the U.S. could accept a mid-­point compromise (e.g., 47–48 percent) or even 45 percent. The difference between a 45 and 50 percent reduction is roughly equivalent to the throw-­weight of the SS–25 force. But the other central START limits (6000/4900/1500) would substantially constrain the Soviet ability to take advantage of any additional throw-­weight. Agreeing to any number other than 50 percent will probably generate (perhaps substantial) political flak. On the other hand, Soviet agreement to 50 percent probably is not in the cards, at least not without a high level political effort on our part. If we decide to move off of 50 percent, it does not matter much—­militarily or politically—­where in the 45–50 percent range we compromise. Baker should try to get Soviet agreement to a 50 percent throw-­ weight reduction. If that fails, we should compromise on any number between 45 and 50 percent in exchange for Soviet acceptance of a U.S. position of importance to us (e.g., noncircumvention). Whatever deal is struck on throw-­weight should be made contingent on the acceptability of the Soviet declared throw-­weight of the missiles they will reduce. Otherwise, they could inflate the magnitude of their claimed aggregate throw-­weight reduction. START/ABM Issues The immediate issue is whether to accept a reference to “Article XI of the ABM Treaty” in the START preamble as the price for getting the Soviets to fall off several other efforts to relink START to the ABM Treaty. The Soviet motive almost certainly is to try to retain some vestigial linkage. The objections for accepting the deal stem from concerns that any reference to the ABM Treaty, no matter how innocuous, will cause us problems on the Hill with SDI supporters. SDI supporters also argue that any reference to the ABM Treaty amounts to a reaffirmation of a ­bargain—­no defenses in exchange for continuing limitations on offenses—­that the U.S. no longer supports.
