1012 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ­particular stress on the need for increased agricultural production and ­reorganization of the present agricultural credit facilities; and (4) In harmony with that Report, that the loans be those needed for ­transportation—especially feeder roads—and communications ­facilities; and (5) If a foreign and experienced private utility enterprise cannot be found to take over the Administración National de Electricidad (ANDE) on reasonable terms, and a public loan becomes a necessary final resort, then such a loan be considered, but it should be granted only on the condition that foreign technical and administrative management be clearly stipulated in said loan. Within ANDE there has been much waste and payroll padding through political patronage and the Government can, by cleaning its own house here and in other places, make room for needed improvements through its own revenues. 8. Conclusion All loans that may be hereinafter extended should be constructed with a knowledge of Paraguay’s annual debt load and service requirements. A reference to Exhibit I indicates that Paraguay has additional debt servicing capabilities from, and including, 1962 and thereafter. The current Central Bank reserve position and the improvement that has occurred in the Bank’s liquidity during 1959 give some basis for confidence that Paraguay can pay any loans which may be granted in the categories listed above—as long as the service payments are extensively limited to 1962 and thereafter. Finally, it is the considered opinion of this Embassy that, as long as the Government of Paraguay rigidly; adheres to the stabilization ­program, she should be generausly treated—in accordance with her ability to pay—in the private sector, and that further loans in the public sector should be in accord with the thinking expressed above. Appended as Exhibit I is a schedule of Paraguay’s external debt and annual service requirements as they exist at the time of this Report. Appended as Exhibit II is a list of projects of USOM/P and their scheduled termination dates. Appended as Exhibit III is a schedule of loans made to Paraguay during the past two years by the DLF, the Ex-Im Bank and the World Bank.9 POLITICAL Embassy’s Past Action Paraguay has a long history of political instability and a “state of siege” has existed almost continually since 1940. President Stroessner 9 Not printed.
