Arms Control and Disarmament 1461 Attachment Memorandum for the Record October 10, 1958 Memorandum for Record regarding Trip to Nevada Atomic Test site— 3–5 October Discussions regarding the project for suspension of atomic tests brought out that the “equation” can be written in three major terms: A. Military Security 1. Technically, there is no clear or substantial advantage either to the Soviets or to the United States in suspending. 2. Militarily, although there is some reservation on this point, the suspension is to the considerable disadvantage of U.S. security. 3. Should the Soviets continue in testing under exceptions to the suspension, or in evasion of it, while the United States did not, then (irrespective of whether the U.S. knew of Soviet action or not) extremely serious—possibly even fatal—damage to U.S. security could occur; there is a division of opinion as to the likelihood of such action by the Soviets and the U.S. B. Foreign Affairs—Defensive Objectives The Secretary of State has considered that world public opinion regarding testing has come to such a point that the United States diplo­ macy cannot be satisfactorily conducted without the suspension of tests or a demonstrated effort to nuclear agreement to suspend. 1. World opinion has been successfully brought to a state of alarm by propaganda regarding the genetic effects of nuclear tests. 2. World opinion, as expressed in the efforts and attitudes of sev­ eral governments, is demanding a suspension of tests as a means of “lessening world tensions,” an objective on which they place a high value; as a corollary they call for agreement with the Russians on any significant subject as a means of lessening such tensions. 3. World opinion in many areas, and particularly those which have undergone heavy serial bombardment in past wars, attaches the horror of atomic warfare to the testing of nuclear weapons. C. Foreign Affairs—Positive Goals 1. It is possible that agreement on suspension of testing, if achieved and if faithfully carried out, might prove to be a step to more significant measures of disarmament and reduction of the over-­hanging armed threat of the Soviet Union to the United States, and vice versa. 2. It is possible that the inspection operations incident to the sus­ pension of testing may “open” the Soviet bloc in such a way as to introduce liberalizing and democratizing effects, which may lessen the threat of use of armed force at totalitarian decision and direction.
