760
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
condition further discussion of restraint in Africa on our agreement to
discuss other areas of interest to them. Indeed, even if the Soviets come
to agree upon meaningful restraint in Africa, they will probably look
for trade-offs from us outside Africa, for the simple reason that our
arms transfers to Africa are minimal.
[Thus, our key tactic at Mexico City must be to make the Soviets
see that a restraint agreement in Africa is in our mutual interest—
whether or not we agree to discuss the areas of primary interest to the
Soviets.]
3. Courses of Action and Proposals
In addition to the general tactics outlined above and assuming that
we are able to bring the Soviets to further discussion of Africa, the Dele-
gation will propose the following courses of action.
(a) The Region Defined: Sub-Saharan Africa
Consistent with guidance for round III, an African proposal
should cover sub-Saharan Africa. The Delegation should, as necessary,
indicate that we would also be willing to discuss northwest Africa, but
under no circumstances Egypt.
(b) Region-wide Interim Weapons Restraint Proposals
[The Delegation is authorized to explore interim restraint possibil-
ities and to make a proposal for Africa. The Delegation should seek fur-
ther guidance on what specific proposal to table. The Delegation
should make clear that the US is prepared to implement such interim
restraint measures bilaterally.]
(c) High Tension Areas
Along with Africa-wide interim restraint, the Delegation should
press for discussion and eventual agreement on additional arms trans-
fer restraint in certain areas of particularly high tension. The region-
wide IRM may be viewed as the preliminary evidence of our mutual in-
tention to restrain arms flows. The discussions on the high tension
areas will give more substance to our region-wide undertakings and
allow all parties to demonstrate that they are striving for meaningful
agreements.
If region-wide restraint is deemed insufficient, our aim will be fur-
ther and more specific arms restraint in certain areas, with the ultimate
aim of reducing tensions and avoiding possible confrontations. The pri-
ority areas for such discussions are Angola/Zaire and Ethiopia/So-
malia and at some point North Africa and Southern Africa. In each of
the priority areas we would point to our own restraint and suggest the
Soviets take reciprocal measures. If the Soviets choose to raise other
countries, we would be prepared to consider them as long as they fit
with our overall objectives.
