United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 135 the contribution which has been made by the regional Bank to such program, and member Government support for the institution. The representatives of the four Central American Governments have formally applied to the ICA for the funds to be contributed to the resources of the Central American Bank for Economic Integration. In order to inform the participating Governments that $5 million of the $10 million of assistance would be provided by DLF, we propose an allocation of a credit, under the terms of section 202(e) of the Mutual Security Act (Tab C),5 of $5 million to be extended upon the satisfactory establishment of the Bank. A formal application for such a loan has been filled with the DLF and several discussions have been held with DLF officials, including a nesting with the Managing Director. The draft charter (Tab E)6 of the Bank provides for paid-­in capital subscriptions, in three installments over a 14 month period, of $2 million by each member country. These contributions to the capital of the Bank would be available for use on a multilateral basis within the region (with the national currencies subscribed being convertible). It is deemed necessary to allocate $5 million of DLF funds for the purpose of a loan to the Bank at this time in order to further the establishment of the Bank which requires contributions by the member countries as well as the United States which contribution it is hoped will be authorized by the member countries in the near future. With respect to the $3 million from ICA, we believe that it would be possible to meet this part of the $10 million in a timely manner from FY 1962 ICA funds and thereby make minimum demands on the contingency Fund in 1961. We are therefore preparing papers for a 1550 determination (Tab A).7 The draft charter establishing the Bank (Tab E) which was discussed in retail with United States Government techniques, is subject to ratification by each of the national legislative bodies of the member countries before it can become operative. It is contemplated that ratification by the respective national legislatures be completed by January 5 Not printed here. 6 Not printed. 7 Not printed. NSC Action 1550, as approved by the President on May 8, 1956, established a procedure for making commitments to foreign governments on behalf of the United States, subject to the availability of funds. It stipulated that no promises or commitments involving future performance or expenditures of U.S. funds for foreign assistance should be made or implied, except upon specific determination by the Executive Branch covering the following four points: 1) the commitment was in accord with approved policy, 2) the funds had been approved by Congress or there was an Executive decision to request additional appropriations, 3) a judgment had been made indicating that the funds would be used effectively, and 4) the probable time span during which the assistance might have to be granted had been determined. (S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action)
