744 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II serves for financing needed grain imports would remain. This problem could be dealt with through the provision of food aid used countercyclically to offset crop shortfalls in LDC’s and thereby relieve pressure on scarce foreign exchange resources. The Bourne World Hunger Campaign paper might include an examination of how US food aid could be used more effectively in this way. If an effective grain reserve system is not established, then the US could consider proposing the negotiation of a grain reserve specifically for LDC’s designed to offset world price increases for grain as well as domestic grain production shortfalls in LDC’s. (Preliminary calculations suggest that a reserve for this purpose would require around 15 million metric tons of grain—compared to estimates of 60 million tons for a world-wide reserve.) Through its foreign assistance programs the US is also making an effort to foster growth with equity in LDC’s, with greatest concentration on expanding LDC agriculture. However, the widespread concern with the effectiveness of US aid suggests that a special effort be made to assess the past effectiveness of US assistance in fostering the expansion of LDC agriculture. Specifically, what is needed is —a methodology for assessing effectiveness —an examination of past experience in the context of this methodology —establishment of regional or country agricultural growth targets for measuring future effectiveness. Other US policies specifically aimed at expanding agriculture in LDC’s might include: —Developing the knowledge and techniques for greater agricultural productivity world-wide: Agricultural experts have been troubled for some time at the apparent slowdown in productivity gains in agriculture and believe there is a strong case for greater government finance of basic research in this area. (This was also a conclusion of the recent World Food and Nutrition Study.)5 —Delivering the research to LDC’s: This involves the time consuming task of adapting research improvements made in the US to conditions in individual countries or regions within countries abroad. A number of LDC’s do not even have the agricultural facilities to undertake efforts at adaptation. Perhaps the 1979 Science and Technology Conference6 could focus on improving the delivery of agricultural technology to LDC’s and facilitate its adaptation there. 5 See Document 212. 6 The UN Conference on Science and Technology for Development (UNCSTD) was scheduled to take place in Vienna, August 20–31, 1979.
