National Security Policy  77
December, and you referred it to the National Security Council for 
appropriate consideration and further action.
2. The Report consists of a 93-­page Report proper and a 191-­page 
Appendix. The Report is remarkably fine, comprehensive, and detailed, 
and should be most useful to appropriate operating personnel as a 
source of information and guidance.
3. Much of the Report is consistent with approved U.S. policy. I 
do not understand that Mr. Nash thought of his Report as a means of 
raising policy issues for Council consideration. In fact, the Report is not 
framed in the form of policy recommendations or issues. Yet scattered 
throughout the Report, the NSC Staff identified a total of 123 separate 
conclusions and recommendations.
4. It would be impossible to summarize briefly the contents of 
this magnificent work. Its first three sections, pages 1–13, do contain a 
summary of past U.S. base development and of considerations for the 
future. The remaining sections of the Report proper cover:
Section IV—Analyses by country and by region.
Section V—Major problems common to most areas.
Section VI—Operational and Administrative Policies.
Section VII—Internal U.S. Government organization for base matters.
5. The entire Appendix volume is devoted to a country-­by-­country 
analysis of twenty-­nine nations. Each of those analyses is for conve­
nience presented in a uniform format. Naturally, each analysis varies 
with the importance of the area under consideration. One wonders 
whether any comparable mine of exact and detailed information on this 
subject will be found in any one place in government.
6. It would obviously not be appropriate for the Council to give 
detailed consideration to most of the material in the Report. However, 
the Planning Board has identified nine issues for Council consideration.
7. I will call to the Council’s attention the Planning Board’s com­
ments and recommendations on these nine issues, with respect to 
which we suggest that the Council:
a. Adopt the Planning Board’s recommendations, and
b. Recommend that the President authorize the responsible agencies 
to circulate the Nash Report, together with the Planning Board’s rec­
ommendations as adopted, to key operating personnel in this country 
and overseas, for information and such action as each agency deems 
appropriate consistent with approved national security policy. In view 
of the sensitivity of the Report in its entirety, distribution of the full 
Report should be limited to key operating personnel, and only appro­
priate extracts from the Report should be circulated to personnel hav­
ing particular responsibility for specific subjects.
8. First, the main thesis of the Report (which you will find on page 1 
of the February 14 NSC memorandum), which I will read:
