1956 693 renounce pursuit policies or views toward dispute are no more than empty words. 46. Wang said I had given example that if American vessel fired upon it would respond in self-­defense. He might ask what sort vessel meant. If merchant vessel carrying on peaceful mission would be one thing. If military vessel intruding into terriorial waters China, it could not claim any self-­defense. That action would be outright provocation and act aggression against Chinese people and Chinese people would not hesitate respond that aggression. 47. Wang said turning now to question of declaration on renun­ ciation force. If US refuses withdraw its untenable claim to right self-­ defense in Taiwan area, it then proves US not willing make any progress on this question. 48. Wang said if US should in any way assume Chinese would accept my proposal, that, he might say, would be an illusion which could only be realized when sun rises in west. 49. I said, in other words his proposition was that, instead of being renunciation of force and agreement settle differences peaceful means, that instead would be renunciation of US of its views, rights, and inter­ ests in Taiwan area. 50. Wang said if they were to make declaration renouncing use force and at same time declaration recognized American right self-­ defense in Taiwan area, what meaning would there be to such a decla­ ration? Probably I was proposing making of statement in which their side would accept continuing armed occupation Taiwan by US. 51. I said I had told him over and over again that it not my intent, and I did not think amendments I had suggested, in any way prejudice their views and policies on area. I still believed I had accomplished that purpose and I had said if they do not agree, willing listen any sugges­ tions they cared make on this query. 52. I said, however in statements he had made here previously in public statements by his government, and again very explicitly this morning, he had stated his purpose in negotiating this declaration was to have US renounce its views and its rights in area. That was something different. He could not expect US do that, either explicitly or implicitly. 53. Wang said, I had said I did not demand China give up its views or position. However, position of China is exactly to liberate Taiwan. This liberation of Taiwan is inherent right of self-­defense of Chinese people. 54. Wang said this reasonable position of China was accepted throughout world. He had repeatedly pointed out that US has absolutely no right self-­defense Taiwan area. For US to insist on its views or rights in Taiwan area was to interfere in domestic affairs of another country and to seize territory of another country in violation international law.
