International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 465 Strauss: There can’t be one essential condition, as there is total conditionality in the negotiations. We can’t say there is one condition which overrides everything. We have attempted in every instance to determine the political difficulties of other nations and solve them while we solved our own. The Zenith case showed the good faith of President Carter. We fought against our own company all the way up to the Supreme Court and we won. This showed the good will of the President.6 Trudeau: We should say there must be agreement on uniform application of GATT rules. Uniform application of GATT rules is essential, and we agree to move as promptly as possible in that direction. Lambsdorff: We can accept the last proposal. Trudeau’s proposal gets around the difficulty expressed by Strauss. More conditions would tie our hands in Geneva. We should not lose sight of the French objective, but we need flexibility in Geneva. Giscard: Dell clearly indicated our position on substance. On the tariff measures we need to ask approval of our Deputies. We cannot obtain their agreement unless the U.S. takes some decisions in a symmetrical manner. We could accept Trudeau’s proposal to use the word “essential.” Strauss: This would read “uniform application of GATT rules is essential and we shall move in that direction as soon as possible.” Carter: Essential is too far-reaching. It would not be appropriate to put in essential. Perhaps vital. Giscard: We accept vital. It means that it is a life and death issue. It is stronger than essential. Carter: It means life. We can live with vital. I hate to see this as a prerequisite of all other progress. Ushiba: I can go along with this. Trudeau: We can say vital or important or necessary. All go in the same direction. Schmidt: We should keep in mind that there are other preconditions as well. Giscard: We should agree not to have too much technical detail. Also, we do not want another Kennedy Round where we enact everything and wait for the U.S. Congress to ratify. We want progress before 6 On June 21, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled against the Zenith Radio Corporation’s contention that the Secretary of the Treasury was required to levy countervailing duties on imported Japanese consumer electronics exempted from taxes normally imposed within Japan. (Warren Weaver, Jr., “Court Calls Import Duty Optional, Probably Averting Price Spiral,” The New York Times, June 22, 1978, p. NJ21; Carol H. Falk, “Supreme Court Rejects Zenith’s Protection Bid,” The Wall Street Journal, June 22, 1978, p. 2)
