1134 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Shelton; Assistant Secretaries of State Gerard C. Smith and Thomas C. Mann; The Assistant to the President; the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; Mr. Huntington Sheldon, CIA (Items 2 and 3); the White House Staff Secretary; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the Acting Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Director, NSC Secretariat (Johnson). There follows a summary of the discussion of the Meeting and the main points taken. 1. OUTER SPACE PROGRAMS UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. (NSC Action No. 2245) Mr. Gray described the background of the Defense presentation, noting that the Planning Board recommended that NASA be asked to make a similar presentation on its programs, and then called on Mr. John H. Rubel, Acting Director, Defense Research and Engineering, to make the presentation. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s Briefing Note is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and another is attached to this Memorandum. A copy of Mr. Rubel’s presentation is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting). At the conclusion of Mr. Rubel’s presentation, the President said that he did not know where the money for such programs was going to come from. It seemed to him that we should finally reach the point where these programs were not constantly going up until they absorbed nine-tenths of our research money. We should determine some sort of level of effort and set a dollar ceiling which would be changed only if there were some sort of startling development that should be exploited. If we continued to budget such programs on the basis that we did not know what they would ultimately cost, expenditures would increase constantly and there would be little hope for free government. We would have to be ruthless with respect to other areas of expenditure if we were to continue to support programs of this sort. He said he had watched these programs go up and that he had supported them and believed in them. Programs which offer real promise should be sup­ ported, but in the case of others, we should stay closer to basic research. No one, however, was suggesting elimination of important defense programs. Except for the work which they provided, there was nothing productive about these programs. They did not, for example, reduce costs of U.S. exports. He was for getting useful information, but not for spending billions to put a man on the moon. Secretary Anderson referred to a statement Mr. Rubel had made in his presentation to the effect that the cost of many of these programs depended upon the life of the satellite involved. He wondered what the problems were with respect to ensuring long life for these satel­ lites. Mr. Rubel said that the principal problem in this respect was an
