February 1951–February 1952
149
52.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, October 30, 1951.
1590. 1. Abol Qasem Panahi called on Richards yesterday stating
that he was emissary of Qavam. After reviewing what he described as
“rapidly deteriorating situation” Iran, Panahi stated that many people
now felt that Mosadeq could not retain position as Primin for long after
his return from US. If he failed return with agreement permitting early
resumption oil production his political opponents would brand his
mission a failure. On other hand any likely agreement would involve
arrangements with British and this would leave Mosadeq open to
charges having sold out to British.
2. Panahi then stated Shah had been seeing Qavam and, while
Qavam’s shortcomings well recognized, Shah now prepared accept
him as next Primin in absence any more promising candidate.
3. Qavam had indicated to Panahi that he would have no dealings
with Russians; and that he would have minimum dealings with Brits.
However before taking next steps Qavam wanted to be assured he
would be acceptable to US were he to be called to power.
4. Panahi was told Emb could not indicate opposition to or support
of any specific person or political party. However it was believed US
would cooperate with any political leader coming into power on plat-
form which indicated he would (a) support the constitutional gov-
ernment of the country, (b) take steps to revive oil industry on basis
sound economic considerations, (c) oppose Russian expansion and in-
filtration, and (d) would be willing collaborate with US and other
like-minded Western powers to achieve these ends.
5. Point also made to Panahi that Emb would hope any new Govt
would enlist support young, respectable and forward-looking leaders
for positions of responsibility. Panahi stated Qavam already lining up
likely candidates for number key posts and he thought they would
meet specifications we had in mind although there was “poverty of
leaders” in Iran.
6. Foregoing is of considerable interest as coming from Qavam and
as indication thinking of considerable number Iranians. Richards’ han-
dling of matter has my approval.
Henderson
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 32. Secret. Drafted by Richards. The telegram is the Embassy copy as
approved and has no time of transmission.
