278 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I ACTION: State, Treasury, and AID should prepare a memorandum outlining such a program, and covering both multilateral and bilateral aid, by December 15. Zbigniew Brzezinski 60. Editorial Note On December 20, 1977, President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski held a press briefing at the White House from 10:35 to 11:10 a.m. Brzezinski devoted the briefing to placing President Jimmy Carter’s upcoming trip to Poland (December 29–31), Iran (December 31–January 1), India (January 1–3), Saudi Arabia (January 3–4), Egypt (January 4), France (January 4–5), and Belgium (January 6) within the broader context of the administration’s foreign policy. He explained that the administration understood this trip, and another trip scheduled for the spring of 1978, as “reflecting a recognition of the need for the United States to pursue a wider foreign policy more identified with global change and more responsive to global diversity.” Continuing, he indicated that the President’s May 22 commencement address at the University of Notre Dame (see Document 40) foreshadowed the need for this type of policy, adding: “Our point of departure is the view that we are living in a time in which the world is experiencing the most extensive and the most intensive transformation in its entire history. There are obviously many ways of defining the nature of that transformation. But I think it is doubtlessly true that one of its very key aspects is the phenomenon of global political awakening. “In other words, a world that was politically and socially passive is now becoming truly activist. The consequence of this is a rising crescendo of political and social demands worldwide. It thus represents an altogether new reality in the totality of our common experience. It is on the implication of this that I would like to focus my remarks.” Brzezinski then referenced three substantial phenomena of what he termed this “global political awakening.” These included the collapse of Western colonialism, the primacy of the nation-state as a form of political organization, and an increase in world population. He then identified four additional aspects related to changes in the international system: the division of the world into key clusters, the dispersal of
