February 1951–February 1952
67
There are several indications that the Shah is seriously considering
the adoption of such a drastic course of action, in which event Ala
would probably be replaced by Qavam or Seyyid Zia, the only leaders
believed capable of carrying out a “strong” program. Seyyid Zia, in
spite of his pro-British reputation, is generally estimated to be the most
likely candidate for such a role at the present time.
William L. Langer
17.
Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa
Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency
(Roosevelt)1
Washington, April 23, 1951.
The Tehran station submits the following estimate of the situation
in Iran as of 18 April 1951 for the purpose of operational planning.
The position of the Ala Cabinet is considered uncertain despite the
vote of confidence given it 17 April 1951. At present Ala is acting with
extreme caution. Although it appears he has made no working arrange-
ment with Mullah Kashani, the opposition of the National Front has
been neutralized, at least temporarily, and several Front repre-
sentatives such as Fazlullah Zahedi, appointed Minister of Interior,
have been included in the Cabinet. Ala, however, is receiving only lim-
ited active support from the Shah and others and is facing opposition
from Seyyid Zia and his British supporters and from Qavam. Never-
theless Ala may be able to retain the premiership and, if so, he plans to
take stronger measures against the extremists. Most observers, how-
ever, believe Ala will be replaced by Seyyid Zia, a move which the sta-
tion feels would probably occur only with Ala’s full approval as being
in the best interests of Iran.2 If Seyyid Zia becomes Prime Minister, he
would apparently inaugurate a strong man type of government. It is
believed that the Shah would order dissolution of the Majlis after
Seyyid Zia obtained a vote of confidence, call for new elections and
support Seyyid Zia in governing by decree and forcefully suppressing
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Secret.
2 In the margin next to this sentence is a handwritten note, apparently written by
Wisner, that reads: “‘Most observers have been influenced by British propaganda, I
think!”
