Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 154. Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, December 8, 1978 To President Sadat I extend to you my warm friendship and best personal wishes—to you and your family. Secretary Vance will deliver this brief letter to you as he comes to pursue with you the historic peace which your courageous initiative has made possible. We must not fail. The triumph of radical elements who have attacked you would indeed bring the prospects of a dismal future to the entire Middle East. With the threat of disarray in Iran and further intrusion of Communism among your friends, the success of your noble effort has now become of even more importance. We are close to a settlement and a treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel, based on the vital harmony between your country and mine which was so effective at Camp David. It is extremely important that you and I present to Israel and to the world a proposal which is obviously generous and fair and which fulfills the letter and spirit of the Camp David accords. A crucial element of those accords is a time limit on the current negotiations of three months. As you know, only a few days remain. A violation of this timetable by the two principals would set a very bad precedent and would cast doubt on any future time agreements of the new treaty. You know that we are committed with you to a comprehensive peace settlement. We have proven this in every negotiating session. Secretary Vance, in accordance with my personal instructions, will explore with you every feasible option in assuring that this goal is reached. The long range strategic necessity for you and me to stand together is obvious—whether or not the Israelis ultimately carry out their obligations and commitments. The Middle East must be kept stable. Our friends must be protected. The focus of others must turn away from the destruction of Israel toward peace, stability and the repulsion of alien forces in your region of the world. I am glad to have you as a partner in this great endeavor. Your friend, Jimmy Carter 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 14,
