360 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX again said that a quick move to binding arbitration would cause him some problems. He would like to have some in-between step. El-Erian suggested a slight change in Article VII, paragraph 2. The four-member commission should be for conciliation, not arbitration. The President said that this sounded all right to him, but they should try to work out three stages. El-Erian suggested negotiations first, then conciliation, then arbitration. The President then showed the Egyptians the letter that he had drafted earlier in the morning. He would like Begin and Sadat both to sign this letter committing themselves to begin negotiations within one month on the West Bank and Gaza. In addition, the Egyptians could have their own letter using Camp David language on the West Bank and Gaza. Boutros Ghali asked if the letter would be part of the treaty. The President said that it would be signed on the same day. Israel has not yet seen the exact text of the letter, however, but they will reconfirm their commitment to the Camp David agreements and they will allow the full text to be annexed to this letter. It will say that within one month negotiations will begin on the West Bank and Gaza. This will establish a strong link between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. El-Erian said that if this letter were part of the treaty it would be great. The President said that it would not be in the text, but the same procedure would be used as at Camp David, with the letters being released on the same day. Boutros Ghali asked if it would be legally binding and the President confirmed that it would be. On this basis, the Egyptians agreed to the idea of the exchange of the letter. The President then turned to page 6 concerning the priority of obligations. He said that Israel wanted to be assured that if the Jordanians or Palestinians refused to participate in the West Bank/Gaza negotiations, this would not impede the implementation of the Egyptian- Israeli treaty. Boutros Ghali initially hesitated to react to the new language, but on reconsideration said that there would be no problem. The President then turned to page 5a. This deals with the question precedence. Some of Egypt’s mutual defense agreements are in conflict with the terms of this treaty. We have tried to find words in our treaties, such as the NATO treaty, which make it clear that the most recent treaty takes precedence. El-Erian said that this was a legitimate Israeli concern. According to the Egyptian constitution, a treaty requires that domestic law be in conformity with the treaty. The treaty is selfexecuting in that sense. Egypt has committed itself to end the boycott. Many Egyptian laws will have to be abrogated. Everything that has been based on the state of war will end. It is hard to say that in all circumstances this treaty will prevail. Therefore, Egypt preferred the first American draft, which simply said that “there will be no conflict.” Only
