436  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
the cables, attacking the submarines, or even making boost-­phase inter-
cepts of the missiles—I am particularly concerned about vulnerability 
to the so-­called Van Dorn Effect, a subject of considerable interest when 
the Navy first considered such coastal submarines.
The Van Dorn Effect postulates that as the wave front from the det-
onation of a large-­yield weapon in deep water to seaward approaches 
the rise to the continental shelf, its energy becomes crowded into a 
much smaller volume, and the result is violent motion throughout the 
mass, with waves at the surface hundreds of feet high. Theory predicts 
that a single weapon could generate a destructive wave front over a 
hundred miles in width. Though there is clearly no way of running any 
kind of full-­scale test, vastly scaled down tests using sizeable amounts 
of chemical explosives in a lake gave results that agreed well with the 
theory. Should the coastal submersible be vulnerable to this effect, the 
entire force—­and much of our coastline as well—­could be wiped out 
with perhaps a dozen, large-­yield Soviet weapons.
SUMMARY
We could abandon the ICBM leg and move to a dyad. By strength-
ening the airbreathing and SLBM components, we could build back our 
number of warheads, megatonnage, etc. But we would also be sacrific-
ing some important characteristics that we would enjoy with the ICBM 
force, and we would be less well hedged against unsuspected develop-
ments on the part of the Soviets and unsuspected failures on our own 
part. And for a US force size comparable with that the Soviets are sure 
to have during the mid-80s, moving from a triad to a dyad would not 
save a significant fraction of our strategic force costs.
We could also consider—­and we are doing so—­novel basing alter-
natives other than MAP. None of these has been studied thoroughly 
enough for me to recommend a deployment decision as among them. 
The addition of such alternatives to a dyad will result in a force that 
may approach the full goals of a triad, though none would fully match 
the characteristics of a triad that included MX in MAP basing. The 
alternatives could avoid some of the verification and political con-
cerns connected with MAP, but could have other political problems 
of their own.4
Harold Brown
4 In November 1 memorandum to Brown entitled “The Triad and Its Alternatives” 
Brzezinski wrote: “Attached is a copy of your memorandum of October 23 on the above 
subject. Please note the President’s comments.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, 
Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 43, Missiles: 11/78–4/79)
