Chile 221 Added to these permanent factors is the complication that 1958 is a Presidential election year in Chile. Moreover, 1958 is going to be a very difficult year for Chile because of drastic drops in tax income and foreign exchange receipts from the copper industry as a result of the low international price of copper (see below for a discussion of this point). Considering the current precarious status of the Chilean economy, the application of any import tax by the United States on Chile’s leading export will have a deadly psychological effect locally. The imposition and increasing of the import tax will be even more serious. The Embassy believes that the United States import tax will become a local political issue which will be exploited to extremes with little regard for economic facts (such as that in 1956 only 34.4 percent of Chile’s “great mining” copper actually was sold in the United States, and in 1957 only 14.7 percent). The average Chilean is not acquainted with the latest statistics of the copper trade, and if all he hears and sees is that the United States is impeding the sale of Chilean copper in the United States, that is what he will believe. There can be no doubt that the important leftist political parties of Chile will be glad to have such an issue handed to them, on a copper platter so to speak, and also that these parties will utilize the issue as widely and loudly as possible. The Presidential campaign thus far has centered primarily or personalities, so that a new issue will be most welcome by those left-­wing parties who can make use of it to whip up, and capitalize on, anti-United States sentiment within the country. The Embassy already has expressed its concern over the possibility of an extreme-­left victory in September, particularly if economic conditions worsen here. Therefore, the Embassy believes that the proposed United States copper import tax of 4 cents cannot possibly help in the achievement of United States objectives in Chile but could seriously endanger them if the tax issue were to be instrumental in electing a far-­ left President. The second serious problem envisaged by the Embassy is that if the United States increases its protection against copper imports, it will become much more difficult to maintain Chile’s cooperation in maintaining embargoes against shipment of strategic materials to the Soviet Bloc. If the United States, by raising import taxes, in effect indicates that Chilean copper is unwelcome within its territory, Chilean cooperation on the embargo policy undoubtedly will be subjected to great pressure and might well be abandoned. Certainly United States moral suasion for maintenance of the cooperation policy would have a hollow ring. There has been a great deal of talk in recent years of “trade, not aid” in United States foreign policy. In the eyes of Chileans, if we cannot grant Chile more aid, the least we can do is let them trade. But, if Chile must seek new markets for copper displaced from the United States market, where can this copper go? It cannot go into the Western European
