1030 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II of both objectives. Particularly, it thwarts efforts to distribute the benefits of growth to all segments of the population. A principal mechanism for moderating internal imbalances in income distribution is productive employment. Yet, in the next 25 years, working age populations of all developing countries (excluding China) will more than double, with the potential of increasing mass unemployment/underemployment. Actual deterioration in the employment situation would act to deepen the maldistribution of wealth, as well as intensify social unrest and political tensions. On the other hand, many developing countries are giving increased attention to social development, notably in health, education, and greater involvement of women in development and in decisionmaking processes. These programs are expected—in interaction with other components of development—to have a long-term, favorable effect on moderating high fertility, as long as they are adequately extended to rural areas and urban slums. A list of social and economic pre-conditions for declining fertility does not imply that we know what combination of conditions triggers a sustained fertility decline or that significant declines in fertility cannot be initiated under conditions of illiteracy and high mortality. (A good example of the latter, perhaps, are recent declines in fertility on Java and Bali, Indonesia.) If we assume, however, that voluntary family planning requires: —a conscious choice on the part of the couple (a decision preceded by a weighing of economic, social, and psychological advantages and disadvantages of another child); —knowledge and effective use, as well as availability, of acceptable means of contraception or birth control; then, education, adequate health conditions, rising income and expanding consumer goods and services, acceptability and availability of alternative occupations for women, etc., generate and promote both conditions. Population and food. Between 1960 and 1975, food production in the developing market economies, as a whole, expanded at the unprece-
