1030
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of both objectives. Particularly, it thwarts efforts to distribute the ben-
efits of growth to all segments of the population.
A principal mechanism for moderating internal imbalances in in-
come distribution is productive employment. Yet, in the next 25 years,
working age populations of all developing countries (excluding
China) will more than double, with the potential of increasing mass
unemployment/underemployment. Actual deterioration in the em-
ployment situation would act to deepen the maldistribution of wealth,
as well as intensify social unrest and political tensions.
On the other hand, many developing countries are giving in-
creased attention to social development, notably in health, education,
and greater involvement of women in development and in decision-
making processes. These programs are expected—in interaction with
other components of development—to have a long-term, favorable ef-
fect on moderating high fertility, as long as they are adequately ex-
tended to rural areas and urban slums.
A list of social and economic pre-conditions for declining fertility
does not imply that we know what combination of conditions triggers a
sustained fertility decline or that significant declines in fertility cannot
be initiated under conditions of illiteracy and high mortality. (A good
example of the latter, perhaps, are recent declines in fertility on Java
and Bali, Indonesia.) If we assume, however, that voluntary family
planning requires:
—a conscious choice on the part of the couple (a decision preceded
by a weighing of economic, social, and psychological advantages and
disadvantages of another child);
—knowledge and effective use, as well as availability, of accept-
able means of contraception or birth control;
then, education, adequate health conditions, rising income and ex-
panding consumer goods and services, acceptability and availability of
alternative occupations for women, etc., generate and promote both
conditions.
Population and food. Between 1960 and 1975, food production in the
developing market economies, as a whole, expanded at the unprece-
dented rate of 2.8 percent per year. However, since 1960, population
and income growth in the developing countries have increased the de-
mand for food by about 3.5 percent per year. Despite the return of
overall food production to the previous high growth trend of 2.8 per-
cent, after the lull of 1972 to 1974, population growth has held average
per capita increases in food production over the 1960 to 1975 period to
about 0.3 percent per year. This leaves relatively little room to reduce
malnutrition, particularly when the increased per capita consumption
by the more affluent in these countries is taken into account. For the
poorest group of developing countries, the average annual increase in
