3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
541
186.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President
Carter1
April 13, 1979
Dear Mr. President:
I considered it necessary to raise with you an urgent and most se-
rious question. According to reports which have been received citing
U.S. military authorities, the United States plans to conduct this year
very large strategic exercises “in simulation of nuclear war.”2 In this
connection it is reported that the exercises will involve U.S. strategic
systems located both inside U.S. territory and at bases abroad. Among
other things it is planned to launch strategic bombers toward the Soviet
Union.
Naturally, every country has the right to conduct training and ex-
ercises of its armed forces. But the exercises now planned by the United
States far exceed the framework of normal training, both in scope and
in character. What we have here is a global military-political action on
an unprecedented scale, and moreover, directed against the Soviet
Union.
The reasonable question arises—for what purpose and for what
sake is this openly hostile step, provocative to the Soviet Union, being
undertaken? Does the current international situation and the nature of
relations between our countries really warrant such “global games”
using strategic weapons? And how would the U.S. Government feel if
Soviet strategic systems were suddenly and without warning launched
toward American territory?
In short, there is no justification, nor can there be, for carrying out
such exercises. They do not in any way correspond with statements
made by the U.S. Government in favor of strengthening peace and in-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 70, USSR: Brezhnev–Carter Correspondence: 1–6/79. No classifica-
tion marking. Printed from an official U.S. translation. Bartholomew forwarded the letter
to Carter under an April 14 covering memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 Reference is to exercise “Global Shield 79.” The press release jointly issued by the
Department of Defense and the Strategic Air Command on April 9 read in part: “The
Strategic Air Command announced today that it will conduct a major command-wide,
no-notice exercise later this year, nicknamed ‘Global Shield 79.’ Global Shield 79 will in-
clude command post and field training exercises designed to test the ability of SAC forces
to implement emergency war orders (EWO) which support U.S. national policy if deter-
rence fails. All SAC units and selected Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard units
will participate in one or more aspects of Global Shield 79. This exercise is strictly a
training exercise based on a hypothetical scenario. Global Shield 79 will not affect SAC’s
ability to meet its day-to-day alert, and other commitments. Aircraft flying exercise mis-
sions will not carry nuclear weapons.” (Telegram 93209 to Moscow, April 14; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840176–1003)
