Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 623 this is clearly evident already in Bob Strauss’s approach to Middle East negotiations).3 —SALT treaty passes the Senate—for if it doesn’t, Vance will be spending all his time mending the Soviet fences and our allied wells. THIS MEANS: —even less likely Carter or Vance should want to take on major new initiatives. We’ve assumed that all along. It is simply underlined triply now. —programs that may cost money or imply new outlays are not going anywhere unless they are strictly in support of what we’re already doing and of the highest priority (e.g., Vance’s approval of another $60 million in PL–480 for Egypt without even waiting to see what other claimants may be or even what our resource base for the PL–480 pie is likely to be). —Vance is going to have to spend a lot more time SELLING our foreign policy domestically; the President doesn’t have too much to sell on domestic economic policy.4 —foreign policy credibility of the US administration—always uncertain during an election year in terms of our ability to commit and deliver on new policies—is going to be lower than we’ve seen it since Watergate. This means hesitation by allies and others to be strongly supportive of US initiatives which may not have bipartisan support inside this country and their own. I SUGGEST, THEREFORE: —that Vance focus particularly on defending and articulating what we’ve done;5 —that he concentrate on strengthening existing policy areas where they are sagging and where we may suffer losses; —Central America6 —non-proliferation —relations with Allies —relations with energy producing states, Middle East and elsewhere 3 Strauss resigned as Special Representative for Trade Negotiations on August 8. Earlier in 1979, the President appointed Strauss as Ambassador at Large for the Middle East negotiations. Resigning from his Special Representative position allowed Strauss to focus more attention on the Middle East. 4 In the right-hand margin next to this point, Lake placed a checkmark and an asterisk. 5 In the left-hand margin next to this and the following points, Lake placed a checkmark. 6 In the left-hand margin next to this and the next three points, Lake placed a checkmark. He also deleted a dash placed erroneously before “Middle East.”
