974 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Economic Growth and Aspirations 63. The extent and force of “have-­not” feelings are almost certain to be strengthened by the economic course of the underdeveloped areas in the next few years. Even for those nations (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico) where something like an economic “take-­off” is occurring, the gap between their standards of living and those of the advanced West and the USSR will remain wide. Rapid population growth will greatly contribute to this result, and in other countries that might otherwise appear to be approaching the point of “take-­off”—most importantly India—it will probably siphon off a high proportion of potential invest­ ment resources into meeting consumption needs. Thus industrial prog­ ress could be slowed down and have little effect on popular welfare. With death rates likely to decline more rapidly than birth rates over the next decade, the population problem and its economic impact are likely to become more serious except in a few sparsely settled areas. 64. Moreover, the tremendous dependence of the underdeveloped areas on raw material markets in the West will continue essentially unchanged, and will be an increasingly sore point to local leaders. The best current forecast is that the terms of trade for exporters of agricul­ tural products, and to a lesser extent of industrial raw materials, are likely to remain unfavorable over the next decade in the face of techno­ logical substitution and other factors. If so, this will increase pressures on the economic and foreign trade policies of the US and the West, and create both opportunities and pitfalls for the USSR and the Bloc. 65. As to their own hopes for growth, some of the extravagant early expectations of underdeveloped nations with regard to industrializa­ tion have by now been dampened by harsh experience and growing realization of the depth and complexity of their problems, and of the need for major social changes before these problems can be effectively tackled. But if the governments of “have-­not” nations expect less in the way of visible progress, it does not follow that they will be any less vig­ orous in their demands upon the “have” nations for capital investment and support. Nor will the pressure on the US and the West be eased much by the fact that the USSR will also be subject to such pressures. The game of balancing economic demands on East and West is one that almost all can play, and most of them will. Political Stability 66. The problems of developing leadership and effective political systems remain acute throughout the underdeveloped areas. The new nations of Africa appear to be adopting thinly veiled forms of dicta­ torial control from the outset; in the absence of any military or other trained class, an adequate supply of future leadership is hard to fore­ see. The longer established nations of Latin America have generally
