Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1131 had to negotiate through the night of July 28 and on into the early hours of July 29. And I ask myself: Do I understand the entire significance which the treaty will have in human history? Do I see all the long-term consequences that its implementation will entail? I attempted above to answer these questions insofar as it would be possible here and now at the closing plenary session. In any case, during the entire time of our long and complicated talks we always held steadfast to the premise that the treaty’s primary goal should be to free people from mutual fear, from suspicion, and from the pernicious waste of incredibly vast amounts of resources aimed at mutual destruction. The concluding of the START treaty is a great contribution to this noble effort. But this is not the end of the road. Just a year ago the top leadership of our two countries agreed to conduct further negotiations on nuclear and space arms and on furthering strategic stability. Today, I wish to express deep appreciation to Ambassador Linton Brooks, head of the U.S. delegation, and to the entire U.S. component for their efforts to create a business-like and friendly negotiating atmosphere. The same sentiments apply in equal measure to Ambassador Richard Burt, former head of the U.S. delegation. This is especially important when we take into account that in the framework of the negotiations now coming to an end we were able to resolve extremely sensitive national security issues requiring both consistency and firmness of us. Naturally, this almost always led to heated debate and sometimes even quarrels—at times serious ones. But we always managed to find a way to understand each other and from there we moved on. Many of us developed warm and friendly relationships with our U.S. colleagues. This bears out the breakthrough in the U.S.-Soviet relationship and augurs well for the future. By initialing the first U.S.-Soviet treaty on the reduction of strategic arsenals today, we are truly making history. I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Ambassador, as well as all of those on both sides who worked on the treaty, on this achievement. (End text of statement) Initialling of the Treaty 9. Ambassador Nazarkin completed his statement at 11:32 a.m. And proposed that he and Ambassador begin initialling of the treaty. After initialling the first page of the two English and two Russian copies of the treaty, Ambassador Nazarkin and Ambassador Brooks exchanged the pens used for that purpose. The Ambassadors stood, exchanged the pens, and shook hands to the applause of the delegations, guests, and press. Presentation of Statements 10. A short interlude followed during which representatives of the mass media were excused and Ambassador Nazarkin informed Ambassador Brooks that there was some confusion as to what was the
