The Secretary stated further that he hoped the work of the Conference would iron out all difficulties; that he would personally discuss its results with the Secretary of Labor at which discussion he invited the Minister of Canada to be present. Since it was Diplomatic Day, the Secretary then excused himself and the Conference proceeded informally, presided over by Assistant Secretary Carr. The Canadian Minister read a prepared statement outlining the widespread adverse effect Labor’s General Order No. 86 has had on the sentiment and economic structure in Canada. He said it is being taken up editorially and by the man on the street in cities far removed from the border and has become, in fact, an acute international issue. He exhibited a copy of the Border Cities Star which bore a full front page editorial under one-inch headlines, “An Unfriendly Act of a Friendly Nation” and presented other clippings similar in tone from Quebec and other interior cities. Mr. Wrong went further into details and suggested that under Labor’s own definition—”an alien who, having a fixed domicile in some other country which he has no intention to abandon, comes to the United States for a temporary period only”—the border-crossers were in the category of nonimmigrants. Mr. White outlined the position of the Department of Labor at some length. He said that ever since July 1, 1924, Labor had been seeking a means to curtail the border-crossing privileges and was now driven by pressure from organized labor to a definite announcement of its program of control of border crossing by workers. He said these people who entered the United States solely for purposes of work and took the places of American workers were not contemplated by Congress as coming within the non-immigrant class. The discussion then became general and centered around the number of persons who, under Labor’s Order, would be required to present quota immigration visas. It was submitted by the representatives of Canada that these persons caused them the greatest concern since they were over 90% British-born and as much the responsibility of the Canadian Government as
