3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 759 this might best be accomplished. This will be reviewed at a subsequent meeting for a decision well in advance of April 1. (C) 2. COCOM. Secretary Klutznick reported that the internal U.S. review process is complete except for specific decisions concerning such difficult items as computers, software and technical data packages. Mr. Newsom agreed that this is the problem. The allies are aware of our policy in broad terms, and we have made clear decisions on certain specific cases, but the allies are now asking for greater detail on these complex and difficult areas of definition. At the present time, the U.S. effort is stalled awaiting a recommendation from the Department of Defense on how to handle these complex definitional problems. Mr. Claytor said that DOD was working on this; however, the complexity of the problem must not be underestimated. DOD will have a proposal available for interagency consideration by next Friday, March 7. State cautioned that the process would begin once the DOD proposal is submitted. Mr. Hinton drew attention to the fact that the computer paper for COCOM consists of 53 pages of highly complex and technical details. It will not be a simple process to revise this. (C) Mr. Hinton pointed out that we have made a number of significant decisions establishing policy in the area of oil and gas technology, Kama River, phosphates, and non-exceptions to the COCOM list. He thought that we should be prepared to begin approving some licenses for exports in those areas where policy is well established, rather than keeping all export licenses frozen. Henry Owen and Mr. Aaron remarked that it was their understanding that Congress is looking for us to take an even harder position on punishing the Soviets, and our own announcements indicate that we would have completed our policy review before now. They did not believe this was the moment to begin approving exports. (C) Henry Owen suggested that it might be useful to have Secretary Klutznick report to the Congress or in some other forum on those areas where decisions have been made—which are considerable—and note that some of the more complex issues remain under consideration. Secretary Klutznick agreed that it was important to make people understand the reasons for delay on certain issues were not just stalling or lack of decisiveness. Mr. Aaron agreed with this approach: Secretary Klutznick would prepare a report to the President9 which could, after approval, then10 be used to brief the Congress and the press. Once this had been accomplished and we had some reading on the public and 9 Carter underlined “a report to the President” and wrote “OK” adjacent in the left margin. 10 Carter deleted “also” in the original and replaced it with “after approval, then.”
