3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
759
this might best be accomplished. This will be reviewed at a subsequent
meeting for a decision well in advance of April 1. (C)
2. COCOM. Secretary Klutznick reported that the internal U.S. re-
view process is complete except for specific decisions concerning such
difficult items as computers, software and technical data packages. Mr.
Newsom agreed that this is the problem. The allies are aware of our
policy in broad terms, and we have made clear decisions on certain spe-
cific cases, but the allies are now asking for greater detail on these com-
plex and difficult areas of definition. At the present time, the U.S. effort
is stalled awaiting a recommendation from the Department of Defense
on how to handle these complex definitional problems. Mr. Claytor
said that DOD was working on this; however, the complexity of the
problem must not be underestimated. DOD will have a proposal avail-
able for interagency consideration by next Friday, March 7. State cau-
tioned that the process would begin once the DOD proposal is sub-
mitted. Mr. Hinton drew attention to the fact that the computer paper
for COCOM consists of 53 pages of highly complex and technical de-
tails. It will not be a simple process to revise this. (C)
Mr. Hinton pointed out that we have made a number of significant
decisions establishing policy in the area of oil and gas technology,
Kama River, phosphates, and non-exceptions to the COCOM list. He
thought that we should be prepared to begin approving some licenses
for exports in those areas where policy is well established, rather than
keeping all export licenses frozen. Henry Owen and Mr. Aaron re-
marked that it was their understanding that Congress is looking for us
to take an even harder position on punishing the Soviets, and our own
announcements indicate that we would have completed our policy re-
view before now. They did not believe this was the moment to begin
approving exports. (C)
Henry Owen suggested that it might be useful to have Secretary
Klutznick report to the Congress or in some other forum on those areas
where decisions have been made—which are considerable—and note
that some of the more complex issues remain under consideration. Sec-
retary Klutznick agreed that it was important to make people under-
stand the reasons for delay on certain issues were not just stalling or
lack of decisiveness. Mr. Aaron agreed with this approach: Secretary
Klutznick would prepare a report to the President9 which could, after
approval, then10 be used to brief the Congress and the press. Once this
had been accomplished and we had some reading on the public and
9 Carter underlined “a report to the President” and wrote “OK” adjacent in the left
margin.
10 Carter deleted “also” in the original and replaced it with “after approval, then.”
