632 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement (3) On balance, I am dubious of our ability to exert effective influence in support of the moderates in the present junta, particularly with no Ambassador on the spot. Moreover, it seems to me the withholding of recognition, at least until the situation clarifies, in fact places some leverage in the hands of friends in the junta since they can hold out the prospect of recognition as an argument against further radical acts by the radical elements. To recapitulate, I recommend withholding recognition and continuing to watch and wait. I also recommend that you meet with Mr. Dillon, Mr. Mann, and myself as soon as convenient after your return for a further review of this matter. ES–34. Memorandum for the President by the Secretary of State1  Washington, November 10, 1960. SUBJECT Recognition of Junta in El Salvador As you know, we have delayed recognition of the Junta in El Salvador pending further analysis of its stability, composition and political orientation. It is now clear that the new Government is one of coalition without adequate leadership which, while seeking reform, has no clear idea of how to deal effectively with subversive elements. This presents a situation of danger and it may well be that we should recognize so as to be in the best position to use our influence to strengthen the efforts of non-Communists to orient government policy along democratic lines. I recommend that you authorize me to extend recognition to the Junta Government at such time as we consider our interests will best be served by so doing. We are informed that Brazil has decided to recognize the Junta Government today. Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Ecuador, Paraguay, Israel, China, Austria and Spain have already recognized. I anticipate that other countries will soon follow suit. Christian A. Herter 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Secret. A notation by Brigadier General Goodpaster on the source text reads as follows: “President approved orally. I notified State Dept.”
