Yugoslavia
777
the friendship of the two nations. He looked forward to President Tito’s
visit this spring, and he thanked Kardelj for delivering the letter. He
found President Tito’s report very helpful. He noted that the Yugoslavs
were eager to have the US begin discussions with North Korea, and
he reminded Kardelj that he had told President Tito of our commitment
to the South Koreans not to begin those discussions without them. We
want a peaceful solution and would like to explore with the Yugoslavs
how progress might be made, while assuring the South Koreans of our
commitment. He again thanked Kardelj for the report and said he
would study it with great care.
Tito’s Trip
Kardelj said much of what President Tito wrote would be familiar
to the President. He emphasized that the North Koreans want a peaceful
solution. With regard to China there was not much new to report.
President Tito had the impression that the Chinese were aware of their
differences with the US. At the same time there was some coincidence
of interests. They wanted better relations with Washington; of course,
however, there were conditions, including Taiwan. Apart from that,
one way or another, the Chinese wanted to cooperate. He said the
welcome that the Chinese had given President Tito had greatly
exceeded their expectations; it was much warmer than they had
expected. That seemed a sympton of a deep change in Chinese policy,
the beginning of an opening to the world. In that sense, the attention
given to Tito was not meant for him alone.
President Tito had found it interesting that the Chinese had appar-
ently decided to accelerate their economic development, especially in
the industrial sector. They had introduced material incentives quite at
odds with previous policy.
Kardelj thought the Chinese could be a very positive force in inter-
national affairs in the future. Of course, the Yugoslavs realized that
China’s attitude toward them was a function of the Chinese attitude
toward the Soviet Union. Yugoslavia wants good relations with China,
not to become their advocate with the Soviets, but rather because of
the positive, independent role in world affairs.
In his discussions in the Soviet Union, President Tito did not
encounter serious difficulties. The two parties preserved their positions
unchanged, and the well-known differences continue to exist. The
Soviet Union dislikes both Yugoslavia’s non-alignment and its internal
system, but it understands that those will not change, and it is prepared
to develop its relations with Belgrade. Yugoslavia desires similar devel-
opment; its location, both geographic and strategic, requires special
efforts at good relations with the Soviet Union, despite differences with
it. That is necessary for peace in Europe. Yugoslavia will maintain its
