the Arbitrator reserved the authority to pass upon the report of the Special
Commission or to appoint a new Special Commission and pass upon its
report in like manner. Interferences with the Boundary Commission, or its
members, representatives or employees, while prosecuting their work under
the Arbitrator’s Award are interferences with the Arbitrator. They are
interferences with the discharge of the Arbitrator’s duty and with the exercise
of his authority under the terms of submission. Where such interferences
occur in territory under the Chilean administration, it is the obvious duty of
the Chilean Government to afford redress and prevent their recurrence by the
proper action of the authorities. If the Chilean Government should not do
this, if it should fail to afford protection to the Special Commission, its
representatives and employees, while they are at work under the decision of
the Award in territory under Chilean administration it would subject itself to
the responsibility of interfering with the Arbitrator and of violating the
essential conditions of the submission to arbitration. The Secretary of State
desires to express his confidence that the Chilean Government will not be
willing to disappoint the expectation of the just settlement of the long
standing controversy through the agreed submission to the Arbitrator and will
readily appreciate the importance of taking such action, in the discharge of its
administrative responsibility, as will assure a fair and free plebiscite, as
contemplated by the submission to arbitration and the Award, and adequate
protection to the Special Commission on Boundaries, its representatives and
employees, in the performance of the task assigned to it.”
You may leave a copy of the above statement with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
the Chief of State should they so request. At the same time you may orally call to their
attention that one of the consequences of a persistence of the Chileans in their present
attitude may be not simply the failure of the present plebiscite and the ordering of a
new plebiscite, but a forfeiture of Chile’s right to a plebiscite and with it of any right to
the disputed territory. For as the Award indicates, one of the conditions of Chile’s
retention of the territory is that a plebiscite should be held with the necessary
implication that neither party should frustrate it. The Arbitrator has held that there was
not sufficient evidence that Chile had frustrated it and that the plebiscite should be had
as contemplated by the Treaty. But if, now, with a plebiscite ordered, and with the
Plebiscitary Commission on the ground, it appears that the administrative authority of
Chile is used so as to frustrate the holding of an appropriate plebiscite, and that she
refuses to take the reasonable measures which are essential to such a plebiscite, she
may be exposed to the contention that she has forfeited any right to the territory under
the Treaty.
I am not unmindful of the provisions of the Award for the ordering of a new plebiscite
(p. 49) and this would be appropriate if it appeared that the objections which vitiated
the first plebiscite were not of such a fundamental character as to discharge the
