868
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
world hunger nor this country’s genuine concern for hungry people.
Although one can argue that the United States gave more than its fair
share of Official Development Assistance (ODA) from the end of World
War II through the late 1950s, U.S. contributions have fallen off sharply
since then as a percentage of GNP. The United States now ranks behind
12 other donor nations in this respect and would rank even lower if se-
curity supporting assistance, which is only incidentally for develop-
ment, were not included in the U.S. totals. Moreover, compared to most
other donors, the United States gives a lower percentage of its aid in the
form of outright grants, and more in the form of debt-bearing loans.
The low priority accorded to the hunger problem is even more evi-
dent in U.S. policies and programs other than development assistance,
which influence the possibilities for overcoming world hunger through
self-reliant development. Development assistance flows will never
amount to more than a tiny fraction of all U.S. economic interactions
with Third World nations. In the long run, patterns of U.S. trade and
private foreign investment, U.S. participation in international organiza-
tions, U.S. foreign policy, and domestic agricultural policies and pro-
grams are likely to have a much greater impact on hungry people than
development assistance.
3. Mobilizing Public Support
The broad-based plan of action recommended in this Report
cannot be carried out without a major reordering of this country’s na-
tional priorities. American concern for the hungry must spread to all
spheres of Government activity if it is to obtain major results.
For such a marked shift in established practices and premises to
occur, public support must be mobilized. The American public now is
only dimly aware of what this country as well as others would stand to
gain if people in countries which today receive foreign aid, could feed
themselves, within dynamic, equitable and self-reliant domestic econ-
omies. Such a world would be characterized by a far greater degree of
equity among and within nations than is apparent today. While few
would oppose improving the lives of impoverished human beings, the
benefits for those who are already affluent are less evident; indeed, at
first sight the well-off may seem more apt to lose than to gain.
The costs and benefits of overcoming poverty and hunger are diffi-
cult to compare in conventional ways. The costs tend to be felt sooner
than benefits are received. The Commission affirms its view that the
long-term self-interest of the United States is linked to the fate of poor
and hungry people throughout the world, that the very spirit of
America is its national commitment to justice, equity and human dig-
nity. Only in a world freed from hunger will the human community
achieve the state of equality and brotherhood it dreams of now. A cam-
