International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
447
etary stability. We must achieve balance of payments equilibrium and
exchange rate stability. I was interested in Carter’s statement regarding
the US objectives of bringing oil prices in the US to world levels by
1980, to reduce US oil consumption and to ensure that the US current
account deficit is reduced. I am sure that I and others will point out
what we can contribute to the party, i.e. spell out these square brackets.
If oil prices increase in the coming year, there will be problems.
Our Saudi friends have helped a great deal. But if oil prices go up, it
will mean disarray in exchange rates. If the Middle East situation once
again places oil exporters under pressure from the other Arabs, there
will be a significant deterioration. This will be very serious for coun-
tries without oil, although less so for the US than for countries without
energy. For economic and strategic reasons it is vitally necessary to
limit oil import dependence. The EC at Bremen decided to reduce en-
ergy imports by 50%. This will be difficult for France, Germany and
Italy. We spend .5% of GNP to subsidize coal. We already import vast
amounts of energy. Our resolve is firm and unswerving to increase nu-
clear production. This is the only way we can increase domestic energy.
We should look to the long term energy policy. I agree with Fukuda on
this. But I would take it still further—to make individual countries
much less dependent on imported oil. I stress this for strategic reasons,
because of the depletion of fossil fuels, because of oil’s impact on pay-
ments balances and exchange rate stability and because it will affect
protectionist pressures.
Let me add something on the latter point. There are protectionist
pressures in many areas such as steel, textiles and shipbuilding. If any
of us gives in, all may follow suit. This will lead to an increase in unem-
ployment. In the communique we should re-emphasize the crucial im-
portance of combating protectionist pressures. We should also agree to
open our markets more to one another and to the LDCs, too. There has
been progress by Strauss, Haverkamp and others. We should also
discuss investment tomorrow, when we discuss trade, and how to
make the system more open than in the past.
Regarding the question of growth, we have not done as well as we
would like although our inflation has been only 2.5%. Our growth has
been less than 4%. We can pay for our oil by exporting, and we do not
have to finance oil imports from anywhere. We have a small current ac-
count surplus, but we would be happy to do away with the surplus be-
cause it constitutes a transfer of real resources abroad. We let the DM
go up to offset this. It has increased three times more than GNP, and
more than our exports. As a result, a certain amount of unemployment
has developed. The DM was undervalued for two decades. This di-
rectly affected incentives for exports. These exports are now slowly de-
creasing. We need 5–7 years to correct the export-oriented focus of our
