1010  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
sprays, drone aircraft sprays, toxic darts, grenades, tactical rockets, 
special operations, ballistic missiles, or bomblets prepared for use with 
aircraft, rockets or ballistic missiles.
The US has a relatively poor posture vis-­a-­vis the USSR, Dr. York 
continued, our stockpile of chemical and biological agents being one-­
fourth that of the USSR. Moreover, most of the Soviet agents are lethal. 
In addition we have trained in chemical and biological warfare only 
1/30 of the troops the USSR has trained and we do less in defense 
against such agents than the Soviet Union does. In the latter connection 
Dr. York said that the need for research on defense against chemical and 
biological agents had been strongly indicated by a recent experiment 
in which an aircraft flew along a flight line of 230 miles releasing sim­
ulated agents. After three days the simulated agents covered 300,000 
square miles. If the airplane had released powerful chemical or bio­
logical agents instead of the simulant, the area would have sustained 
casualties of 30 per cent. Dr. York then called on General Lemnitzer to 
continue the presentation.
General Lemnitzer said that Dr. York had described the characteris­
tics of chemical and biological weapons; he would deal with the doctri­
nal aspects of these weapons. Chemical and biological agents had been 
very effectively developed since World War II but the doctrine for their 
use had not changed very much. General Lemnitzer thought that such 
agents had a number of advantages. They have important search capa­
bilities for use against dispersed or concealed targets; they are flexible, 
since they can cause either casualties or incapacitation and the length of 
the latter can be controlled; coverage of a large area is possible; heavy 
casualties can be inflicted without physical destruction or property 
damage. Accordingly, chemical and biological agents might have a great 
potential in future warfare, especially where friendly civilians may be 
present in an area occupied by enemy forces. General Lemnitzer said he 
would give three examples of the possible use of chemical and biologi­
cal incapacitating agents. The first example concerned trouble in South 
East Asia. He asked the Council to assume that important areas in North 
Laos had been seized by Communist forces. The task of friendly forces 
was to retake key areas, capture or disarm the Communist forces and 
prevent their re-­entry into the country. This assumed situation provided 
opportunity for the use of NU, which caused a form of encephalitis. A 
lethal agent could not be used under these conditions because friendly 
civilians and enemy forces were present in the same area. General 
Lemnitzer then displayed a map of North Laos showing areas assumed 
to be held by Communist forces and areas on which bomblets of NU 
would be dropped or which would be subjected to spray from aircraft. 
He estimated that two medium bomber loads would incapacitate all 
the people in the area shown on the map. An entire province of North 
Laos could be covered by the use of more planes. After this biological
