922 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement On November 3, the United States Embassy transmitted a Note to Panama’s Ministry of Foreign Relations protesting the desecration of the American flag, the damage done to the United States Embassy and Information Office, and the alleged failure of the Panamanian police to maintain order. In its reply on November 4, the Republic of Panama rejected the United States protest and accused American authorities of provoking the riots and of having ordered American soldiers to open fire on unarmed Panamanians. Documentation on these incidents is in decimal files 611.19 and 719.00, and also in ARA/ OAP Files, Lot 64 D 67. PM–24. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1  Washington, December 1, 1959. SUBJECT Note from Panamanian Embassy Seeking United States, Agreement to Fly ­Panamanian Flag in Canal Zone on Regular Basis. Discussion: Panamanian Ambassador Arias, on November 26, handed as a note dated November 252 expressing his Government’s purpose to have the Panamanian national flag flown on a regular basis in the Canal Zone and stating that it would be desirable that the local authorities on both sides agree as to detailed procedures. The note continues by saying that Panamanians have long desired this action, and that this is based in the fact that Panama has never transferred nor ceded its sovereignty over the Canal Zone, but merely has granted to the United States, according to existing treaties, the rights, power and authority which the United States requires for the maintenance, operation, sanitation and protection of the Canal. The note continues that, notwithstanding the opposing positions held by the two governments on flying the flag, the United States has not denied the title of sovereignty which Panama has over the territory of 1. Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 67, “Panama Relations December, 1959.” Official Use Only. Drafted by Sharp on November 30. The source text is a carbon copy. 2 Not printed; 719. 00/11–2559.
