Afghanistan
353
129.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, January 2, 1980
USSR-AFGHANISTAN: Situation report
We estimate that as many as 40,000 Soviet troops were in Afghanistan
as of yesterday.
It now appears that units from two airborne divisions based in western
USSR participated in the coup in Kabul and that a third airborne division at
Fergana sent units to the Salang Pass, Bagram, and to major provisional
[provincial] capitals in central and western Afghanistan. The motorized rifle
division from Termez is still deployed in and around Kabul and elements of
the motorized rifle division from Kushka were observed in yesterday’s [less
than 1 line not declassified] of Shindand Airfield, south of Herat.
On Monday, a motorized rifle division located in the Central Asian
Military District was in the early stages of preparations for leaving its garri-
sons.2 This division is normally in a high degree of readiness and could be
preparing for deployment to the Afghan border. The motorized rifle division
at Kizyl-Arvat that began vacating its garrison on Friday is now probably
at Kushka.
[1 line not declassified] yesterday showed Soviet tactical fighter aircraft
at two Afghan airfields; a MIG–21 Fishbed squadron was at Bagram and two
SU–17 Fitter squadrons were at Shindand.
Meanwhile, about 25 Long Range Aviation TU–16 Badger medium bomb-
ers may have flown from the western USSR to Mary Northeast Airfield last
Friday, bringing to at least five the number of regiments that have sent aircraft
to the Turkestan Military District since early December. A bomber deployment
of this magnitude to the southern USSR is unusual and appears related to
developments in Afghanistan.
Occupation forces
The government and the Soviets are clearly concerned about the loyalty
of Afghanistan’s armed forces.
Soviet forces have apparently completely disarmed Afghan soldiers in
Kabul, and some Afghan political officers stationed at Bagram Airbase have
been ordered arrested.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The article
printed here was found in this form.
2 Monday was December 31, 1979.
