Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I limiting the threats we face. All U.S. strategic programs could go forward under the treaty. But the Soviets would be restrained in significant ways. —Under President Carter’s leadership, the United States has led in the search for ways of enjoying the benefits of nuclear energy without increasing the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation. In 1977 President Carter initiated the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation, involving 66 nations in an effort to expand international consensus on safer nuclear technologies. US has led the drive to expand membership of the Non-Proliferation Treaty—to 115 countries today. We have worked with International Atomic Energy Agency to tighten international safeguards and standards for nuclear commerce. 3. Exercising leadership to strengthen the international stand against Soviet aggression. —Firm response to Soviet aggression in Afghanistan serves two purposes: to impose a substantial, continuing cost on the Soviet military presence in Afghanistan; to demonstrate that Soviet aggression anywhere will meet firm resistance. Have acted in three areas: • First, in our direct relations with the Soviets, we have: —cancelled grain sales (decision denied Soviets 17 MMT of grain; Soviets able to replace less than half. Together with poor Soviet harvest, has meant less meat on Soviet shelves. Per capita meat consumption down to 1975 levels. Thwarted important objective of Soviet government—increasing meat supplies to Soviet people). —led Olympic boycott (61 nations chose not to attend. Turned Olympics into largely Eastern European affair. Denied Soviets desired goal of using Olympics as symbol of world acceptance of Soviet foreign actions). —tightened controls on sale of high technology items to Soviet Union. —sharply restricted Soviet fishing in US waters (lost their allocation of about 300,000 tons of fish; about 4% of their total worldwide catch). —curtailed exchange programs. —limited Aeroflot flights to US. —suspended plans for opening new US consulate in Kiev and Soviet consulate in New York. • Second, we have moved to address the new security situation in the region: —increased and accelerated military preparedness for contingencies in the area (greater naval presence in Indian Ocean; RDF; prepositioning of equipment; new base and port access rights).
