demonstrators, places blame on the British and stigmatizes police action as
greatest disgrace to China in years. Telegram urges Chief Executive take firm
stand; and states that if the British Government confesses crime and makes
amends so much the better, but if not signers of telegram will support the
union on behalf of justice, humanity, national sovereignty and people’s lives
even if signers perish in attempt in order to calm agitation and redress
national humiliation. It is quite evident from these telegrams that militarists
are making every effort to use present situation in order to cause Chinese
people to forget antimilitarist feelings.
5. In this connection I am becoming increasingly concerned with question of
harmful reaction upon the anticipated special conference94 of continued
student agitation and refusal or inability of Chinese Government to control
situation. … I apprehend that continuation of student agitation and despatch
of notes by Foreign Office to Heads of Legation will eventually result in
eliminating Government’s foreign sympathy and producing an atmosphere
calculated to militate against successful conference. The singling out of Great
Britain for attack which is increasing in animosity is singularly unfortunate in
my opinion since as in the Washington Conference we and China must to a
great extent depend upon British cooperation to achieve constructive action
in special conference. I fear Chinese Government, so called, has not kept
sufficiently in mind the bigger questions in its desire to use the present so-
called patriotic agitation of the students and the attitude of the militarists
indicated by the two proclamations summarized above to consolidate
Government’s position.
[Paraphrase.] I talked informally and confidentially yesterday with the
secretary of the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I expressed myself to him to the
above effect, of course omitting any reference to the desire of the Chinese
Government to reap a benefit as suggested above. I suggest that it might be
advisable for the Department to call the Chinese Minister’s attention to this
matter and to ask him to communicate to his Government on the subject.
6. At the beginning of the Shanghai incident the Japanese were reviled as
much as the British but during last two days the British have been given most
of the attention. It will be noticed that Chang and Feng did not mention Japan
in their telegrams. I have reason to think that there is an effort to weaken the
present prestige in China of the United States and the resulting influence of
our country with the Chinese Government, the purpose of this effort being to
enable Japan to pose as China’s chief foreign friend. [End paraphrase.]
7. Thus far I have believed Chinese feeling is, generally speaking,
nationalistic rather than antiforeign with the exception of Great Britain where
