Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII —Neither side had a good estimate of insurgent strength. The Pakistanis feel the Afghan situation is a classic Mao’s “Peoples’ War.” As a Pakistani colonel observed: if an Afghan has a rifle and a bullet he is a soldier; when he loses one, he becomes a civilian. It is therefore not possible to reach a reliable estimate of insurgent strength. Drawing further on Mao, the Pakistanis say the rebels are the fish in this sea. The rebels are careful not to undertake actions which would damage the people’s interest and risk weakening the insurgents’ link with their mass base. They want to damage a bridge and force the Russians to expose themselves during its repair rather than to destroy the bridge and injure for years the surrounding economy. Thus, explained the Pakistanis, they cannot, and indeed should not, control the insurgency. The Afghans control it and the Pakistanis support it with materiel, which the Afghans accept, and advice, which may or may not be accepted. This fact establishes the parameters within which the covert support must operate. COVERT ACTION PROGRAM —Barring a change in the internal or international scene, the Pakistanis are committed to covert support to the Afghans. General Akhtar expressed his concern about lack of US security guarantees but did not pursue the subject and did not make continued support contingent on such aid. —The Pakistanis are providing unilateral weapons support from their stockpiles to the insurgents, support which predates our involvement. When we offered to provide some of the materiel now being provided by Pakistan (e.g., .303 ammunition), General Akhtar waved aside our offer stating he preferred to use Pakistan money for things available in Pakistan and to use our resources for external procurement. —The Pakistanis attempt to control any unilateral exile weapons procurement. They do not want weapons entering Pakistan outside their control and have so informed the Peshawar exile leaders. The Pakistanis share our surprise at the vigor of the insurgency in northeastern Afghanistan (Badakshan and Qonduz Provinces). The Pakistanis suggested some aid may be coming over the mountains from China or that Tadzhik ethnic groups resident in the four border area could be providing support. —General Akhtar described how the support mechanism works. Our weapons arrive at Rawalpindi airport by Saudi C–130 approximately twice a week at dusk. Officers of Akhtar’s organization oversee the unloading. Fortuitously we happened to witness one such unloading while awaiting our aircraft departure. A Pakistani Army tank transporter backed up to the C–130 ramp and the unmarked crates rolled on to the transporter. The whole process took less than an hour. From
