Eastern Europe Region
109
31.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, February 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Presidential Determination to Provide Financial Assistance to U.S. Voluntary
Agencies Assisting Political Refugees from Eastern Europe
The American voluntary agencies assisting in the resettlement of
political refugees coming from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
to the United States are having serious financial difficulties. These
agencies depend heavily on financial assistance from the Department
of State. Due to a sharp increase in the number of refugees being cared
for and resettled during calendar year 1978 (from a projected 17,000
to an actual figure of approximately 24,000 refugees) as well as inflation
and the decline in the value of the dollar, funds appropriated for the
European refugee program for calendar year 1978 were exhausted
during the fall.
The agencies have continued to care for, process, and resettle refu-
gees at their own expense, despite a funding shortfall totalling nearly
$8 million. (Details of the shortfall are shown in the attached table.)2
As a result, the voluntary agencies accumulated substantial debts and
have had to curtail services; some may soon be forced to cease accepting
responsibility for new refugees, irrespective of the rate of refugee flow.
Such a development would pose a threat to U.S. foreign policy and
humanitarian concerns, for these agencies have been unique and faith-
ful partners in U.S. refugee efforts throughout the world dating back
to the end of World War II. It is in our national interest to ensure that
these agencies are able to continue their important work, at a time
when Soviet and Eastern European emigration continues at extraordi-
nary high levels.
The Department of State has been moving on two fronts to resolve
the financial problems of the agencies, working closely with representa-
tives from OMB and the NSC. First, the supplemental budget request
for fiscal year 1979 will provide funds to make up the October-to-
December shortfall. The Administration has asked the Congress to
treat the refugee supplemental on an urgent basis, separately from
the government-wide supplemental. (During the week of February 20,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 50, Presidential Determinations: 5/78–7/79. No classification marking. Brzenzinski
forwarded the memorandum to the President on March 16. (See Document 33.)
2 Neither attachment was attached.
