734  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Defense plan will call for a substantial cutting back of the BOMARC pro­
gram, deploying it on the northern, eastern, and western segments of the 
perimeter of the United States. A cutback in the SAGE system is also con­
templated, with hardening of the control centers retained. There remain 
significant questions concerning the ground environment for each of the 
two systems, NIKE–­HERCULES and BOMARC.
The use of the term “master plan” for air defense to describe 
the Defense position is open to question, since this position does not 
include consideration of other factors in the problem such as the F–­108 
and other interceptors. If decision is taken to use BOMARC simply on 
the periphery as indicated above, the question of the F–­108 should also 
be resolved; and there would appear to be strong reason to drop the 
project, which is a $5 billion projected program. The relationship of the 
F–­108 to the B–­70 should also be considered, inasmuch as the F–­108 
was being designed to have the dual capability of use for defense or for 
high performance attack.
Dr. Killian said a further point is that this master plan should in no 
way interfere with the carrying forward of the comprehensive study of 
air defense being prepared at the President’s request on the basis of a 
letter from Gordon Gray.
The President said it is to him an indication of weakness in the 
top leadership of the Defense Department when a choice between two 
weapons systems comes to the President for resolution. He felt that this 
type of problem should be settled in the Defense Department.
Dr. Killian said there are certain other questions involved. Admiral 
Radford, he understands, feels that the whole air defense program 
should be cut back in a very major way, using the resources to increase 
offensive forces. A further question is as to the validity of our estimates 
of the Soviet aircraft threat, which is evidently considerably smaller 
than had been estimated at earlier times.
A further issue is the organizational problem. In Dr. Killian’s judg­
ment the operation of the total system of defense missiles, BMEWS, 
the DEW line, SAGE, etc., will not be effective until NORAD has been 
made effective. There is need for centralized operational direction to 
tie all these together. The President strongly agreed, saying that this is 
the whole theory of the unified commands, and the role of the services 
should simply be to prepare the forces and turn them over to NORAD 
for operational employment.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
