366
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to proceed with initial Polansky approach to Klobes on Consular Con-
vention (ref B). Before doing so, however, Embassy Bonn should inform
Von Braunmuehl of broad agreement reached between Fischer and
Secretary and of our intent to proceed with approach to Klobes and,
with reference to his earlier expressed concerns (ref C), should reassure
him along following lines.
A. We will provide the FRG a separate bilateral assurance (prefera-
bly oral), as requested by Genscher in his September 30 breakfast
with Secretary, that U.S. practice respecting rights of FRG Consuls in
providing protection for German nationals will not change as a result
of the Consular Convention.7 This assurance will not repeat not provide
a right of first access by FRG Consuls to persons present in the U.S.
on the basis of GDR documentation. A request by the FRG for a USG
assurance on this latter point has previously been rejected.
B. Recognizing the FRG’s concerns that we not give the GDR
ammunition that it could throw back at the FRG, we will delete all but
the first sentence of para. 6A of the draft US statement (ref D).
C. With regard to the concerns expressed in paras. 5 and 6, ref C,
we will reserve our position to the extent of adding “and cannot be
taken as representing, in whole or in part, the views of my government
on this issue” to the end of para. 7, ref. D.
2. FYI. Department agrees with EmbOff’s position para. 5, ref. C
and does not believe reservation on nationality can be linked to retained
responsibilities for Germany as a whole. In general, Von Braunmuehl’s
contention that nationality is an essential element of statehood is unper-
suasive, since there are numerous contemporary examples of multi-
national states (e.g., UK, Soviet Union, CSSR, Yugoslavia), nations that
are divided into two or more states (e.g., China, Korea) and nations
that are stateless (e.g., Macedonia). In particular, such a linking of
nationality and statehood seems to fly in the face of past German
7 In a meeting at the United Nations on September 30, Vance and Genscher discussed
the situation in the Middle East, SALT, MBFR, U.S.-Soviet relations, FRG-Soviet relations,
and the ongoing U.S.–GDR negotiations on a Consular Convention. Stressing that the
United States had a special responsibility for Germany, Genscher asked Vance that the
United States make “the most unequivocal statement by the US endorsing the FRG
concept of German sovereignty.” Vance agreed and told Genscher that the United States
would provide the West German Government with a separate assurance that the exchange
of notes between the United States and the German Democratic Republic would not affect
the West German concept of sovereignty. (Memorandum of Conversation, September
30; Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of
State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, Vance NODIS MemCons, 1977)
