224  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
if Chile is developed as a dependable source of large amounts of cop-
per. The American companies’ production dropped sharply in the years 
of unfavorable tax and exchange treatment, and important expansion 
programs were delayed. The effect of serious changes in the New 
Copper Law could well be that the companies, particularly Anaconda, 
might have to re-­examine their long-­range investment programs in 
Chile, the result being a decrease in Chile’s actual and potential copper 
production.
In conclusion, the Embassy wishes to add its strong belief that the 
increase in the United States copper import tax will also raise serious 
side problems in Chilean-United States relations. It could, for exam-
ple, seriously affect or preclude passage of certain pending projects, 
such as the modification of the General Electrical Services Law to 
permit the American and Foreign Power Company to obtain a higher 
profit rate and enable it to carry out a large investment program, and 
the Government bill to permit private and foreign capital to develop 
Chilean petroleum resources.
The Embassy hopes that consideration can be given to means 
other than a copper import tax to provide relief to American copper 
producers, including possibly measures which have been suggested 
in other quarters, such as an outright subsidy or increased stockpile 
purchases. Such measures naturally would require the expenditure of 
United States funds, but at least the expense would not include damag-
ing relations of the United States with a country in which we have high 
political, economic, and strategic stakes.6
William Belton
Charge d’Affaires a.i.
6 The Department responded in instr. A-210 to Santiago, April 11, 1958, that the 
Embassy should not undertake a detailed reply to the Foreign Minister’s note of 
February 25 concerning the proposed copper import tax, but rather should state that the 
observations made had been noted and that the Department would make every effort to 
assure they were given full consideration as regards any tariff action. The Department 
further stated that it generally agreed with the Embassy’s views regarding the problems 
that would arise in the event S. 2998 were enacted.
The Department also commented on the bill, S. 3234, to repeal the current suspen-
sion of import duties on copper. Without congressional action, the suspension would ter-
minate on June 30, 1958, at which time a duty of 1.7 cents a pound would be reimposed. 
The Department did not propose to press for continuance of the duty suspension after 
June 30, since “there is reason to believe such action would be defeated and the strength 
of its position against the major tariff proposal thereby weakened.” (411.256/3–2158)
The bills were not enacted and the suspension was terminated as scheduled.
