Chapter 6, June–December 1990  859
Assuming that SDI remains too much of a political hot potato, we 
can try to outlast the Soviets on the preamble issue, recognizing that 
doing so will take time when we don’t have much. Alternatively, we 
can decide that the innocuous reference to Article XI is a small price 
to pay to settle this issue and get on to less symbolic disputes. Cheney 
probably will propose the former and Baker likely will support the 
latter.
There are two other SDI-­related issues. One concerns our efforts to 
balance limits on Soviet encryption with our need to encrypt SDI tests 
(the “data denial” issue). OSD and the intelligence community have 
come up with a compromise that both can live with. It was presented to 
the Soviets in Moscow and the ball is in their court.
The other issue relates to Soviet efforts to ban the conversion of 
missiles to boosters for the deployment of “space strike weapons.” 
There are no present plans to use converted ballistic missiles to deploy 
SDI. Some tests also could be captured by the Soviet proposal, but 
work-­arounds would be available at some increase in cost. The main 
argument against the Soviet proposal is that it would “relink” START 
and ABM/SDI.
This issue appears to be very important to the Soviets and we might 
be able to get leverage on some other issues if we were forthcoming. 
The question, as above, turns largely on the domestic politics of SDI.
Other START Issues
The Soviets are still trying to tie us in knots on ALCMs, particu-
larly in their continuing efforts to constrain conventional ALCMs and 
press us for a very intrusive inspection regime. Colin Powell may raise 
the issue. If he does, Baker will reassure him that we will continue to be 
stalwart in the defense of U.S. interests. No additional decisions need 
be taken at your meeting.
There also are a collection of issues related to non-­deployed mis-
siles (NDMs). These include tagging, perimeter-­portal monitoring, and 
the magnitude of the numerical limits. The Ungroup needs to do a bet-
ter job of focusing the issues before they are considered at your level. 
One way or another, we will need to be in a position to say something 
to the Soviets on them next week.
Concurrences: John Gordon, Rich Davis
