394
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
cific occasions. It can also assist certain political factions to oppose
Tudeh candidates in elections, to maintain anti-Tudeh propaganda,
and to attack physically Tudeh facilities and demonstrations. CIA is
also in a position to obtain the publication of anti-Tudeh material in the
press, and in pamphlets, books, posters, etc.
3. However, CIA is not in a position to influence the Iranian Gov-
ernment (as opposed to individuals in the Government) to adopt a con-
sistent policy to curb the activities and reduce the growing influence of
the Tudeh Party. Nor is CIA able to influence the Iranian Government
(and people) to adopt a more moderate attitude toward the British gen-
erally and toward the oil controversy in particular, or to adopt neces-
sary financial, judicial, and administrative reforms. If, however, the
U.S. Government were to intervene, with or without British agreement,
to bring about an oil settlement and aid program which an Iranian gov-
ernment could justify to its own people, CIA’s ability to influence sig-
nificant elements of the Iranian Government to take anti-Tudeh as well
as more positive constructive measures to improve the internal situa-
tion would, of course, be greatly increased. (Paras. 4.c. and e., NSC
draft)
4. In the event of a government crisis involving the resignation of
Mossadeq, CIA might conceivably have some influence on the choice of
a successor.
5. In addition to these operations, CIA is making plans and taking
other preliminary steps to assist potential resistance groups in Iran in
the event of a Tudeh coup. Planning for such activity is underway and
limited stockpiling of mate´riel has been carried out. However, CIA’s
assets in Iran for such activity are limited and CIA is unable (for ob-
vious reasons) to concert its plans with the potentially friendly resist-
ance groups until the emergency actually arises. While, therefore, li-
aison on hot war stay-behind plans is being maintained with certain
potential resistance groups, nothing has been done to alert them to the
fact that CIA is planning to support them in circumstances short of
global war. This could of course be done, if the urgency of the situation
were thought to require it, but it must be recognized that to do so
would run definite security and political hazards. The existing liaison
can, however, be expanded and directed with the intent of action
against a Tudeh coup foremost in the minds of American repre-
sentatives, though concealed from the Iranian representatives.
B. CIA Capabilities in the Event of a Significant Increase in Tudeh
Influence
1. Any great increase in Tudeh influence, whether or not accompa-
nied by legalization of the Tudeh Party, would seriously reduce CIA
capabilities in the political and psychological fields in Iran. Such a de-
