First Responses Dr. Brzezinski said the results of that would be to simply punish our friends. He thought that there was more merit in taking the little islands inside Gulf. The President said they would probably simply say take them and not worry about it. Dr. Brzezinski said he thought it would bother them. They have a strong territorial instinct. Going after Kharg Island would create a worldwide oil crisis. Secretary Brown said the three small islands would provide no bargaining lever. Dr. Brzezinski noted that if they only kill a few hostages we need a bargaining leverage; if they should kill all of them we need a punitive action. Secretary Brown said they will probably kill all of the hostages if we do anything at all. Secretary Vance noted that there were also economic steps that we should look at. Secretary Brown noted that we could possibly seize an Iranian ship. The Vice President suggested looking very closely at the economic steps. He found this to be an outrageous precedent. He wondered what was the legal status of an act such as this of taking diplomats hostage. Was it an act of war? Dr. Brzezinski said it was contrary to a great many agreements to which Iran was a party but it was not a casus beli unless they begin killing hostages. He wondered if we should consider taking it to the United Nations Security Council and seeking a denunciation of Iran’s action. Secretary Brown said the Third World would be against us. The Vice President said he was not so sure. For instance in cases of piracy and terrorism there were only a few extreme nations who would not condemn those actions. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the reaction by Iraq and Kuwait were both interesting. Both nations were quite concerned and this might be reflected in any UN debate. The Vice President said he would like to have a legal analysis of the situation. He suspected that something like this had happened many times before. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we should take a much closer look at the military option. First of all we should look at a simple punitive act which would be effective but would not get us engaged in a long military campaign. Secondly, we should look at other actions which would provide us with leverage to deter future action by Iran. He
