3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
578
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ning. He was sure (said somewhat teasingly) that Brezhnev’s vigor
would measure up to the schedule.
His meeting with Brezhnev would offer an opportunity to discuss
in depth not only SALT and disarmament, but also other matters of in-
terest to the two countries and to the entire world.
He was struck by the beauty of Austria and by the genuine hospi-
tality of the Austrian people. He was personally gratified that the
Vienna Opera, of which he would get a first sample tonight, had agreed
to come to the United States in the fall. The American people were
looking forward to this event with great excitement. This was but an-
other demonstration of the many ties of friendship existing between the
Austrian and the American peoples.
Kirchschlaeger thanked President Carter for his remarks. Turning to
Brezhnev, he repeated one more time that he was happy to accept the
Soviet invitation to visit the Soviet Union. He was struck by the fact that
President Carter in his arrival statement and President Brezhnev in his
remarks just made had voiced very similar views on the importance of
the state treaty of 1955 and of maintaining the neutrality status of the
Republic of Austria. One could therefore conclude that the leaders of
the United States and the Soviet Union had already come to their first
agreement during their Vienna summit meeting. (After Brezhnev
began to understand the significance of this remark after two transla-
tions, he laughed heartily and turning to President Carter, said,
“good!”) Would the Chairman come to the opera tonight?
Brezhnev said that he was rather tired.
The President interjected he should really not go if he was feeling
tired.
Brezhnev (turning to Carter) said, “Will you go?”
The President: “Yes, I and my wife will go. We have an advantage
over you, as we have had one night’s rest in Vienna.”
Brezhnev (haltingly and after some deliberation): “then Brezhnev
probably will go, too, at least for the first act.”
Kirchschlaeger interjected that one did not need to sit through all
operas until the bitter end.
The President (to Brezhnev): “As I told you before, I came here one
day earlier and have had more rest than you. But if you could come just
for the first act, that would be very nice. It would give us an opportu-
nity to be together and shake hands.”
