3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1978 423 viet side had “overlooked a great deal” with respect to the conduct of US citizens in the USSR. But when “you take such a line, we also must do so. You speak of concern, but we have the same concern expressed to us from our people in New York. It would be better to remove the source of such concern. This is all very bad, as I told Secretary Vance.” 5. I said I was sorry Gromyko could not do more to alleviate this very serious problem, but would relay his response to you along with his offer to delay the Piper-Whitney trial until the 17th. 6. As the meeting concluded, Gromyko repeated his familiar line about the forthcoming Geneva meeting: he hoped the meeting would be useful, but it all depended upon the positions of the US side. Toon 130. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, July 7, 1978, 1:15–2:45 p.m. PARTICIPANTS Zbigniew Brzezinski Anatoliy Dobrynin 1. Dobrynin brought up the question of the Woodbridge Two.2 He asked if there is any way in which the issue could be terminated and the two men released. I made it clear that we regard the use of spies without diplomatic immunity as not covered by previous rules of the game. Thus we cannot release them without some quid pro quo. Dobrynin asked what kind of a quid pro quo could be arranged, and I told them that we would submit some names to the Soviets. 2. I suggested also that both sides might find it useful to have an informal understanding regarding the restriction of intelligence activity to personnel covered by diplomatic immunity. Dobrynin expressed an interest in exploring this matter further. 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 19, U.S.S.R.—U.S.-Soviet Relations: 7/78–3/80. Secret. The meeting took place at the Soviet Embassy. Carter initialed the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, which he received under a July 7 covering memorandum, from Brzezinski. 2 Reference is to Enger and Chernyayev; see footnote 6, Document 109.
