1192 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX this document. He has two questions. First, if we use these as illustrations—“for example”—will this be all right? Prime Minister Begin said he would think it over, and doesn’t reject the idea on the spot. Ambassador Linowitz said that, speaking as one lawyer to another, he is making progress. Second, if Israel would feel better, regarding the U.S. role, instead a Continuing Committee would be set up with the U.S. named to it. Prime Minister Begin said no, this is not from the Camp David Accords: “During the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing committee . . .” Very good; so it is written. There is the inauguration, then the Self-Governing Authority starts. Then there is the Continuing Committee. The President said that Camp David doesn’t say that. It says in the transitional period: “. . . will constitute a continuing committee . . .” It doesn’t say wait five days—that is in the entire period: as soon as the Self-Governing Authority is set up. Prime Minister Begin said that it says: “during.” The President said that it does not say: “will be established.” Prime Minister Begin said: during the transitional period—after the Self-Governing Authority is inaugurated. The President said that he reads English! It doesn’t need to be set up. Prime Minister Begin said: not the very day the Self-Governing Authority, the very day it is inaugurated. It says “During the transitional period . . .” The President said that in Hebrew he doesn’t know, but in English . . . If it says “will be constituted,” yes. But it says “will constitute.” Minister Burg said: but not before. The President and Secretary Vance agreed. Minister Burg quoted: “The United States shall be invited to participate in the talks on matters related to the modalities of the implementation of the agreements and working out the timetable for the carrying out of the obligations of the parties.” Prime Minister Begin said that they would think it over. The President asked Ambassador Linowitz when he would see a list of authorities. Prime Minister Begin asked whether Minister Kubersky could speak. The President said: please.
