468 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Fukuda: Last year we had 5.5% growth. If you add 1.5, you will be setting a target in a different way. We will not oppose the other countries’ paragraphs, which are somewhat vague. We can say that we will do higher than last year’s 5.5%. We will obtain our real growth target for FY ’78. This means 7%. It is quite clear that for FY ’78 our target is announced. This satisfies your intention, doesn’t it? Schmidt: Could we say Japan will achieve its real growth target as already announced for FY ’78? Fukuda: I could agree to buy Carter’s suggestion that we indicate we will do 1.5 above the previous year. Callaghan: The press is likely to say what does this all add up to on unemployment and growth. Carter: We can say that we all have made several strides forward. Germany and Japan agreed to greater growth and we agreed to restrict oil consumption and inflation. It is a brave new world. Schmidt: We cannot calculate the effect of these measures. We cannot foretell the results; the situation looks a little brighter. Giscard: A slightly more scientific answer is needed. The origin of this effort was in the OECD Working Group, under Charlie Schultze, working with the European Commission. The OECD indicated that if growth were 4.5% there would be a certain fall in unemployment because 4.2% seems to be the threshold in Europe above which unemployment declines. All figures for the Schultze group except those for the FRG seem to have been taken up here. We will ask the OECD to assess the impact. But the net results should enable us to pursue an increased growth rate and a decrease in unemployment. Schmidt: There seems also to be some issue of subsidies and discipline. Carter: We think we should say we will look for greater discipline in the use of subsidies so that they do not distort the normal flows of world trade. We would like to add a sentence to this effect. Callaghan: It depends on how we interpret this. I am not ready to see firms destroyed by world recession when they require subsidies to keep them going. Jenkins: Suddenly to insert this at this stage when this is a complex MTN issue is very difficult. Giscard: Countries using subsidies feel they do not distort world trade. We do not believe this sentence would have practical content; in fact we believe it will have no meaning. Schmidt: I see this as an instrument for countries to avoid pressures for new subsidies. I do not think it is being pointed against participants here. Callaghan: I don’t particularly want this wording at all.
