advocating would also result in a situation where rates could be made more
advantageous for farm produce, as has recently been done in the revision of
rates on fertilizers in the South. Additional benefit will accrue from the
development of our inland waterways. The Mississippi River system carries
a commerce of over 50,000,000 tons at a saving of nearly $18,000,000
annually. The Inland Waterways Corporation operates boats on 2,500 miles
of navigable streams and through its relation with 165 railroads carries
freight into and out of 45 States of the Union. During the past six months it
has handled over 1,000,000 bushels of grain monthly and by its lower
freight rates has raised the price of such grain to the farmer probably 2½
cents to 3 cents a bushel. The highway system on which the Federal
Government expends about $85,000,000 a year is of vital importance to the
rural regions.
The advantages to be derived from a more comprehensive and less
expensive system of transportation for agriculture ought to be supplemented
by provision for an adequate supply of fertilizer at a lower cost than it is at
present obtainable. This advantage we are attempting to secure by the
proposed development at Muscle Shoals, and there are promising
experiments being made in synthetic chemistry for the production of
nitrates.
A survey should be made of the relation of Government grazing lands to the
livestock industry. Additional legislation is desirable more definitely to
establish the place of grazing in the administration of the national forests,
properly subordinated to their functions of producing timber and conserving
the water supply. Over 180,000,000 acres of grazing lands are still pastured
as commons in the public domain with little or no regulation. This has made
their use so uncertain that it has contributed greatly to the instability of the
livestock industry. Very little of this land is suited to settlement or private
ownership. Some plan ought to be adopted for its use in grazing,
corresponding broadly to that already successfully applied to the national
forests.
The development of sound and strong cooperative associations is of
fundamental importance to our agriculture. It is encouraging to note,
therefore, that a vigorous and healthy growth in the cooperative movement
