36 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I First, by widening the opportunities for genuine North-South consultations. The developing nations must not only be the objects of policy, but must participate in shaping it. Without wider consultations we will have sharper confrontations. A good start has been made with the Conference on International Economic Cooperation which should be strengthened and widened.8 Secondly, by assisting those nations that are in direct need. There are many ways the democracies can unite to help shape a more stable and just world order. We can work to lower trade barriers and make a major effort to provide increased support to the international agencies that now make capital available to the Third World. This will require help from Europe, Japan, North America, and the wealthier members of OPEC for the World Bank’s soft-loan affiliate, the International Development Association. The wealthier countries should also support such specialized funds as the new International Fund for Agricultural Development, which will put resources from the oil exporting and developed countries to work in increasing food production in poor countries.9 We might also seek to institutionalize, under the World Bank, a “World Development Budget,” in order to rationalize and coordinate these and other similar efforts. It is also time for the Soviet Union, which donates only about onetenth of one percent of its GNP to foreign aid—and mostly for political ends—to act more generously toward global economic development. I might add, on the subject of foreign aid, that while we are a generous nation we are not a foolish nation, and our people will expect recipient nations to undertake needed reforms to promote their own development. Moreover, all nations must recognize that the North-South relationship is not made easier by one-sided self-righteousness, by the exercise of automatic majorities in world bodies, nor by intolerance for the views or the very existence of other nations. “Limit the Flow of Arms” Third, we and our allies must work together to limit the flow of arms into the developing world. 8 The Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC) met in Paris December 16–19, 1975. In an undated memorandum to Ford, Scowcroft indicated that the conference had “reached agreement on a basis for beginning the North-South dialogue.” See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Document 300. 9 Proposed during the November 1974 UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) World Food Conference in Rome and formally established in 1977 as a specialized agency of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) finances development projects targeted at increasing food production in developing nations. The Fund began its operations in Rome in 1977.
