1072
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
rather than wheat. He noted that in the South where he grew up,
people ate almost as much corn as wheat.
Vice President Mubarak said he had discussed the negotiations yes-
terday. When full autonomy is reached, it will be a good solution to the
whole problem. Egypt and the U.S. must work together. He said he had
recently gone to Tunisia for a meeting with an Islamic group. He had
also traveled to Malaysia and to Oman. In Oman he had met with
people coming secretly from Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the UAE. There
was only one question: what did you do in Jerusalem? This is the vital
question. Prince Fahd and the King know only Jerusalem. The Presi-
dent was right when he said some months ago that none of the Arab
leaders really wants an independent Palestinian state. They are terri-
fied of the Palestinians. They are afraid the Soviets will go there. Arafat
has sent a private message. Every time he is going to make a public
statement which is critical, he sends a message and says he must say
this for Assad or for Qadhafi, and he asks for understanding. Egypt
always gets the same message. He is trying to get some money from
them, but still he is a leader who, when he finds the train is starting to
leave, he will get aboard. For that reason, he has left his representative
in Cairo. They have been trying to get him to take his representative
out, but he leaves him there. Qadhafi has kicked out the PLO repre-
sentative in Libya. In Oman, Vice President Mubarak met with the
Chief of Cabinet of Shaikh Zayid of the UAE who had come from Pak-
istan to Oman to meet him. He said please convey to President Sadat
our appreciation for all the steps he has taken, but ask his under-
standing that we cannot say it publicly. This is also what we hear from
the Saudis. Not from the King. He knows nothing of politics, only Jeru-
salem. They need a way to save face. The object is not to kick the Israelis
out of Jerusalem.
The President wondered if Vice President Mubarak had recently
read the Jerusalem language in the Camp David accords? Was that lan-
guage satisfactory to Sadat?
Vice President Mubarak said yes it is. Egypt wants something fin-
ished. Sadat told Begin nearly the same language as the Camp David
language. Both he and President Sadat had said the same thing to
Weizman: let us live all in peace. Jerusalem is a religious thing. We
need only a small Council (Consulate?) with a flag. Weizman said
Begin would not be able to accept the flag. But it is only something
symbolic, he would see in time.
The President recalled that he had once spent two days with Begin
talking about flags.10
10 Not further identified.
