908
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
would allow us to move the commodities, escape from a politically em-
barrassing position, elude a confrontation with the Hill, and avoid the
establishment of what can only be viewed as a “hit list” (the 14 coun-
tries required to send in new human rights reports as a pre-condition
for obtaining PL–480, Title I assistance.)7
RECOMMENDATION:
That you call Vance and discuss this matter with him, urging a res-
olution of the immediate problems along the lines suggested above.8
Henry Owen concurs.9
7 Such a list would have the most pernicious consequences for not only will it com-
plicate our relations with nearly a score of countries, many of which are good friends, but
will undoubtedly acquire some bureaucratic standing and legitimacy and serve as an ex-
cuse for withholding other support from these governments, whether military or eco-
nomic assistance. When that occurs, the conclusion for many countries will be inescap-
able: the U.S. is using human rights concerns in order to justify reductions in its
assistance efforts. Guy Erb agrees that PL–480 shipments should not be held up but does
not have enough information on the human rights dimension of the PL–480 program. Jes-
sica has seen a copy of this memo, but has not had a chance to react to it. There is some
urgency to this matter inasmuch as instructions are going out this afternoon to our Am-
bassadors in the 14 countries instructing them to negotiate changes in the contracts. At a
minimum, I believe you should call Warren Christopher and ask him to hold up outgoing
cables on this subject until the NSC can review it.” [Footnote in the original. Brzezinski
underlined the words “Guy Erb,” “Jessica,” and “has not had a chance to react to it.” He
also highlighted the portion of the footnote that begins with “should call Warren Christo-
pher” to the end of the sentence.]
8 Inderfurth placed a vertical line in the margin and Brzezinski underlined “you call
Vance” and highlighted the recommendation in the margin. He did not indicate his pref-
erence with respect to the recommendation; however, he did speak to Vance that after-
noon, according to a November 30 note from Christopher to Brzezinski. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Office of the Deputy
Secretary, Warren Christopher, Lot 81D113, Box 7, WC—Memos to the White House—
1977) Brzezinski spoke to Christopher that afternoon, according to a November 30 note
Christopher sent to Brzezinski transmitting copies of his letter to Talmadge and the sim-
plified form of assurance. (Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Hu-
manitarian Affairs, footnotes 3 and 4, Document 92) On December 17, The Washington
Post reported that the Department had reached agreement in principle regarding
P.L.–480 Title I shipments with South Korea, Guinea, Zaire, Bangladesh, and Indonesia.
(“ ‘Agreements’ Said Reached On Food Aid,” The Washington Post, December 17, 1977, p.
A16) See also Seth S. King, “Link to Food-Aid Program Helping Carter’s Human Rights
Campaign,” The New York Times, December 18, 1977, p. A3.
9 Brzezinski underlined this sentence.
