Yugoslavia 757 As far as Somalia is concerned, I had a visit from their President. He said he is ready to have confederation with Ethiopia. In Djibouti, the situation is dangerous. I sent our Assistant Foreign Minister with messages urging the parties to reach a peaceful solution. In terms of the internal situation, fighting is going on. Both sides are stubborn. We have let the Ethiopians and the Eritreans know that we do not agree with succession. However, I am not optimistic. Minic: After the Ethiopian revolution, when the Emperor was overthrown,6 Ethiopia applied for assistance. We agreed to provide economic and military assistance within the limits of our possibilities. It is a progressive regime and we thought it important to maintain Ethiopia as a non-aligned country. The policy of some Arab countries, supporting the succession of Eritrea, is the wrong policy. The Ethiopian regime is assuring us that they are determined to remain non-aligned. We are of the opinion that we have to support Ethiopia because the government assures they are determined to remain non-aligned. We are trying to encourage the government to find a federal solution for Eritrea, not war. We are trying to press the Arab countries to change their policy and to influence Ethiopia along these same lines. Neither Ethiopia nor the Arabs are ready to accept such suggestions. Tito: It is difficult to say what consequences there will be if the situation continues on its present course. If such a thing were to develop, we would have to keep the conflict from spreading. We should all try to contribute. Kardelj: What is in question is the policy of detente itself. All of these conflicts inevitably involve the two world blocs. Africa is possibly a confrontation ground. V.P.: Mr. Kardelj, our fondest hope is that that will not happen. We want majority rule in Rhodesia and Namibia. We want progress in South Africa. Where there is profound social injustice, there is room for caprice. We want the U.S. and the Soviet Union to stay out of there. That is the policy we want to pursue; we do not have designs for hegemony. Kardelj: But it is possible that this will have to be the result of US- Soviet negotiations. It is in U.S. interests that non-aligned countries remain non-aligned. 6 Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie was deposed on September 12, 1974.
