332 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX rights, as well as its economic problems. The regime’s crackdown on the signatories has: —opened a new breach—if only temporarily—between Moscow and its allies in Eastern Europe on the one hand and West European Communist parties on the other; —set back Prague’s attempts to gain wider international acceptability and to improve relations with various Western governments; and —may have caused some embarrassment to Moscow during the latter’s attempts to pursue detente with the West and, particularly, the US. Western reaction may have also contributed to divisions within Czechoslovak leadership on how best to deal with dissidence—whether to moderate harsh policies to blunt Western criticisms or to charge Western governments and media with blatant interference in Czechoslovakia’s internal affairs. This is the charge made by Moscow and other East European regimes in the debate over human rights. Aware that they could not publicize their goals and documents within Czechoslovakia, Charter activists have sought to have their documents published or broadcast in Western media. They have hoped thus to have them receive maximum publicity both in Czechoslovakia and abroad. The Charter’s success in gaining the support of Western governments and media has perhaps been its single greatest accomplishment. The Charter movement has also enlisted support from other dissidents in Eastern Europe and in the USSR. For instance, in early 1977, dissidents in Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the USSR sent messages of support for the aims and purposes of Charter 77. Little is known about the contacts which the Chartists have carried on with other East European dissidents. However, formal contacts were established with the Polish Committee for Social Self-Defense (KOR). Meetings were held in August and September 1978, at which it was announced that efforts would be made to coordinate activities and establish permanent working groups to further human rights. A third meeting planned in October 1978 was broken up by coordinated action of the Czechoslovak and Polish police. Recently, support from Polish activists has become apparent: a Krakow student group allegedly plans to stage a hunger strike in support of the ten arrested Chartists prior to the opening of their trials, while members of KOR plan to conduct similar strikes in Warsaw churches. In early July, KOR made public a letter by a group of Polish Catholics to Czechoslovak Cardinal Tomasek asking him to defend the ten Chartists, four of them Catholics. Charter Failures and the Regime’s Tactics The Charter movement, however, has not been able yet to secure actual improvements in human rights in Czechoslovakia. In some
