1440 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement the terms of the Agreed Announcement. He does not appear to have brought his case to the attention of the Indians. John Dexter, who is going to take Bob Ekvall’s place as interpreter, is now in the Department on consultation. He intends to do some work with Language Service Branch here in the general techniques of con­ ference interpreting, following which he will take a little leave before proceeding to Geneva. We hope he will be able to arrive in Geneva in time for the December meeting. It would be desirable, if you can work it out, to have Dexter sit in on the December and January meet­ ings. It is up to you, of course, whether you wish to introduce Dexter at the December meeting as Ekvall’s replacement, or to have him take La Claire’s place for the December and January meetings. Although it is somewhat irregular, I should think it might serve as a demonstra­ tion of our continuing interest in the talks if you introduced Dexter frankly as Bob’s replacement. It would also be more useful to Dexter if he could concentrate on following the interpreting rather than be required to take notes. We are having some trouble fitting Dexter in at a post convenient to Geneva. The only job which has been given serious consideration as a possible slot for Dexter at Geneva is the conference administration position formerly occupied by Bill Sabbagh, but this job is felt to be not entirely appropriate. The difficulty with assigning him to Bern or Zurich is the matter of his language training between meet­ ings. As you know we are asking Ed to look into language training possibilities, but we are not too sanguine about those places. As you will have noticed from the verbatim record of the 79th MAC meeting, the UNC opening presentation on the missing servicemen was based almost entirely on the draft statement which you saw here last May. There were a couple of unfortunate interpolations, however, which have given rise to some false impressions. In the latter part of the opening statement, it is noted that the Communist falsification of their “accounting” only strengthens the conviction widely held in the United States that American citizens are still being held. The USIA ticker on the MAC meeting misquoted this passage so that it appeared the U.S. Government shared this conviction. The other unfortunate state­ ment in the UNC presentation was the reference to the 1,084 persons on the UNC list against whose names the Communists noted in their last “accounting” that they had no data. This gave rise to the mistaken infer­ ence in the USIA ticker and in some news stories that the figure 1,084 is the total number of missing servicemen for whom we are seeking an accounting. As you know, we regard the Communist accounting as unsatisfactory throughout, and not just with regard to the persons on whom they say they have no data. On the whole, despite these unfortunate passages, I believe the meeting went pretty well. I do not see that the Communists offered us
