500.A14/286: Telegram
[Document 41]
The Chairman of the American Delegation (Burton) to the Secretary of
State
GENEVA, June 1, 1925—11 a.m.
[Received June 2—10:30 a.m.]
54. Military and Naval Committee have adopted a report to General Committee, going
on record as to the need for dealing adequately with the subject of gas warfare. Report
states that present Conference is not competent to deal with the subject and
recommends that an international conference be called for the purpose as soon as
possible.
It seems evident that this is part of a plan to keep this question in the hands of the
League Secretariat. Delegation aware of possible difficulties in our accepting invitation
to such a conference. On the other hand if we decline to participate we shall appear in
the unenviable light of having started the whole movement without a sincere desire for
results.
One possible solution lies in the fact that a convention on this subject could be drafted
very briefly and simply and that it does not really require the calling of a large
international conference.
We could probably keep direction of the whole matter in our own hands if, on the
presentation of the Military and Naval Committee report, delegation could state that it
welcomed this evidence of a desire to deal effectively with the problem of gas warfare
and that it was authorized to state that as soon as the powers represented at this
Conference as well as other interested powers felt that it is opportune to take further
steps in this matter the President of the United States will be glad to extend an
invitation to such countries to designate their diplomatic representatives in Washington
or such other representatives as they may desire with a view [to] agreeing upon the text
of a convention with regard to the prohibition [of] the use of poison gas.
Such a suggestion made at the right moment could hardly be refused and if Department
feels that it is desirable for the United States to keep the initiative which it took both at
the Washington Conference and here with regard to poison gas the above action may be
necessary. Further, we would thereby avoid the embarrassment of making reservations
as to attendance at a possible future conference which would probably be held under
the auspices of the League.
