818 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III —What kind of programs and approaches are the most effective in producing additional commitments from other donors, including OPEC; which lend themselves best to cooperation with other nations, including COMECON? —How can coordination between bilateral and multilateral programs be improved within the U.S. Government, among donors, and within host countries? How can coordination between official and private assistance programs be improved? 269. Briefing Memorandum From Richard Feinberg of the Policy Planning Staff to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, June 30, 1977 Basic Human Needs Strategy: Some Caveats At CIEC and the OECD, you supported a development strategy emphasizing the basic human needs of the world’s poor majority.2 While such an approach commands wide support, it also faces many pitfalls. The purpose of this memo is to alert you to these potential problems before they become real. Some will be resolved through further study, and others can probably be finessed. None needs prove fatal. IDENTIFYING NEEDS: Needs have a strong subjective component and vary culturally. The mud hut which maintains moderate temperatures year-round may seem less impressive than a more modern (and more expensive) brick home with a pre-fab aluminum-sheet roofing— which boils in the summer and fails to insulate in the winter. Nutritional needs, even for the same sex, age and activity, vary among different people and different environments. Whatever programs are developed must be clearly designed as situation-specific. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–January 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, S/P-Lake Papers—6/16–30/77. No classification marking. Drafted by Feinberg on June 29. Sent through Lake. 2 Regarding Vance’s May 30 address at the CIEC Ministerial meeting, see Document 265. The OECD met at the Ministerial level in Paris June 23–24; for the text of Vance’s intervention at the meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, July 25, 1977, pp. 105–109.
