196
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
“The above ranking reflects the Division’s belief that activities of
ICA, which are designed to build long-term mutual relationships
worldwide, are more important and represent a better investment than
BIB activities which are unilateral and geographically limited.”
This is not a valid reflection of the Administration’s policy toward
ICA and BIB operations. They are not competitive but complementary.
BIB requests should not be subjected to sharper reductions than those
of ICA. Major elements in the BIB are sums for non-recurring staff
rejuvenation, funds for program improvement, for acquisition of AP
news service and for money which the President approved in March
1977 and which is now well underway.
I hope you and your colleagues will take the foregoing into consid-
eration as you review the budgets of the above.
Regards,
Zbigniew Brzezinski
61.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 6, 1979
SUBJECT
The President’s Comments on Persian-language Broadcasting and
Related Issues (U)
The President’s impatience as expressed in his comments on
Vance’s report that Persian-language broadcasting (Tab B)2 will be
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 1–9/79. Confidential. Sent for action. Copies were sent to Quandt, Sick, Thorn-
ton, Funk, Odom, and Ermarth. Bartholomew and Inderfurth initialed the memorandum,
indicating they saw it.
2 Attached but not printed. Newsom met with ICA and VOA to discuss the need
to strengthen broadcasting to Iran in response to both the Shah’s recent departure and
an increase in Soviet propaganda broadcasting to the region. Inderfurth informed Sick
and Henze on February 5 that, in a February 2 Evening Report to Carter, Vance informed
the President of the discussions and of ICA’s plan to begin Persian broadcasting “in
about six weeks.” The President, Inderfurth noted, responded: “We should have prepared
for this 3–4 months ago—make this SOP in the future.” The memorandum asked Sick
and Henze to follow up on the Presidential comment. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 9, ICA, 1–5/79)
