Yugoslavia
923
coordinate activities between agencies, and determine agendas. He will
not be Generalissimo, but he will be the ranking General. Milos Minic,
long-term Tito associate and former Foreign Secretary, will be in charge
of foreign policy; General Ljubicic, Defense Minister, will run national
defense and be involved in broader political decisions. The central role
that these three have played, and will play, is clear.
6. Other participants are less easily discernible. Prime Minister
Djuranovic is probably the key figure on all matters economic and, as
such, inevitably will be a part of—or on the edges of—the inner circle.
Kolisevski, the new but temporary Chief of State, and Doronski, Chair-
man of the Party Presidium (also only temporarily), will, because they
are where they are, carry some weight. But both are eminently dull
and forgettable fellows and will probably not survive as significant
factors after their terms expire. Dolanc and Mikulic are important fig-
ures now, and may become more so as time goes on. Dragosavac also
bears watching, both from the Croatian perspective and because he is
a leading “conservative” who could play an important role should
things turn sour.
7. But beneath the calm exterior there will lie a degree of uncertainty
and disquiet which will not soon or easily be put aside. First and
foremost will be overwhelming fact that the father figure, the man
above the battle who resolved disputes when no one else could, the
only true Yugoslav, is gone. For a while, until they are accustomed to
doing without him, the fact that Tito is no longer there to turn to
will be a massive if subliminal psychological problem for people and
government alike.
8. Then, of course, there is the Soviet threat, which is never far
from the mind of any Yugoslav. Relations with Moscow have been
bad and getting worse for the past two years, which adds to the disquiet.
And Afghanistan has hardly been a reassuring event.
9. How the Soviets play the first few weeks after Tito’s death
can make some difference. If Brezhnev comes to the funeral (assuming
he is up to it), and if he behaves himself, it will somewhat relieve
concerns. If, on the other hand, the Soviets treat Tito’s death as
they did Kardelj’s (they virtually ignored it), the level of nervousness
will skyrocket. But in any event, I am persuaded that Yugoslav and
Soviet interests are so widely divergent that no real relaxation over
the long term is likely. This is not to say that a less confident
Yugoslav leadership will deal as forcefully with Moscow as Tito
did. On the contrary, faced with problems at home and vulnerable
to Soviet economic pressures, the new leaders will probably—at least
in the short term—feel compelled to accommodate Soviet interests
to a greater degree than in the past (e.g., by adopting a lower profile
on issues such as Afghanistan).
