Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 279 world power, the “fading of single ideological or revolutionary models,” and the division of labor in the world economy. Returning to the concept of a political “awakening,” Brzezinski concluded his remarks by sketching out the potential impact on U.S. policy: “What are the broad policy implications of this? Let me suggest four basic implications. The first is that the relevance of the West to the politically awakening world has to be largely on the level of creative innovation. That innovation has to operate both on the material as well as on the spiritual level. “On the material level, if the world—if the Western world—is willing to accept the reality of interdependence and channel it into constructive directions, it will have a very important role to play and especially so if it accepts the notion of a certain humanistic responsibility for changes which are not only profound, but potentially positive. We are dealing with changes which involve for the first time the emergence of a community in which there is greater responsiveness to the demands and needs of other societies than our own. Thus, a great deal depends on the West’s collective ability to deal with the problems of the South, particularly in the North-South context and on the level of the material response. Creative interdependence means reforming the existing institutions, adjustment and acceptance of certain new realities. On the spiritual level, this means acknowledgment of the reality of human rights defined very broadly, not only in terms of liberty, but also in social terms. “Secondly, and closely connected with it, is the need for a wider economic system. For many years to come I think we will be preoccupied with the very difficult process of how to widen the existing political and economic international system. Here again I think it is useful to reflect on our own domestic experience. “The last 100 years or so of American social and political experience involved the widening of participation for political groups, for social groups in the American system as a whole. Ultimately, and most recently this process involved blacks and women, but earlier the whole struggle of the trade union movement was a struggle over participation and the right to organize. “On the global scale, we need to widen the scope of the international system beyond the purely Atlanticist connection, to reform the international system that was designed after 1945 for a reality which has profoundly altered. “Thirdly, we will have to anticipate the consequences of regional conflicts and try to deal with them before they escalate. If regional conflicts become simultaneously North-South and East-West conflicts, they will be very difficult to control. We see the potential for such con-
