1244 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Proposed position—We believe that establishment of surprise attack zones apart from any other arms control measures would be in our interest. However, in view of the past Soviet insistence that surprise attack zones be linked to such other measures, we have, in TAB E, indi­ cated what conventional reductions we would be prepared to under­ take should the Soviet Union be prepared to accept any of the three inspection proposals described above. If the European NATO members should be unwilling to have a European zone standing by itself, we should propose that it be conditional on Soviet acceptance of either of the other surprise attack inspection measures proposed above. Probable reaction of our allies—Would probably support. Tab D PRELIMINARY MEASURES RELATING TO MISSILE CONTROLS AND OUTER SPACE PROPOSED POLICY The following measures may be undertaken simultaneously or separately: (a) Immediate initiation of an international working group to plan an inspection system to insure that the sending of objects through outer space is for peaceful purposes only. (b) Joint cooperation in selected outer space projects, such as the development of an outer space platform, an interplanetary rocket and reconnaissance satellites, looking forward to centralization of all outer space activity in an international organization when the program envi­ sioned in (a) goes in to effect. (c) Advance notification and, if possible, inspection of all vehicles, military or otherwise, entering outer space (or, as a fall-­back, all objects to be launched into orbit). DISCUSSION August 29 Proposals—Provided only for a technical committee to study the design of an inspection system which would make it possible to assure that the sending of objects through outer space will be exclu­ sively for peaceful and scientific purposes. Proposed position The proposal under (a) is a reaffirmation of our suggestion that outer space be used for peaceful purposes only. The decision whether a cessation of missiles production could be implemented separately or whether it should be tied to other elements of disarmament should be left for the future. We cannot take a final position on a proposal either to ban the pro­ duction, testing and deployment of intercontinental and intermediate
