1084 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement (4) Integrate individual strikes for mutual support through the establishment of attack corridors, timing, ECM, etc. 2. In accomplishing this task, direct liaison with any agency of the Department of Defense is authorized. 3. In accordance with the foregoing, the DSTP shall submit to the Joint Chiefs of Staff by 14 December 1960 and on ( date ) of each year thereafter the following: a. The NSTL, consisting of all installations under attack in the SIOP. These installations will be grouped together by Target Data Inventory (TDI) major reference number. b. The SIOP in a format which can be readily reviewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the DGZ’s selected for various conditions of warn­ ing supplemented with: (1) The list of the weapons, delivery forces, and the unified and specified commanders furnishing those forces programmed for each DGZ. (2) The list of the installations under attack by weapons assigned to each DGZ. c. An over-­all damage assessment summary by country for each category of essential enemy resources attacked to include the assurance of attaining specified levels of destruction under the following assumed conditions for initiation of war: (1) U.S. attack with full strategic warning. (2) U.S. attack with tactical warning under initial circumstances that are reasonably likely to occur. d. Advise the Joint Chiefs of Staff as appropriate of any temporary inability to attain the levels of destruction or neutralization prescribed. 4. Participating Commands and Forces. The commanders of all uni­ fied and specified commands shall advise the DSTP of those forces of their commands which have an appropriate capability and which are available for commitment to the attack of targets on the NSTL and which should be included in the SIOP. The inclusion of forces in the SIOP constitutes a first priority commitment. 5. The foregoing responsibilities of the DSTP do not include com­ mand authority. It is recognized that points of difference involving tactics, use of forces, etc., may develop between the commanders of unified or specified commands and the DSTP. Such differences will be resolved by DSTP to permit completion of the SIOP and will be high­ lighted in presentation to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their review and approval.
