1955  263
200.	 Telegram 745 to Geneva1
Washington, September 19, 1955, 3:45 p.m.
745. For Johnson.
Instructions for September 20 meeting.
1. Department approves your suggested oral reply to Wang ques­
tion invitation to GOI and UKG, as contained paragraph 5 your 740. 
While question raised by Wang seems trivial and without merit, con­
sidering explicit language of Agreed Announcement, it would seem 
desirable for you to explore fully with him subject of respective com­
munications to GOI and UKG. Department expects obtain further infor­
mation from British Embassy later in day regarding ability UK Mission 
in Peiping to perform agreed function. Wang should be queried insis­
tently in regard to action taken by PRC with UK Mission in Peiping 
until you are satisfied that necessary facilities accorded.
2. Department will send you separate report today on publicity for 
Agreed Announcement in Chinese language newspapers in U.S.
3. Department has received note from Indian Embassy contain­
ing formal GOI acceptance role assigned to it. Indian Ambassador 
calling at Department September 20 to discuss Indian Government 
responsibilities under Agreed Announcement. UK has orally indi­
cated in answer to our formal note that it is prepared to accept func­
tion requested. Written confirmation expected shortly. We of course 
do not object to PRC approaching GOI in same vein that we have 
approached UKG. We consider it mandatory on PRC to approach UK 
as we have approached GOI.
4. We hope to have additional information for you from I & NS in 
time for tomorrow’s meeting on latest departures Chinese for Far East.
5. You are requested to raise question of unilateral public state­
ments. You should make it clear to Wang that you are not charging him 
with act of bad faith on September 14, since it now appears that he did 
give notice at last meeting that he intended issue statement. However 
his statement of intention was not clearly understood by you at the 
time and created necessity for you put out unilateral public statement. 
You should propose that both sides get back to original agreement of 
no unilateral public statements without clear understanding or explicit 
advance notice.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1955. Secret; Niact. Drafted by 
McConaughy and Phleger; cleared by Sebald and in draft by Dulles.
