National Security Policy  1053
as ordnance development, weapons proving, submarine development, 
etc., but these latter groups we consider to be counted under other 
headings in this estimate.
6. Draft Boards. We estimate on the order of 10,000 active duty mili­
tary personnel serving on local draft boards, and as military instructors 
at civilian schools and clubs.
II. THEATER FIELD FORCES      2,445,000
7. Ground Forces, Field. Based on identification over the last two 
or three years, and information on strength levels, in particular of line 
divisions, we now believe that the Soviet ground forces include:
About 100 combat ready line divisions, at high level (averaging 
about two-­thirds) strength.
About 70 line divisions at low level (averaging about one-­third) 
strength, and requiring replenishment with reserves before combat.
Of the 100 combat ready divisions, we estimate there are 57 motorized 
rifle/mechanized, 13 rifle, 22 tank, and 8 airborne divisions. Most of 
the low strength units are rifle divisions, but also in this category are 
2 tank, 2 airborne, and 21 motorized rifle/mechanized divisions. The 
total strength of line divisions is estimated to be about 1,275,000 men.
8. Our estimate of strengths of combat support forces and service 
support units rests on less certain and less comprehensive informa­
tion; it is based on known Soviet organization and the requirements 
of the line divisional force. The combat support forces consist of about 
550,000 men organized into some 16 artillery divisions, a substantial 
number of separate artillery, antiaircraft artillery, antitank and rocket 
artillery brigades and regiments, as well as other combat support units. 
Headquarters, service support units, and certain schools account for 
about 425,000. The ratio of support to line units is austere, with only 
a little over 25 percent in combat support and about 20 percent in the 
logistic and administrative tail.
9. Tactical Aviation. The operating and support personnel of Tactical 
Aviation, exclusive of air transport, is believed to be in the neighborhood 
of 195,000 men. This and other estimates of the personnel strengths of 
the operational military air components are based on the estimated air­
craft Order of Battle, on a detailed calculation of field support require­
ments, and on some information concerning the actual Soviet support 
establishment.
III. AIR DEFENSE FORCES      365,000
10. Antiaircraft Artillery. The estimate of Air Defense Forces is 
complicated by the circumstance that a substantial shift from anti­
aircraft artillery guns to surface-­to-­air missiles is in process, and 
that the subordination of the various AAA units which have been
