Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I to promote friendship might be misconstrued by them as an indication of a new zig-zag and as evidence of lack of resolve. It would be useful if you were to indicate to State your determination that the Administration cohesively convey the same tone—a point which The Washington Post editorial so well stressed and so much welcomed. 3. It should be made clear to the Russians that our purpose is not to humiliate them, and that we are prepared to deal with them seriously, on the basis of reciprocity. Accordingly, I think it would be useful if you were to instruct Cy and me to have separate talks with Gromyko and Dobrynin respectively, or each alone with Dobrynin—in order to convey the same message. That message ought to be that we are still interested in SALT, etc., but that we cannot sustain a selective detente which they exploit to their own advantage in a manner inimical to our vital interests; and that any positive gesture by them would be reciprocated by us. For example, tangible even if quiet steps to reduce the Soviet/Cuban military presence in Africa (notably Ethiopia and Angola), and a commitment not to exacerbate the situation around Rhodesia would be reciprocated by us. On the other hand, Soviet unwillingness to give us these assurances will necessarily force us not only to support our friends but also to seek friends where we can find them (and here the China alternative is a very subtle but persuasive argument). 4. In regard to China, we should be very careful to continue stressing the proposition that our long-term interests are congruent not because of tactical anti-Sovietism, but because of our joint commitment to a world of diversity (a point I stressed in my report to NATO).4 Subtle hints of long-term congruence of interest are more likely to induce the Russians to compete for our favors. Above all, what we now need is to demonstrate prudent resolve so that the four gains mentioned at the outset of this memorandum are translated into tangible benefits internationally and lasting domestic advantages politically. 4 During the summit meeting, Brzezinski delivered a report on China. (Power and Principle, p. 221)
