630
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
islation. We will make sure the Members have copies of the legislation,
an editorial support list of periodicals that is overwhelmingly favor-
able, and an endorsement list of organizations that should provide the
uncommitted with considerable political cover. We intend to follow up
the third tour with a final, fourth round crammed into the three or four
days just before the House vote is scheduled.
(B) Tally by Committee: At the completion of the first tour, we had
two very weak committees in terms of response (Aging, and Interstate
and Foreign Commerce) and one leaning negative (the Small Business
Committee). In our second tour, the Interstate and Foreign Commerce
Committee came over solidly to us, but we still have to do more work
with the Small Business group. To remove some of their questions, we
are preparing draft letters from you to each of these committee
members reiterating the special steps we have taken to eliminate small
business from the government procurement code provisions.3 This
should give us a further boost with that group who may not be thor-
oughly informed yet or who have lingering doubts from the earlier dis-
cussions and exaggerated newspaper reports.
(C) Tally by Geographical Area: Both the southeast and the northeast
seem to have improved somewhat in the latest tally. The midwest
lingers somewhat behind now and requires our closest attention. By
state, Pennsylvania is our most difficult one, followed by Illinois, In-
diana and Michigan. Special efforts by Administration CL officers and
our outreach groups are being made particularly aimed at these four
states. Pennsylvania may remain a problem to the end, but we should
clearly have the other three thoroughly with us.
(D) Tally by Issues: Steel and textiles are still the only two issues that
repeatedly come up. Now that the specialty steel decision has been
handed down and the unilateral action taken on textiles with China,4
we should be in position to swing over a number of House Members
from these caucuses to the positive side. On the second tour, we had 37
House Members still expressing MTN reservations because of steel
concerns and 14 on textiles. Letters indicating industry endorsements
will be circulated to each of these individuals.5
SENATE SITUATION
The first tour of contacts on the Senate side produced a better re-
sult than we had expected. Based strictly on the hearings and personal
3 The draft letters were not found.
4 On May 31, the United States introduced quotas on Chinese textile imports.
(Clyde H. Farnsworth, “U.S. Imposes Quotas on Chinese Textiles,” The New York Times,
June 1, 1979, p. A1)
5 The letters were not found.
