North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 981 Progress on aid, trade, and commodities will require a large expenditure of political capital. The Congress is now sitting in judgment not only on aid and (prospectively) on trade, but also on the International Coffee and Sugar Agreements and a US contribution to a buffer stock for the International Tin Agreement.4 Since our influence on the Congress is limited, we should focus on a few key issues. Even this may require an effort that is almost Panama Canal-ish in scope.5 Your own continuing involvement will be the key to success. It would be helpful to know, at the meeting Dick recommends or otherwise, whether you agree that aid and trade should receive priority attention among North-South issues at the Summit. After the Summit, in light of its results and of Dick Cooper’s discussions with Jamaican leaders, we can do more staff work and recommend follow-up actions on these and other North-South issues that they will raise, such as the Common Fund and LDC participation in international consideration of economic issues. 4 The International Coffee, Sugar, and Tin Agreements regulated commodity prices and sales among their signatories, which included both importing and exporting nations. In 1975, the United States signed the then most recent version of the Coffee Agreement; in 1977, it signed the latest iteration of the Sugar Agreement; and in 1976, it signed the fifth iteration of the Tin Agreement. 5 Reference is to the Carter administration’s effort to secure ratification of the Panama Canal Treaties. See footnote 4, Document 163. 310. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper) to President Carter1 Washington, July 3, 1978 SUBJECT North/South Dialogue: Follow-Up on Your Discussions in Panama As you requested, I have compiled two sets of papers on North/ South economic issues. The first set (Tab C)2 describes areas of agree- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 13, President, Germany, 7/13–17/78: Economic Summit (II). Confidential. Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page. 2 Tab C, not attached, includes the June 23 memorandum from Watson to Cooper and the eight papers on North-South issues discussed in Document 307. Tabs A–C are attached to a copy of this memorandum in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 3, North-South Dialogue—1978.
