3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
679
number of launchers of medium range missiles, as well as the yield of
the nuclear charges of these missiles, have even been somewhat de-
creased. The number of medium range bombers has also been de-
creased. The Soviet Union does not at all deploy such means on the ter-
ritory of other states. For a number of years we have not increased the
number of our troops stationed in Central Europe. Such are the irrefut-
able facts, Mr. President, and I am sure that they are well known by the
appropriate organs of your country.
Moreover, we have expressed our readiness to decrease the
number of medium range means deployed in Western areas of the So-
viet Union as compared to the current level, but of course only if there
is no additional deployment of medium range nuclear means in
Western Europe.
As is known, important negotiations concerning SALT III are in
prospect. We are in favor of commencing them immediately after the
SALT II Treaty enters into force. We agree, within the framework of
these negotiations, to discuss the possibilities of limiting not only inter-
continental but also other types of arms, but with due account, of
course, for all related factors and with strict observance of the principle
of equal security of the sides.
Third, the Soviet Union, motivated by a sincere desire to break
through the impasse which has limited the efforts of many years to
achieve military detente in Europe, to provide an example of transition
from words to concrete measures, has decided, with the agreement of
the GDR and after consultations with other member-states of the
Warsaw Pact, to reduce unilaterally the number of Soviet troops in
Central Europe. During the next twelve months up to 20 thousand So-
viet servicemen, one thousand tanks, and also a certain amount of other
technical military equipment will be withdrawn from the territory of
the GDR.
We hope that this new, concrete manifestation of the peaceable-
ness and good will of the Soviet Union and its allies will be properly
evaluated by the governments of the member-states of NATO and that
they will follow our example.
Fourth, being in favor of further strengthening trust between
states, we are prepared in particular to reach agreement that notifica-
tion as to large military exercises by ground forces, provided for by the
Helsinki Final Act, be made not three weeks before the event, but rather
a month ahead, and not from the level of 25 thousand men, as is pres-
ently the case, but, let us say, from the level of 20 thousand men. We are
also prepared, on the basis of reciprocity, not to conduct military exer-
cises involving more than 40–50 thousand men. In addition, we pro-
pose that timely notification be given not only about military exercises,
