870  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
RVs if they fell under the threshold. A definition that attempted to 
exclude non-­nuclear defense suppression weapons would be difficult 
to negotiate.
There are three options:
1. Do not propose a definition. DOE supports; OSD and JCS prefer.
2. Propose the following definition:
The term “reentry vehicle” means an object carried on an ICBM 
or SLBM that is capable of surviving reentry through the Earth’s atmo-
sphere and is also capable of containing a weapon.
OSD, JCS and State can accept.
3. Modify the language in option 2 to include only those objects 
“capable of containing a nuclear weapon.” ACDA supports; State 
prefers.
Although OSD and JCS prefer that RV remain undefined, they 
believe that a definition will be necessary politically and can accept 
option 2. They note that option 2 would capture [less than 3 lines not 
declassified] They see nothing in the definition that the Soviets could 
use to advantage. State agrees with this outcome as long as the phrase 
“capable of containing” is part of the definition.
ACDA supports option 3 on the assumption that the U.S. needs to 
protect the option of not counting a non-­nuclear defense suppression 
weapon (DOD maintains that it does not need to protect this option). 
[4 lines not declassified]
DOE favors option 1, arguing that any definition would create 
more problems than it would solve.
NSC staff favor option 2. The desirability of including a definition 
of RV is primarily political. Our overriding objectives in the specifics of 
the definition are to avoid language that the Soviets could exploit to cir-
cumvent the Treaty [1 line not declassified] Options 2 and 3 satisfy both of 
these criteria. Option 3 is weaker than option 2 because it would require 
us to monitor the distinction between objects capable of containing a 
nuclear weapon from those capable of containing only a non-­nuclear 
weapon. Further, option 3 would be more difficult to negotiate because 
it would raise again the neuralgic issue of whether START should limit 
all strategic weapons, or only nuclear weapons.
Finally, we note that OSD and JCS agree that option 2 is acceptable 
[less than 1 line not declassified]
Simulated Release Definition
The U.S. and Soviet positions on RV counting differ in the details 
of how to assign a number of RVs to a specific type of missile. Both 
would count the number of actual RVs released during flight-­testing.
