January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1379
Attachment
Report Prepared by the President’s Special Representative
for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz)5
undated
PROGRESS IN THE AUTONOMY NEGOTIATIONS
Egypt and Israel have over the past months, by virtue of their com-
mitment and efforts, been able to make considerable progress and have
appreciably narrowed their differences on a wide range of critical, sub-
stantive matters germane to the concept of “full autonomy” called for
by the Camp David Accords.
While significant differences remain on important issues which
will require extensive and intensive negotiations during the weeks and
months ahead, it can fairly be said that a substantial consensus now
exists between the parties on the elements set forth below.
Some of the positions reflected in this report have not yet been re-
vealed by the parties to one another. Moreover, each of the parties has
emphasized that its position on many of these matters is expressly con-
ditioned on the completion of a comprehensive autonomy agreement.
Accordingly, it is important to emphasize that one or both of the parties
might deny aspects of this report were it to be made public. Never-
theless, the existing consensus as reflected below provides a solid foun-
dation for the completion of a comprehensive agreement which will es-
tablish the transitional autonomy arrangements contemplated in the
Accords.
1. Election of Self-Governing Authority
The parties would agree that a single body should be elected by
the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza as the Self-Governing
Authority (hereinafter referred to as the “SGA(AC)”). The SGA(AC)
would select its own officers from among the elected members and de-
termine its own internal procedures.
Proposals have been made by both parties on the SGA(AC)’s size
and structure, and some progress in narrowing the differences has been
made. The parties are proceeding on the basis that these issues are
more appropriately resolved once the scope and nature of the
SGA(AC)’s powers and responsibilities have been more fully defined.
5 Secret.
