Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX own ideas about non-alignment and internal structure. Kardelj felt the Soviets now understood that, and thus relations had improved. Within this general framework, the Soviets seemed preoccupied with their relations with the US—with detente and disarmament. The President thought that perhaps because of Tito’s discussions in Moscow, the Soviets had been more cooperative in recent weeks in SALT and other discussions, and he asked Kardelj to tell President Tito that relations had improved. US-Soviet discussions had been freer and more productive. There had been progress in SALT and on CTB; no final agreements had been concluded, but the US was encouraged by progress. The US had talked with the Soviets about building a constructive attitude at Belgrade. The President hoped that the terms of the Final Act and compliance with it would be discussed openly and freely, but without aggravating difference. We will be forceful but not in a way which will disturb detente. The Belgrade conference is important to us, and we appreciate the good influence of President Tito in bringing us together for common purposes. The President stressed that the unity and strength of Yugoslavia, as well as its non-alignment, are very important to world peace; they are important to us as well. He said he was eager to have constant exchanges of views with the Yugoslavs, and he hoped that Kardelj would not hesitate to contact him when he could aid relations. The President said that the US wanted to move toward peace, to diminish armaments levels in the world and the threat posed by nuclear weapons, to extinguish the flames of war. Yugoslav advice and cooperation would be important. Kardelj said he was happy to hear the President’s views because he also felt that the big and small nations should participate equally in solving major global problems. Yugoslavia supports detente and recognizes that US-Soviet relations are decisive for world peace. But for efforts to succeed, other nations, including the non-aligned, must participate. Yugoslavia wants to contribute to developing less confrontation and more cooperation in the world. In that context, Kardelj welcomed the President’s statement that the US not only sought arms limitation, but wanted to reduce arms. He reiterated that all countries should participate; at the same time, the balance of power is important to global strategy, and especially to Yugoslav independence. Still the effort should be made to move to lower levels of arms. Kardelj was unsure whether Yugoslavia’s influence on the Soviets, or President Tito’s own, had been important. But President did what he could to make steps toward US-Soviet understanding, an understanding valid for disarmament and for other fields. Perhaps the Soviets did react to President Tito’s comments in their discussions with the President.
