64
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
b. What kind of groups does it go to? Are they mainly emigre
groups? Brzezinski noted one by a man named [name not declassified]
that he thought was good.
c. Does some of it go to Western European groups as opposed to
emigre groups?
d. We also need to be as specific as we can as to how the additional
funding would be employed, again with emphasis on whether it’s to
emigre groups or established Western European groups.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Eastern Europe.]
Stansfield Turner
Director
20.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 14, 1978
SUBJECT
Russian and East European Book Program—CIA Report
Admiral Turner has sent you a memo (TAB B)2 reporting that the
SCC recommendations of last fall on expansion of Russian and East
European book publishing are being implemented. A total of [dollar
amount not declassified] is going to be allocated to increased book publica-
tion and distribution in 1978 (FY). State has approved the main lines
of the Agency program and there seems, as of the moment, to be no
difficulty in carrying out the CIA program.
This represents very effective performance by CIA at a time of
stress and confusion in the DDO.3 I have drafted a little memo from
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special,
Box 2, Chron File: 3/78. Secret; Sensitive.
2 Dated March 13. Not attached.
3 In a March 23 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze described the “persistent” and
“mistaken” philosophy of using covert action only as a last resort. “Stan Turner,” Henze
wrote, “gives the impression of greater covert capabilities than CIA actually possesses. This
may be in part because he is reluctant to admit the damage his personnel policies have
done to the DDO.” Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVIII,
Organization and Management of Foreign Policy.
