Arms Control and Disarmament  1445
REVIEW OF HIS GENEVA TALKS ON THE IAEA
Talks with the U.K., French, Indian and Soviet representatives have 
reinforced McCone’s concern regarding the future of the Agency. The 
following have been cited as significant problems:
1. The slow progress of the Agency’s program: Although the Agen­
cy’s functions embrace the entire field of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, public attention has focused to a significant extent on its role in 
the development of atomic power particularly in the underdeveloped 
areas. Expectations and aspirations in this field have greatly exceeded 
reasonable prospects for early progress. A growing realization that the 
Agency is unlikely to bring about the swift initiation of atomic power 
projects in underdeveloped areas has led to some slackening of the ear­
lier ardent interest in the Agency of underdeveloped nations. The trend 
toward more conservative appraisals of the early prospects for atomic 
power in underdeveloped areas was reinforced by a number of techni­
cal papers at the Geneva Conference. Although the Department does 
not wish the U.S. to make statements and take positions in the IAEA 
which will promote extravagant expectations doomed to disappoint­
ment, Governor Herter has written Chairman McCone emphasizing 
the importance of making atomic power a principal theme of the U.S. 
representative’s statement at the Second Geneva Conference (TAB B).
2. Role of the IAEA and other U.N. organizations: Mr. McCone is con­
cerned with regard to activities of the U.N. and the specialized agencies 
which appear to be potentially in conflict with the functions assigned 
the IAEA by its Charter, and speeches by some of the participants at 
the Geneva Peaceful Uses Conference have heightened his concern. He 
may also refer to Secretary General Hammarskjold’s report suggesting 
that the U.N. Radiation Committee might be given operating respon­
sibilities and to resistance to the idea favored by the U.S. of the IAEA’s 
sponsoring future Peaceful Uses Conferences.
We believe that the question of IAEA relationship with the U.N. 
and the specialized agencies is not a major problem, in spite of certain 
current frictions. Relationship agreements with ILO, UNESCO, and 
FAO satisfactory to the IAEA have recently been negotiated and will 
be submitted to the Second General Conference for approval; and we 
believe the IAEA can expand its present activities or add new activities 
in the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy without running into any 
serious conflict with the specialized agencies. We consider that IAEA 
should sponsor any future Peaceful Uses Conferences, and that the U.S. 
should oppose in the Thirteenth General Assembly establishment of 
operational responsibilities for the U.N. Radiation Committee. IO is 
prepared to discuss these questions further with Mr. McCone in detail 
at his convenience after he has talked to you. The basic problem of the 
IAEA is to develop a significant program of its own. If this is done, the 
problem of the relationship of the IAEA to the U.N. and the specialized
