Arms Control and Disarmament 1653 and U.K. do not reduce their bargaining power voluntarily. Moreover, any appearance of acquiescence in the Soviet view that an agreed sus­ pension of tests can be undertaken without controls would correspond­ ingly weaken our bargaining position in insisting upon such controls. 3. U.S. Requirements for Nuclear Weapons Tests. The U.S. has import­ ant needs for further nuclear weapons tests: to improve existing design (particularly in the small warheads field); to develop new or improved designs (particularly in the ballistic and anti-ballistic missile field) to improve the safety of certain designs; and to examine further the phe­ nomena revealed by the Johnson Island and ARGUS firings. 4. Relative ability of the U.S. and USSR to carry out weapons improve­ ment (or [illegible in the original]) tests under the proposed arrangement. If the proposed arrangement was adopted, it would not be possible for the United States to conduct nuclear weapons tests. The USSR might not be inhibited to the same degree and could undertake [illegible in the original] they believed undetectable. It would be difficult for us to carry out nuclear tests for improvement of the detection system (or for peaceful purposes) that would not carry with them the possibility that the Soviets would conduct nuclear weapons tests under these guises. 5. U.S. Congressional and public reaction. Public and Congressio­ nal support for moves which might advance the objective of first step agreements toward an inspected test cessation should be weighed against distrust in these quarters of any arrangement with the USSR which does not embody effective controls. 6. Effect on laboratories and developmental programs. In the judgment of the Atomic Energy Commission and Department of Defense, while the potential of the weapons laboratories has been affected only slightly up to now, it is probable that deterioration will proceed rapidly if the U.S. should commit itself to the proposed further one or two year mor­ atorium. Although current programs which are in advanced stages of development and which are based to large degree on devices already tested will proceed relatively unaffected, it is most probable that a one or two year voluntary suspension of this type will greatly accelerate the trend of scientific personnel away from the long-range weapons devel­ opment programs. Once these people are dispersed, their ­reassembly into an effective scientific organization [illegible in the original] virtu­ ally impossible in absence of extreme emergency. It will be extremely difficult for the laboratories to plan new devel­ opment [illegible in the original] without knowing, at an early date, in what environment, if any, testing would be permitted. A development program without testing is, of course, in itself a most difficult under­ taking. The voluntary ban would further delay any decision as to the basis on which weapons development is to proceed. Also, there might be difficulties in securing adequate appropriations for continuation of weapons research or resuming a weapons testing program after a pro­ longed voluntary suspension.
