March 1952–February 1953
315
2. Whether above is basis for stories which are now circulating that
(a) I have asked to be withdrawn from Iran and (b) Iranian Govt has
asked for my recall, I do not know. Polowetzky of AP told Melbourne
this morning that stories this kind were in circulation and if they shld
appear even in irresponsible Iranian press, he wld have no choice other
than to report them. He asked Melbourne if Embassy cld give him
something to use in story in case he shld write one. I authorized Mel-
bourne to tell Polowetzky that relations between members Govt and
myself were cordial and on basis of mutual confidence and that I had
not suggested that Washington recall me.
It is difficult for me to believe that Mosadeq has asked for my recall
unless he is under great pressure from extreme elements cooperating
with Tudeh. My popularity with Internatl Communism has been low
during last ten years and Internatl Communism wld probably regard
my recall as even more noteworthy victory in prevailing circumstances
than recall of mil missions. I do not know whether American corre-
spondents here will report these stories and if so whether they will
have wide circulation. I leave to Dept decision in case stories are pub-
lished as to whether or not it shld issue denial. Iranian Govt in its
present confusion not likely deny anything.
Henderson
114.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, August 12, 1952, 1 p.m.
636. Joint Emb, CAS and Service Atts estimate recent Tudeh activ-
ities fols:
After disturbances attendant on Qavam Premiership, Tudeh at-
tempted capitalize on and inflate its role in events and strove unsuc-
cessfully consolidate informal working arrangement reached with NF
during crisis. Once Mosadeq returned to power Front leaders repudi-
ated tacit understanding and minimized Tudeh role in demonstrations.
Altho Tudeh not (rpt not) able form open partnership with NF, it
emerged from crisis with only NF remaining as effective organized
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/8–1252. Secret;
Security Information. Received at 1:43 p.m.
