952 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Treasury is not now making recommendations regarding either of these banks, since the staff work and international negotiations are not sufficiently advanced. Treasury says that its recommendations on the World Bank Group and the Inter-American Development Bank will come to us in July or later. Some idea of the magnitudes involved can be gained from this range of rounded annual appropriations, which would have to be secured in FY 1982 for the World Bank and Inter- American Development Bank under the high and low strategies described by Treasury: Low High World Bank Hard Lending $1.4 – $1.6 billion World Bank Soft Lending $0.9 – $1.4 billion Inter-American Bank Hard Lending $0.4 – $0.7 billion Inter-American Bank Soft Lending $0.1 – $0.2 billion $2.8 – $3.9 billion II. Specific Recommendations 4. Timing. Treasury recommends that you now make decisions concerning replenishment of two smaller banks: a. The Asian Development Fund, on which we need to make our decision known at a Board meeting April 22. b. The African Development Fund, on which a decision is required before April 30. You may wish to make our decision known during your African trip.4 Nigeria is the Fund’s strongest supporter in Africa and you may have an opportunity to meet briefly with Kwame Fordwor, President of the African Development Bank, in Lagos. Treasury will carry forward Congressional consultation about each of these replenishments as soon as you have made your decisions. Treasury is confident that, by phoning and meeting members during the recess, it could complete the African Fund consultation in time to permit you to announce this decision while you are in Africa. The Asian Fund consultation will take longer, since a good deal more money is involved and there has been less preparatory Congressional consultation; if we begin immediately, Treasury indicates that we will be able to meet the April 22 deadline. OMB recommends in a memo at Tab B that you not make decisions on these two banks until Treasury can develop fuller alternative strategies for the IFIs as a whole, which you can review upon your return.5 4 Carter visited Nigeria and Liberia March 31–April 3. 5 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a March 24 memorandum from McIntyre to Carter which reads: “Given the other replenishment decisions pending, I have strong reservations about your making these two decisions in a piecemeal fashion. The entire
