Non-Proliferation
885
There are four general options available under the existing
circumstances:
Option 1: Permit reprocessing at Tokai on a provisional, experimental,
multinational basis involving IAEA participation to test safeguards. Oper-
ating on the assumption that one of the outcomes of the fuel cycle eval-
uation program might be the continued use of plutonium in some nu-
clear programs, this Option would permit exploration of various
safeguards, surveillance, containment and accounting procedures—
and multilateral plant concepts—with a view to ensuring that any
eventual reprocessing would be carried out only under the most strin-
gent and acceptable conditions. The operations would not involve a de-
termination that reprocessing plants can be safeguarded. They would
be of limited duration, entail a limited number of reprocessing cam-
paigns and would be cast explicitly in the context of test activities to
cover the contingency that a restricted number of reprocessing facilities
might emerge in the longer term. The derived plutonium would be em-
ployed in the Japanese advanced reactor programs.
This alternative would in all likelihood be acceptable to Japan, al-
though it would beg the question of whether and when Tokai could op-
erate commercially. However, it could establish a presumption that re-
processing is “safeguardable” and signal to other nations that national
reprocessing is acceptable. Those risks could be reduced by explicitly
linking the Tokai safeguards test activities to the possibility of the even-
tual emergence of a limited number of carefully sited multinational
reprocessing facilities. Furthermore, the notion that improved surveil-
lance, containment and accountability resolve the problem of pluto-
nium stockpiling and abrogation of safeguards agreements would be
explicitly rejected. This Option could be seen as inconsistent with the
U.S. policy of indefinite deferral of commercial reprocessing. On the
other hand, a major advantage of this option is that it reduces the pres-
sure we will otherwise face to supply plutonium for Japan’s experi-
mental breeder program.
Option 2: Explore through expert consultation the feasibility of altering
Tokai so that it could operate to test both reprocessing and partial copro-
cessing. This option would involve reorienting the Tokai facility to test
alternative methods of extracting value from spent fuel without sepa-
rating plutonium such as partial coprocessing. In addition it would
permit a limited amount of conventional reprocessing in order to de-
rive information regarding safeguards accounting and surveillance
techniques.
Criteria
would
be
established
to
assess
the
non-
proliferation value of the selected technology. While this solution
would permit some traditional experimental reprocessing, it would be
compatible with our international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation pro-
gram, give tangible international content to our evaluation program
