778
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
at the Soviet position with regard to hostages.3 But, the Secretary knew
very well that the Soviet leadership did condemn military methods of
liberating the hostages. It believed that such methods cannot help the
United States and can only damage U.S. prestige. That also applies to
the recent action undertaken by the United States. In his judgment,
had the mission proceeded, it would have resulted in the death of all
the hostages and probably in the death of many other people as well.
The Soviet Union did not need anything at all from Iran. Let Iran
develop its own country peacefully and live in peace with all its neigh-
bors and everyone else.
[Omitted here is material on topics unrelated to Iran.]
Iran
The Secretary said that he was aware of Soviet support and opposi-
tion to taking hostages last January. He appreciated that support in
spite of other difficult problems we have with each other. But he had
to tell Gromyko that two questions were being raised in the United
States in connection with Soviet actions with respect to Iran. First,
there was a feeling among some that the Tudeh Party of Iran was an
instrument of Soviet policy in that country, and that part of the problem
with the hostages was the fact that no one in Iran today had authority.
The Iranians have not finished structuring their government; perhaps
when they finish we might be able to do business with whoever
emerges. Secondly, the Secretary had been told of radio broadcasts
from the Soviet Union that were provocative in nature and fed anti-
American feelings in Iran. He would make one final point in conclusion.
The rescue effort we had undertaken was not regarded by us or
intended as4 a military effort against Iran. It was strictly a rescue
effort. It was his view that any government would be remiss in its
responsibilities if it did not consider and implement efforts to rescue
its citizens. It was unfortunate that our effort had failed, but no one
could say with certainty what would have happened had it succeeded.
In any case, the rescue effort had served a useful purpose in expiating
some of the frustrations felt by the American people.5 The hostages
have now been held for more than six months and it must be clearly
seen that the United States as a great power had displayed extraordi-
nary patience toward a much smaller power such as Iran. The course
of patience is what we must follow and hope that diplomatic contacts
3 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Since the sanctions vote SU has done everything
possible to condemn US & to support Iranian Terrorists.”
4 Carter underlined the words “regarded by us or intended as.”
5 Carter underlined the phrase “expiating some of the frustrations felt by the Ameri-
can people” and placed a question mark in the right margin.
