Chapter 5, May–June 1990  721
wants the freedom to deploy non-­nuclear cruise missiles on as many 
aircraft as possible, including aircraft accountable under START, and it 
wants to keep the Soviets from gaining access to sensitive cruise missile 
technology.
(S) 4. Unfortunately, our current treaty approach to implementing 
these desires will almost certainly prove unacceptable to the Soviets. 
Specifically:
a. The Soviets have accepted our position that conventional ALCMs 
on tactical aircraft are not part of START. But our position also pro-
vides that START-­accountable nuclear bombers can carry conventional 
ALCMs, even though such bombers only count as non-ALCM carri-
ers. Moreover, we say that these non-ALCM bombers (even if they are 
equipped with conventional ALCMs) cannot be inspected. I’m still not 
certain that the Soviets understand this aspect of our position; I am cer-
tain that when they do understand it, they’re going to come unglued.
b. We’ve agreed in principle to allow Soviet inspections of bomb-
ers. In practice, however, our inspection regime is quite limited. For 
example, bombers on alert can’t be inspected, and we won’t put a limit 
on how many can be on alert. The B–1 can only be inspected at B–1 
bases; the B–2 cannot be inspected at all (anywhere). Heavy bombers 
that otherwise would be inspectable can’t be inspected if they are at 
certain airbases. The reason is that some future weapons, which we do 
not want the Soviets to see, might not be able to be removed prior to 
an inspection at airbases at which a heavy bomber may be visiting. I 
am certain that the Soviets will have problems with this whole regime.
c. Similarly, the inspection rights we’re willing to accept for weap-
ons storage areas and for non-­nuclear ALCMs are quite limited. We 
only allow exhibitions of new types of non-­nuclear ALCMs if the new 
type will be located at certain airbases. We unilaterally pick the distin-
guishing features that “prove” that these are non-­nuclear ALCMs; the 
Soviets can’t object to the features we pick. If we claim that non-­nuclear 
ALCMs aren’t located at a particular base, no weapons storage areas 
at that base are inspectable. At bases where we do allow inspections, 
only those bunkers specifically declared to contain non-­nuclear ALCMs 
need be opened or entered. Finally, there is no right for the Soviets to 
verify that nuclear ALCMs are not where they are not supposed to be.
(S) 5. Maybe we can sell all this, but I’m skeptical. Thus, I think 
there are both short-­term and long-­term implications. In the short term, 
our goal should be to avoid casting a shadow on the summit. Thus I 
do not plan to expend much effort this week in trying to work our new 
ALCM language. I will use the excuse of its complexity and the other 
tings which need to be done before the summit to avoid getting into the 
details of the inspection regime. This simply postpones the problem, 
but it avoids any possible unraveling of the Moscow agreements before 
the summit.
