700
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and on our farms, an America that helps to feed the world, an America
secure in filling its own energy needs, an America of justice, tolerance,
and compassion. For this vision to come true, we must sacrifice, but this
national commitment will be an exciting enterprise that will unify our
people.
Together as one people, let us work to build our strength at home,
and together as one indivisible union, let us seek peace and security
throughout the world.
Together let us make of this time of challenge and danger a decade
of national resolve and of brave achievement.
Thank you very much.
139.
Editorial Note
On January 28, 1980, President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski took part in a briefing for editorial page
editors and writers on foreign policy issues. The briefing took place
from 3:33 to 4:09 p.m. in the Old Executive Office Building. Brzezinski
indicated in his opening remarks that he would emphasize three
points:
“The first is that the constructive agenda that the President set for
himself three years ago remains both still valid and binding in spite of
the events that have transpired in the last few weeks and which do call
for sustained response. When we assumed office we were deeply con-
scious of the fact that America was somehow becoming increasingly ir-
relevant to a world of very rapid change and there were many concerns
that were apparently indifferent to us and yet were motivating much of
mankind, and there were problems of a global type which needed ur-
gent addressing: nonproliferation, development, food, regional con-
flicts, human rights.
“I want to stress that even though we have been necessarily preoc-
cupied in recent weeks with matters of a more traditional type, a mili-
tary challenge with strategic consequences, these issues still remain of
importance to us and we will pursue them, for a very good reason.
Unless we do so, we are going to be living in a world which will be
more and more hostile to our values and more and more opposed to
our interests. We owe it to ourselves, we owe it to our children, to try to
shape a more decent world. I know it sounds maudlin and it sounds
trite, but it is a central fact, that if this country is to preserve its
well-being and its way of life, we have to shape a more decent world, a
