Human Rights 567 powerful individual somewhere in the process. In the most difficult cases, the problems between competing interests were solved by balancing every negative statement with a positive statement, resulting, particularly in the East Asian reports (Korea, Philippines and Indonesia) in extraordinary length. In the Korean case for example, the report goes into ridiculous detail about Korean educational, welfare and health programs (down to numbers of people covered), blowing the ROK’s horn, in order to balance everything HA wanted in. Some of the Latin American reports are also unbalanced—reflecting greater personal interest than exists say for African countries. Nevertheless, the process is clearly maturing, and we can be satisfied that a balanced serious effort was made to produce honest reports without trodding on sensitive toes in other capitals. [Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.] 181. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, January 31, 1979 COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Thirty-Fifth (1979) Session Scope Paper Pursuant to Article 68 of the United Nations Charter, the Commission on Human Rights was established in 1946 “for the promotion of human rights.” Our overall purpose at the 35th session will be to lend all appropriate support to the achievement of this objective. Our participation will be guided by two basic assumptions: (a) the human rights to be promoted are those possessed by all the peoples of the world, not those of a select few, and (b) our aim will be truly effective action through the United Nations, so that the situation of the particular peoples concerned will be improved. We want to encourage the devel- 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, PORG 1979 35th UNHCR. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Hewitt. A copy of telegram 13295 to Geneva, January 18, which transmitted the summary of objectives the U.S. delegation to the UN Commission on Human Rights session planned to pursue, is ibid. According to Tuchman Mathews and Denend’s February 9 evening report, the NSC Staff had requested that the Department prepare the scope paper. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issue— Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37: Evening Reports, 1–3/79)
