Afghanistan 733 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State1 Islamabad, May 21, 1980, 1150Z 4900. For Secretary Muskie from Amb Hummel. Subject: (S) The Pakistan Dimension in the U.S. Response to Soviet Aggression in Afghanistan. 1. (S) Entire text. 2. I address you directly, Mr. Secretary, to suggest that we need to have a whole new look at our policies and actions in Pakistan, especially as they relate to the Afghan situation. As things now stand, we state publicly, and privately to our friends, that strengthening Pakistan is a central element in our response to the Soviet invasion next door. But we are doing almost nothing to carry out that declared policy. 3. Unless we narrow this gap between our public stance and the concrete actions we intend to take, it will shortly become so conspicuous that I fear sharply adverse consequences for our national objectives and prestige. 4. The Pakistanis have asked us explicitly for economic assistance.2 However, we will shortly have to tell the Paks and others (at an aid consortium meeting June 12) (A) that we have no economic help to offer in the current fiscal year, (B) that we plan for none at all in fiscal ’81 and (C) that even in fiscal ’82 it is doubtful that we will give substantial economic help. The Agency for International Development (AID) has strongly resisted putting any funds at all into its budget request for fiscal ’82. 5. The Paks have asked us to give top priority in our economic assistance to re-scheduling their debt repayments to us, which amount to over $130 million per year. Given present USG attitudes in Washington, it is very doubtful that we will make any meaningful move toward debt rescheduling. Thus our friends, and the Pakistanis, will draw their own adverse conclusions about our real intentions despite what we say our policies are. 6. I am very much aware that we have genuine problems in getting resources with which to carry out our foreign, and indeed our domestic, policies, and that Pakistan is by no means the only country where our objectives are not supported by adequate resources. There are no easy 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870097–0461. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. 2 Documentation on Pakistani requests for economic assistance is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
