Chapter 2, January–June 1989  133
After the non-­withdrawal period. Our current position (Option 1) 
builds on the Washington Summit Joint Statement, and would explic-
itly give the sides the right to deploy defenses after a non-­withdrawal 
period, upon giving six months notice. The rationale behind this posi-
tion is that we are trading our non-­withdrawal pledge for freedom to 
deploy defenses after the non-­withdrawal period. This quid pro quo 
was worked out between President Reagan and General Secretary 
Gorbachev at the Washington Summit. This option is supported by 
State, OSD, Energy, ACDA, and the Defense & Space Negotiator.
Option 2 is to reevaluate our Defense & Space objectives, at the 
Cabinet level, and not to resume negotiations until we have done so. 
This option is favored by the JCS. It reflects their worry that the current 
U.S. position could imply to the Soviets that the U.S. will go beyond 
the ABM Treaty on a certain date, when in fact the U.S. may not then be 
prepared to deploy ABM defenses for political, technical, or budgetary 
reasons. We had hoped to [omission in the original]. Unfortunately, the 
JCS has been reluctant to suggest specific alternatives to the present 
position, but Options 3 and 4 may provide a framework for such a dis-
cussion, should the Chiefs or others want to pursue the issue.
Option 3 would provide for a non-­withdrawal period of x years, 
followed by a non-­deployment period of y years. This option could be 
implemented in conjunction with options for differentiated periods of 
testing rights, e.g. testing under the restrictive interpretation during the 
first period and removing all restrictions on testing during the second 
period. During the second period, the sides would (as under the current 
U.S. position) conduct intensive discussions on a cooperative transition 
to defenses. At the end of the period both sides would be free to deploy 
defenses, unless agreed otherwise. This option could address the JCS 
concerns by lengthening the period of time after the expiration of the 
non-­withdrawal period before a side could deploy defenses. At present, 
no agency favors this option, but most believe it merits further study.
Option 4 would drop the right to deploy in favor of unlimited test-
ing rights during the non-­withdrawal period as the quid pro quo for 
U.S. acceptance of a non-­withdrawal period. This option would secure 
greater rights for ABM testing during a non-­withdrawal period. After 
the period, the sides would simply return to the ABM Treaty, and six 
months notice would be required to withdraw from the Treaty. This 
option could address the JCS concerns because we would simply return 
to status quo at the end of the non-­withdrawal period. Others would 
oppose it because it would maintain political barriers to U.S. deploy-
ment of defenses that the Soviets do not face. No agency now supports this 
option, but some believe it merits further study.
