6
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
authorities on one hand—headed by Khomeini and his cohorts in Qom
acting through the religious komitehs and Revolutionary Guards—and
the secular, more moderate forces of Bazargan, Yazdi et al. on the other.
We have had a growing body of evidence for several months now that
Bazargan and co. were increasingly aware of their inability to influence
Khomeini. Consequently, they seem to have decided to initiate a close
working relationship with us on the intelligence side. My guess is that
they believe in the omnipotence of the CIA and want to get the Agency
on their side in the event of a clear break with Khomeini. They know
that their jobs depend almost entirely on Khomeini and they are looking
for alliances and clandestine support from us as a safety net in case
they are fired.
This explains their willingness to meet with us and talk reasonably
about our bilateral problems, but this approach (as most recently evi-
denced by the criticism they have suffered for meeting with you)2
makes them even more suspect by Khomeini. A man who spent much
of the summer in Qom (Bill Miller’s friend Haeri) says that Khomeini
trusts no one but his son. He is willing to make use of people like
Bazargan, Yazdi, Chamran, etc., but he would have no compunction
about dropping them in an instant if it suited his purposes.
The present circumstances may be the crunch point in this rivalry.
Yazdi has accepted responsibility for trying to get the hostages released.
He has interceded with Qom on our behalf and he has permitted Bruce
Laingen to stay at the Foreign Ministry. For most of yesterday, Laingen
was physically in Yazdi’s office, using Yazdi’s telephone on a perma-
nent basis to pass messages back and forth to Washington. At the same
time, Yazdi and Bazargan are being attacked in the press for having
met with you without the Ayatollah’s permission, and the rhetoric from
religious luminaries such as Beheshti has been drawing an ominous
distinction between the “language of the revolution” (i.e. the students)
and “the language of diplomacy.” Hence Yazdi is in an impossible
situation, and this could be issue which costs him his job.
The Shah’s presence here is extremely helpful to Khomeini. Just
as in August, when he rallied the population against the Kurds to
revive his sagging fortunes, this provides a chance for him to unite the
population against the one symbol they all hate. It takes them back to
the “good old days” of last year when they all agreed on something.
As long as the Shah is here—or perhaps as long as the Shah lives—
this will be an issue which Khomeini will exploit.
2 Reference is to Brzezinski’s meeting with Bazargan and Yazdi in Algiers, Novem-
ber 1. The memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. X, Iran: Revolution, January 1977–November 1979.
