Bulgaria not unconcerned about Basket III, and what I had said under instructions would be given full consideration. 10. Then he said something of a more general nature. He reminded me that in recently expressing thanks (at Ruse) for hospitality shown to his daughter, Zhivkov had talked to me not as President but “as a father”. If existing “discriminations” could be removed (MFN), he foresaw a much higher level of interchanges of all sorts, not only in business; and he felt that contacts during the last three years had served to remove many misunderstandings and demonstrated that good things can come from high Bulgarian and American officials meeting and talking together. 11. I interpret this last remark to mean that the Bulgarians, while not wishing to be too explicit for fear of a rebuff, are looking for some sort of high-level contact between Zhivkov and the President or between Secretary Vance and Zhivkov. Zhivkov has several times referred favorably to his “meetings with President Ford” at Helsinki11 (where there was only the most perfunctory contact), and there is no question in my mind that he and Mladenov are eager for the kind of legitimation that such a real meeting would involve. At the same time, they also have in mind the occasions, which still rankle, when President Ford and his Secretary of State visited Belgrade and Bucharest, practically overflying Bulgaria, without stopping here.12 12. This is my reading of the Bulgarian attitude. As for our own interest, there are two aspects: one is what we might expect to get out of a high-level visit here. Certainly we cannot expect any substantial change in Bulgaria’s overall orientation. The other aspect is more complicated. It is not that the Bulgarians have anything urgent to talk with us about at a high level, but they know that their country is the only one in Europe with which we maintain diplomatic relations that has not been visited by an American President, Vice President or Secretary of State. So the second aspect involves, in their view, the removal of what they see as a “discrimination”. 13. I think it would be inappropriate for me to make a recommendation on this matter so shortly before my departure from Sofia. One thing, however, I can recommend. Foreign Minister Mladenov will be at the UNGA starting September 25. I believe it would be helpful in 11 Zhivkov met with President Ford during the signing ceremonies for the Helsinki
