Yugoslavia We need also to reflect on probable Yugoslav motives and possible Soviet reactions. The relevant NSC staffers (Hoskinson, Hunter, Thomson) are inclined to believe that these exchanges might be constructed in a way that would minimize exposure of sources and methods, while offering the prospect of significant political benefits. Ambassador Eagleburger says his only concern is “with how we proceed, not whether we should do so”, but he urges great caution and careful political supervision. (His views are in a cable at Tab A.)4 Because this issue involved balancing political, military, and intelligence interests, it needs eventually to be addressed in an interagency forum that can review all aspects, not just the intelligence issues. Because bureaucratically, the action at the moment is with the Deputy Undersecretary for Policy (Intelligence), normal NSC–ISA channels are not adequate for addressing the problem. Therefore, I recommend that you raise this issue directly with Harold Brown, preferably at a VBB luncheon. You could tell Brown that: —in principle, you endorse his offer to Ljubicic. —you understand there may be some intelligence reservations about the nature of the proposed exchanges. —we need to factor in the political implications before making a judgment about how to proceed. —once DOD has had a chance to prepare the groundwork, it might be useful to have interagency consideration of how to implement the offer. You could ask Brown to have Resor convene—or offer to have the NSC convene—a small interagency working group with representatives from State, CIA, NSC, and the relevant offices in DOD. Working from the DOD paper, this group would draw up guidelines for the exchanges that would minimize exposure of sources and methods, while maximizing the political and intelligence returns to the U.S. (Hoskinson is a bit skeptical about the need for an interagency group and feels you may simply wish to review the eventual DOD decision yourself.) You might also want to touch base with Admiral Turner.5
