Yugoslavia
855
We need also to reflect on probable Yugoslav motives and possible
Soviet reactions.
The relevant NSC staffers (Hoskinson, Hunter, Thomson) are
inclined to believe that these exchanges might be constructed in a way
that would minimize exposure of sources and methods, while offering
the prospect of significant political benefits. Ambassador Eagleburger
says his only concern is “with how we proceed, not whether we should
do so”, but he urges great caution and careful political supervision.
(His views are in a cable at Tab A.)4
Because this issue involved balancing political, military, and intelli-
gence interests, it needs eventually to be addressed in an interagency
forum that can review all aspects, not just the intelligence issues.
Because bureaucratically, the action at the moment is with the Deputy
Undersecretary for Policy (Intelligence), normal NSC–ISA channels are
not adequate for addressing the problem.
Therefore, I recommend that you raise this issue directly with
Harold Brown, preferably at a VBB luncheon.
You could tell Brown that:
—in principle, you endorse his offer to Ljubicic.
—you understand there may be some intelligence reservations
about the nature of the proposed exchanges.
—we need to factor in the political implications before making a
judgment about how to proceed.
—once DOD has had a chance to prepare the groundwork, it might
be useful to have interagency consideration of how to implement the
offer.
You could ask Brown to have Resor convene—or offer to have the
NSC convene—a small interagency working group with representa-
tives from State, CIA, NSC, and the relevant offices in DOD. Working
from the DOD paper, this group would draw up guidelines for the
exchanges that would minimize exposure of sources and methods,
while maximizing the political and intelligence returns to the U.S.
(Hoskinson is a bit skeptical about the need for an interagency group
and feels you may simply wish to review the eventual DOD decision
yourself.) You might also want to touch base with Admiral Turner.5
4 In telegram 7623 from Belgrade, October 17, Eagleburger expressed concerns
“about what the Yugoslavs really intend” and nervousness about moving too far too
fast as the military relationship was still in its infancy. “If the Yugoslavs really want
formally to exchange (emphasis on exchange) intelligence information on the Soviets,”
he argued, “then they are even more uncertain of their Eastern Big Brother than I had
thought.” Although he agreed that the Departments of State and Defense should pursue
Ljubicic’s offer, Eagleburger urged that the approach “be supervised at the political level
in State and DOD (and, it goes without saying, this Embassy).” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57,
Yugoslavia: 4–12/78)
5 Aaron wrote on the bottom of the page “ZB—You should ask Resor to contact
me on this & I can work it out with our staff & State with or without a mtg.”
