958 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement that, in his opinion, the Latin Americans had a tremendous respect for U.S. Army officers and that this was an important aspect. Primacy of the Ambassador The Secretary said another problem which he would like to address himself to was that of the difficult position inherent in the presence of three top-­level American officials in the area, the Ambassador, the Governor and the General commanding the Unified Command. He said he felt it important to affirm the primacy of the U.S. Ambassador in Canal Zone matters relating to the government and the people of Panama. Secretary Brucker observed that the military had no disposition to look at things in Panama other than eye to eye with the Ambassador. The closer the relations the better, and this has been the traditional situation there. The Secretary said this must be the understanding between the two Departments and Secretary Brucker replied that “we will work with you on this”. New Canal The Secretary then turned to the problem of the new Canal and said it was the Department’s feeling that a governmental decision on this should be made as soon as possible. He said he understood that the Panama Canal Company had just completed a study recommending the construction of a sea level canal. Mr. Roderick interjected that the Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee of the House was publishing a report on this subject done by a group of highly respected engineers and that the recommendation of this report would be the construction of a third set of locks to the present canal. He understood that the report recommended this because of the diplomatic problem of negotiating a different route for a possible sea level canal. He said he had heard that the Cabinet was to consider the Panama Canal Company report on April 29 and that perhaps this consideration should be undertaken beforehand, i.e., before the Merchant Marine and Fisheries report was made public. Gorgas Hospital Project Secretary Brucker asked how the Gorgas Hospital project was progressing. The Secretary said he understood ICA was actively and favorably studying it. He hoped that the necessary funds could be found. Flag The Secretary then mentioned the flag problem and observed that the Department felt, that given the present attitude of Congress, nothing formal could be done in this regard at this time. He hoped, however, that the Governor would continue, on suitable occasions, his ceremonial crossed flag project which was so successful last month. Secretary Brucker agreed.
