commerce of the United States in all countries. The treaties referred to
include also provisions relating to rights of nationals of each party in the
other country, to protection of property and to rights and immunities of
consuls.
The first treaty to become operative expressing the present policy of this
Government was the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Eights
with Germany, signed December 8, 1923,6 ratifications of which were
exchanged October 14, 1925. Similar treaties have been signed by the
United States with Hungary,7 Esthonia8 and Salvador,9 of which the one
with Esthonia has been brought into force by exchange of ratifications.
Treaties containing the unconditional most-favored-nation clause were
signed with Turkey on August 6, 1923,10 and with Panama on July 28,
1926.11 Several others are in process of negotiation. Modi vivendi, similar
to the exchange of notes with Brazil, likewise based upon the principal of
unconditional 
most-favored-nation 
treatment, 
are 
in 
force 
with
Czechoslovakia,12 
Dominican 
Republic,13 
Finland,14 
Greece,15
Guatemala,16 Latvia,17 Lithuania,18 Nicaragua,19 Poland (including
Danzig),20 Rumania21 and Turkey.22 A similar agreement entered into with
Haiti on July 8, 1926,23 becomes by its terms operative October 1, 1926.
Two copies of the treaty of December 8, 1923, with Germany are enclosed.
You are requested, unless you perceive objection, to inquire whether it
would be agreeable to the Government of Brazil to proceed to the
negotiation of a similar treaty with the United States. A special draft will, of
course, be prepared for presentation to Brazil if this proposal is acceptable
to the Brazilian Government. It is probable that certain departures from the
text of the German treaty should be made either in the special text to be
submitted to the Government of Brazil or, on behalf of either party, during
the course of negotiations.
It may be useful for you to bear in mind that in adopting the unconditional
in place of the conditional most-favored-nation clause the United States has
brought its commercial policy into accord with that prevailing among
commercial countries. It would be gratifying if, among its early treaties as
well as modi vivendi embodying this principle, the United States could
