414 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 124. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, March 6, 1978 SUBJECT Human Rights Policies and the Legislation for the International Development Banks I want to share with you my increasing concern about our current human rights policies in the foreign assistance field. Within a week, the Congress will begin to question the Administration on how we are implementing the human rights provisions of Public Law 95–118—on which you and I have a joint responsibility to report within the next six months. There is increasing dissatisfaction by some members of Congress that our human rights strategy is being applied inconsistently and without clear criteria. As an example, Congressman Charles Wilson of Texas, who until now has been one of our strongest supporters on the Appropriations Committee, plans to seek widespread support for a drastic cut in our requested appropriations for AID and the international development banks because of his dissatisfaction with the inconsistent application of our human rights policy. Such a result would, of course, have serious implications for U.S. foreign policy. I am afraid that a number of other members of Congress, including some of our best friends in past years, have similar feelings. At the same time, our friends abroad, even though they share many of our human rights objectives, remain concerned about the way in which we seek to promote human rights in the international financial institutions and about the consistency of our approach. Several European governments cautioned our recent State/Treasury Consultations team that human rights sanctions in the IFIs should be applied carefully and consistently, and preferably limited to a small number of countries so as to minimize confrontation and limit the risk that others may seek to introduce narrow political considerations which might jeopardize the integrity of the multilateral institutions. They indicated 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 16, Human Rights—IFIs. No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates that it was received in S on March 6. Attached as Tab 1 to a March 10 memorandum from Benson to Vance and Christopher, in which Benson had endorsed Blumenthal’s suggestions concerning the human rights strategy papers. A March 20 draft response from Christopher to Blumenthal is ibid. In a note to Christopher, attached to the draft response, Oxman suggested that it “could serve as the talking points for a meeting with him.”
