1220
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
spect to the program of action is to reach consensus agreement on a
document that will be realistic, supportive of our arms control policies,
and at a minimum, will not disrupt a reasonable negotiating agenda for
the next three to five years. US Del may agree to inclusion in program’s
various sections, in addition to more immediate tasks, reference to
longer term goals as long as they are consistent with US policy. US Del
may agree to language in the draft program of action on an ad refer-
endum basis but should submit all language to Washington for USG
approval.
6. Disarmament Machinery.
One section of the final document to be adopted by the Special Ses-
sion will be recommendations for changes to the international ma-
chinery dealing with arms control issues. At present, this machinery
consists of the following elements:
—The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD),
—The UNGA First Committee,
—The UN Center for Disarmament, and
—The UN Disarmament Commission (dormant since 1965).
At the PrepCom meetings, several proposals have been made for
modifying disarmament machinery:
A. Restructure the CCD to accomplish the following objectives:
(1) Abolish the US–USSR co-chairmanship, removing the primary
symbol of super-power condominium in the CCD, and replace with an-
other system to be agreed;
(2) Enlarge the membership;
(3) Provide for increased participation in the CCD by non-member
states;
(4) Strengthen the relationship of the CCD to the UN.
B. Consider only disarmament and security issues in the UNGA
First Committee, and pass other First Committee items (e.g., outer
space) to the Special Political Committee.
C. Reconvene the UN Disarmament Commission to follow-up on
SSOD and UNGA decisions and recommendations.
There have also been other, primarily cosmetic, proposals for
changes in the disarmament machinery, including enhancing the role
of the UNSYG and the UN Center for Disarmament; establishment of
an international institute for research on disarmament; and creation of
an international verification agency. Separate guidance will follow on
French and Dutch proposals for the creation of an international satellite
observation/verification agency.
In addition to these specific proposals, some fundamental changes
have been suggested by the French, including the dissolution of the
CCD and its replacement by a new body directly subordinated to the
