National Security Policy 903 use. He commented that he was told a year ago that SAC would not take Navy targeting into account. If we are going to fight a nuclear war, it was clear in his mind that we would attack cities and governmental concentrations. Invariably, the reasoning leads us back to perfecting the deterrent. Mr. Douglas said this emphasizes the importance of an invulnerable missile. The President commented that the capabilities of missiles for destruction are beyond human comprehension. It is very difficult to plan, because our plans are developed out of past experi­ ence. Dr. York commented that the total deliverable destructive power is the significant thing and the President agreed. The President asked whether the Polaris program is progressing as rapidly as it should be to justify the preparations we are making. Are its technical problems solved? Dr. York said that perhaps the first or second submarine will not be operational on the exact date planned. However, by the time we reach the eighth or tenth we will be on sched­ ule. The firing methods are sound, and its range is now being worked up to 1200 miles, employing a large nuclear weapon. The President next referred to the National Guard and the Reserves and his discussion with General Lemnitzer. The latter had made two points—first that he had finally sold the States and the Guard on a force structure based on a strength of 700,000; he had sold them on the idea that their mission includes local defense and rehabilitation. The Guard units are better than ever before. It will be difficult to stick to the Administration figure of 630,000, but this will be done. General Lemnitzer was fearful that the Administration would be defeated on this and at the same time incur the enmity of Congress and the Guard. Governor Brucker reviewed the decrease in Guard numbers both as to personnel and as to units. Five years ago personnel was 1,100,000. It is now 700,000. Units were cut from 11,000 to 8,800. He said various members of Congress had insisted that they were going to put a floor under the strength of the Guard. The President said the big question is how much to fight for what is thought to be right, or how much to bow to expediency. He realized he would probably be defeated on this point and that Congress would take things out of the program that he wanted and put things in that he did not want. However, he felt that we should stick to what he thought was right. Governor Brucker said he wanted to push as rapidly as possible the preparations for the Kwajalein tests for the anti-­ICBM. Secretary Gates said it would be practical to withdraw seven squadrons of aircraft from NATO (really four, since three are troop carriers not fully committed). The President said there was not time left to put this reduction into the present budget. The State Department must have time to prepare the
