1160
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
neous complications into negotiations such as MBFR and SALT. While
these potential disadvantages have not disappeared, the situation
changed tactically with the decision of the Non-Aligned Heads of State
at Colombo to bring about an SSOD. The large bloc of votes which the
Non-Aligned commands at the UN made an SSOD unstoppable. Faced
with this situation, we concluded that US interests would best be
served tactically by adopting a positive posture towards the SSOD. At a
minimum this would allow us, in cooperation with allies and others
who may share our views on specific issues, more effectively to employ
tactics—in the Preparatory Committee and subsequently in the SSOD,
designed to avoid confrontation and allow us to influence the course of
procedural and substantive preparations to our advantage. Moreover,
a positive approach would allow us, together with our allies, to pursue
and shape specific initiatives which might develop that appeared likely
to further our arms control or other objectives.
9. Our Delegation to the 31st UNGA was therefore instructed to
join in the consensus approval of a resolution calling for the convening
of an SSOD and to explain that the US plans to participate construc-
tively in the careful preparation which will be needed to bring about a
successful SSOD.5
10. General instructions: A. Action addressees should plan on
making informal soundings based on the guidance provided in para 12
sufficiently before Feb. 14 to allow reporting to the Department by that
date. We are interested in your assessment of how the host government
views on those issues likely to arise during the PrepCons. Our most im-
mediate concern involves the March 7–11 PrepCon which will deal
with organizational matters. Reporting should include the names of
heads of Delegations likely to be attending PrepCon. Except where
deemed necessary by posts, or when instructed otherwise, precedence
of reporting need not exceed priority level. Where report is of consider-
able length, post may want to pouch document to Department with
summary of report sent by cable.
5 Telegram 292475 to USUN, December 1, 1976, included the authorization to join
the consensus adoption on a vote for a SSOD resolution. The Department of State also in-
structed the UN Delegation to make a statement that noted that “unrealistic public expec-
tations can be stimulated by the promises often associated with large conferences and are
just as frequently disappointed. Public understanding and public support of arms control
measures are too important to risk this.” The U.S. therefore “approaches the proposal for
a Special Session on Disarmament with both caution and hope. We are cautious because
of the size of the conference and the fact that its objectives remain vague and unspecified.
We are hopeful, however, because of the strong interest on the part of many UN members
for such a conference and the seriousness of purpose which accompany the sentiments
expressed regarding the necessity of its success.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D760444–0885)
