692  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
150.	 Memorandum From Gray to Quarles1
Washington, March 12, 1959
SUBJECT
Defense Presentations to the President
REFERENCE
Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, subject as above from the Chairman, JCS 
dated 21 February 1959 (Attached)
1. In my conversation with you and General Twining yesterday 
I failed to remind you of the suggestion that I made in my memoran­
dum for the Secretary of Defense dated February 19, 1959, that there be 
prepared a concise discussion paper on each study area which could be 
circulated in advance on an “Eyes Only” basis. I expressed the hope that 
the major issues could be identified and cast in a form appropriate for 
discussion and consideration by the President. I also suggested the kinds 
of policy questions which might be covered in such a discussion paper.
I raise this in connection with the first study area to be presented 
which we agreed would be “Control of the Seas with Particular Reference 
to Antisubmarine Warfare.” I am aware that we are planning to present 
the Comparative Evaluations Group study but I would also hope that 
there might be related to this presentation the pertinent results of the 
report by the Panel on Antisubmarine Warfare of the President's Science 
Advisory Committee dated December 1, 1958. Moreover, it seems to 
me that in preparation for such meetings we should have a discussion 
paper with some advance circulation. Therefore, the schedule of the 
meetings might well depend on the circulation of such a paper. I should 
appreciate a word from you on this matter.
In this connection I am prompted to observe that you may wish to 
include in the overall presentation to the President some of the prob­
lems which should be discussed in the broader subject of “Control of 
the Seas.”
2. We agreed that the presentation on “Tactical Forces and 
Requirements for Tactical Weapons Systems,” could be made about the 
middle of April. Again, I feel that a discussion paper could be useful. I 
think we also agreed that this presentation might perhaps serve only to 
open issues for later study.
1 Source: Question of defense presentations to the President on military missions 
and weapon systems. Top Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, 
Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology.
