650
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Although the issues chosen for study are each distinctive in impor-
tant ways, they do have some notable common characteristics:
—While none is a new concern in the strictest sense, all have taken
on increased prominence for the US over the past decade—some dra-
matically so, as in the case of dependence on imported oil.
—While each is global in that it affects US relations with nearly all
countries, the most immediate policy focus as a rule is US relations
with nonindustrial countries (the LDCs).
—The issues all have vital economic or technological aspects.
—They represent direct or indirect challenges to the influence and
freedom of action and potentially to the wealth and power of the indus-
trial democracies and at times of the Communist powers as well.
—Since the manner in which the major countries manage these
issues will affect global and regional power relationships, they also rep-
resent opportunities to optimize relative influence and freedom of ac-
tion—not least for the US vis-a`-vis traditional adversaries and allies.
A systematic explanation of whether and how these key global
issues are either causes or symptoms of a “new era” in international re-
lations would be well beyond the scope of this brief introduction. The
common characteristics listed above, however, underscore the impor-
tance of several relatively recent and closely related developments af-
fecting world politics, which, in turn, help to explain the prominence of
the issues selected for study.
First, the industrial democracies face increased domestic obstacles to
controlling developments much beyond their peripheries, especially
where the use of military power overseas or large amounts of economic
assistance would be required. This abatement of domestic support for
an assertive foreign policy reflects (1) a decline in the perception of im-
mediate security threats associated with the height of the Cold War,
(2) disenchantment with the costs and risks of extensive overseas in-
volvement, and (3) constraints caused by slower rates of domestic eco-
nomic growth amidst intensifying demands for social and economic
benefits.
Second, these domestic inhibitions on assertive foreign policies, to-
gether with the growing wealth and regional influence of certain LDCs
(e.g., Iran, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, Venezuela) and the rise in assertiveness
concerning their “rights” on the part of LDCs generally, have contrib-
uted to a diffusion of power in international relations. Even as the wealth
and military power of the industrial nations increase on an absolute
scale, their ability either to control or to ignore global problems is con-
strained. This is manifested most clearly in the increased frequency and
effectiveness with which the nonindustrial countries, individually and
collectively, challenge the general authority and specific policies of the
