170 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Appendix A Washington, undated VIEW OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S. ARMY: CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS: AND THE COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS on BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY (NSC 5810) (C) 1. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; Chief of Naval Operations; and the Commandant of the Marine Corps have reviewed the draft statement of policy (NSC 5810) which was prepared by the National Security Council Planning Board for consideration by the National Security Council at its meeting on Thursday, 1 May 1958. 2. From a military point of view, the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; Chief of Naval Operations; and the Commandant of the Marine Corps consider that certain changes are necessary in order to provide a Basic National Security Policy which is responsive to the present world situa­ tion. Over the past several years, a trend in world affairs has developed which has increased Sino-Soviet power and influence, both actually and relatively. The United States, as the leader of the Free World and the heart of its collective security system, has reached a point where we must take action to halt and reverse this trend or resign ourselves to its indefinite continuation. 3. Our national military strategy must not only be designed to cope with the condition of nuclear parity in an era of mutual deterrence to general war, but it must be a strategy which attracts rather than repels the rest of the Free World if we are to maintain an international envi­ ronment in which the United States can sustain its fundamental values and institutions. 4. Basic National Security Policy must provide the guidance for strong Free World leadership. Four issues are fundamental: a. Initiative and an Active Policy. The United States must act to seize the initiative, thus shifting the onus of counteraction to the Communist leaders. Initiative is required in all fields but particularly in the politi­ cal and economic, where it must be supported by appropriate military measures. The adroit employment, particularly movement, of U.S. or allied forces as a cold war operation might spell the difference between success or failure of a bold political move. The United States must exert active pressures against the Sino-Soviet Bloc wherever and whenever possible in order to disrupt Communist designs for world domination. Pressures should specifically include efforts to splinter and reduce the existing Communist structure. b. Mutual Deterrence. Relative nuclear parity has already made the policy of massive nuclear retaliation unacceptable as anything but a deterrent to total nuclear warfare. Both the United States and the USSR will be increasingly deterred from implementing such a policy except
