150
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
57.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs (Newsom) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 24, 1979
SUBJECT
Condition of the Shah
Joseph Reed called again this morning to ask whether I had any
advice for him to give to the Shah.
Reed said he had spent two hours with the Shah last night. He
found him sad and dejected and looking worse than the medical reports
suggested that he was.
He found him anxious to do whatever is necessary to help resolve
the present impasse. He is prepared to move right away if that would
be helpful and could, with difficulty, move before Tuesday. He can
only walk short distances and any such move would have to be accom-
plished by the use of wheelchairs and helicopters.
If the Tuesday operation is successful, the logistics could be in place
for the Shah to return to Mexico on Friday.2 As before, the Rockefeller
organization would arrange for the transportation and would turn to
us for necessary liaison with the Mexican officials on formality.
Reed said the Shah is aware of how complicated his departure will
be under the best of circumstances. He would like to do so with the
utmost of secrecy and the least fanfare possible although he realizes
this would be difficult.
The Shah expressed to Reed several concerns:
—over the security of his children and the possibility of their being
kidnapped here in the United States;
—over the security of the Shabbanu, although he considers her in
less danger than his two sons;
—facing up to the realization of the possibility of death from his
cancer, concern over whether he would be allowed back into the United
States for further treatment if that were necessary;
—whether if he returns to Mexico the Shabbanu and his children
will be permitted to go back and forth between the two countries.
I told Joe that, as far as the movement of the Shabbanu and the
children were concerned, we had already established that that was
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Misc: on Shah. Secret.
2 November 27 and 30 respectively.
