626
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
From the Israeli point of view, there has been no progress this
week; if anything, the other way. At Blair House2 there were fewer dis-
agreements. The latest U.S. draft on article 6–2 involves adoption of the
Egyptian position, and thus the Egyptian proposal has become the U.S.
proposal.
I would like the Prime Minister to come and reach agreement, but
in my report I will have to say that there was no progress from the Is-
raeli point of view. The gap is now wider than at Blair House.
Vance: The Blair House formulas were ad referendum. What is
really left is article 6.
(Discussion of article 6—of the difficulties of finding good
language.)
Dayan: Other elements include full withdrawal and full normaliza-
tion. Now we are told that ambassadors would be linked to the au-
tonomy issue.
The President: Your version of history is not compatible with mine.
The ambassador issue arose subsequent to the Camp David agreement.
Besides you can have a situation where one is obligated by treaty to
have an ambassador. As a final step there should be a commitment to
exchange ambassadors, but even then each side can withdraw the
ambassador.
In any case we are operating under narrow time limits, but if a
treaty is signed other Arab countries will have to accept it. The Gaza ne-
gotiations could be separated to some extent and that might be
constructive.
Finally, I hope Prime Minister Begin will come over here. We must
avoid a breakdown. Also, we need to have bilateral talks. Our budget is
in the final stages. We therefore need to discuss these matters with
someone who has authority.
The importance of all this is very high to the United States and to
the world at large. The United States will accept whatever the two of
you can accept; there is no U.S. position as such.
(To Dayan) Have you agreed on the statement3 that I can now read
to the press?
Dayan: Yes.
2 See Documents 84, 86–87, 90, and 94.
3 The prepared statement, summarizing the February 21–25 Camp David talks and
announcing the possibility of moving the negotiations to the “head-of-government
level,” involving Begin and Khalil, by the end of the week, was read by Carter on the
South Lawn of the White House on February 25. The full text of the statement is in the
Department of State Bulletin, April 1979, pp. 39–40.
