World Hunger and Food Policy 813 tribute. I pointed out that hunger was not my area of involvement or particular expertise; that I was therefore somewhat surprised at the suggestion that I become Chairman of the Commission; that I fully recognized the importance of the subject and would do it if he really wanted me to. On the other hand I pointed out that there might be other things where I could be more helpful to him and have something unique to contribute. The President then told me that he fully understood why I was raising the questions and said he would do the same thing if he were in my shoes. He said that he believed this was a very important program of great significance to him and that he had been trying for fourteen months to get the Commission organized and launched. He talked about the difficulty of working with the bureaucracy and said that the effort had really been a “bitch” in getting it off the ground. He said he believed he needed a strong well-known Chairman to launch the Commission and one who would be tough enough to do what had to be done with the various agencies to bring them together and to agree upon a common course of action. He said, “You would be shocked if I told you the number of hours I have personally devoted to this thing.” He also said that he wanted issues of food and health to be major concerns of his Administration and that he had, for example, asked Joe Califano, Secretary of HEW, to go to Rome for a WHO meeting this week—the first time a Cabinet officer had attended such a session.4 The President then said that there would be other things where he would want to turn to me and that he hoped I would take on the Chairmanship in order to get the project launched. He suggested that I have a good Deputy Chairman who might be able to move in and take over if the President should ask me to undertake another mission later on— even as early as the latter part of this year.5 He pointed out that the entertainers were particularly interested in lending a hand and had made this their project—naming Eddie Albert, 4 See Document 313. 5 Carter, in an October 30, 1979, diary entry, noted that he had “discussed the possibility of Strauss leaving the Mideast and going to the campaign, and that Sol Linowitz would take Strauss’s place as the negotiator.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 366) On November 6, 1979, Carter appointed Linowitz the Personal Representative of the President for the Middle East, replacing Strauss, who resigned his position in order to chair Carter’s re-election campaign. See Marjorie Hunter, “Strauss Reported Quitting His Post As Envoy to Head Carter’s ’80 Bid,” The New York Times, November 6, 1979, p. B–8 and Richard M. Harley, “Linowitz stresses US commitment to end world hunger,” The Christian Science Monitor, December 20, 1979, p. 4.
