12
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
By putting our interest in Portugal’s internal affairs into perspec-
tive, I think it should make it even more possible for us to be patient, to
be more understanding of the very difficult internal problems of estab-
lishing a reasonably representative and progressive government in the
aftermath of decades of tyranny. I believe we need not worry too much
about how the political complexion in Portugal may change from day
to day. Personally, I will be rooting for the moderate and democratic
forces in Portugal, but as a government we should be clear that the
essential American concern is for the continuation of our military
relationship.
The second major issue we need to confront in defining our future
foreign policy is how to support our basic values without winding up
back in places like Vietnam. I do not believe the American people will
support a foreign policy devoid of human values, yet how do we stop
short of meddling in other peoples’ affairs?
I believe strongly that we can and should support human rights,
individual freedom and justice, governments who derive their power
from the consent of the governed. I have always opposed communism
because it has jeopardized these values. But somewhere along the line
we lost sight of the fact that we were contesting tyranny, regardless of
its political coloration.
We became absorbed in the narrower struggle against commu-
nism, and in the process supported and ultimately overcommitted our-
selves to some of the most outrageously oppressive regimes in the
world. And ironically, the consequence has often been to give a boost to
the Communists by identifying the United States and our values with
petty tyrants.
The lesson, I believe, is to support those who truly favor democ-
racy, freedom, and social justice and treat with equal disdain tyrants,
whatever their political label.
A second major lesson that we should have learned by now is that
our commitment to freedom and justice cannot substitute for the lack of
commitment on the part of others. We cannot care more about the in-
tegrity and independence of a country being threatened than its
leaders. We must not offer to make sacrifices that are greater than the
sacrifices to be borne by those we would help.
A third way to be true to our values, yet avoid the pitfalls of an-
other Vietnam, is to turn our attention to the great unfinished business
on the world’s agenda: hunger, development, economic stability and
progress, a new equitable regime for the oceans, a more effective con-
trol of conventional and nuclear arms. There is a very long list that has
received too low priority for too great a time. By tackling these
problems, I believe that we can fulfill our responsibilities, pursue our
basic values, without inevitably being drawn into the agony of war. We
