1662  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
469.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, May 19, 1959, 11 a.m.
OTHERS PRESENT
Dr. Killian, Dr. Bacher, Dr. Baker
Dr. Bethe, Dr. Bronk, Dr. Chance
Dr. Fisk, Dr. Kistiakowsky, Dr. Land
Dr. Piore, Dr. Purcell, Dr. Rabi
Dr. Seaborg, Dr. Smith, Dr. Weiss
Dr. Wiesner, Dr. Dryden, Dr. Hill
Dr. Scoville, Dr. Waterman, Dr. York
Mr. Beckler, Major Eisenhower
General Goodpaster
The President welcomed the group. Dr. Killian asked if he had 
any points he wanted to bring to the attention of the group, which had 
not met with him for some months. The President said he did not. He 
hoped they would continue their study of means of simplifying and 
making more effective the control of governmental research activities, 
and eliminating duplication. He referred to a troublesome amendment 
by Senator Russell to the Military Construction Bill, under which Con­
gress would authorize on an annual basis programs for specific aircraft 
and missiles. Dr. Killian mentioned that the Congress is doing this in 
relation to the space program, and the result is to delay these programs 
considerably. Dr. Dryden confirmed this.
Dr. Killian said the group had two matters they wanted to bring 
to the President’s attention. As to the first, they were impressed by 
the great and growing complexity of our military technology, by the 
reduction in the time scale, both of possible conflict and of weapons 
development, by the rapid obsolescence of weapons types, and by the 
overlapping of different systems. All this seems to mean an increase in 
the cost of weapons, and a lack of stability in military relations between 
nations. On the point of obsolescence, the President commented that 
once we have an effective standardized item, we should proceed by 
gradually replacing it, but not by scrapping such items as soon as an 
improved type of item is available. Dr. Killian agreed with this phi­
losophy. He added that dispersal programs, quickened response and 
improved alarm and alert systems add to the same tendency. The group 
was much impressed with this point and wanted to propose to the Pres­
ident that they think the United States should tackle the arms control 
problem anew. From the standpoint of the group, what they want is a 
1 Source: Technical basis of disarmament; international exchange of scientific infor­
mation. Secret. 5 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
