Hungary
441
141.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Hartman) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, undated
Moving Forward with Hungary: The Crown of St. Stephen
We have been giving considerable thought to the appropriateness
of returning the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary. Congressman Van-
ik’s recent speech suggesting return of the Crown provoked some
sharp, adverse reaction from Congresswoman Oakar, who has a strong
ethnic constituency, and from Congressman Horton. However, Vanik’s
position also has support and we believe that domestic reaction, even
in the Hungarian-American community, will not be entirely negative.
The President is generally aware of the problem: he promised Vanik
a reply after the Crown issue was reviewed. We have prepared the
attached2 memorandum to the President in part as a way to pull our
thoughts together on the issue of policy toward Hungary. However,
there seems to be some divergence of views on the NSC staff regarding
the Crown’s return and we have made no effort yet to sound out
Brzezinski.
The Hungarians have also been exploring how they might obtain
MFN treatment from us. They may be willing to conform (as Romania
did) to Jackson-Vanik requirements. We intend to move forward cau-
tiously in this area, bearing in mind the possible impacts on US-Soviet
relations and prospects for change in Jackson-Vanik.
Recommendations:
That you sign the attached memorandum to the President.3
ALTERNATIVELY, that you agree to meet with a small group
including Warren Christopher, Matt Nimetz, myself and several others
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of European Affairs, Office of Eastern
Europe and Yugoslavia, Hungarian Holy Crown—Crown Follow Up 1979 and Prior
Years 1945–1980, Lot 85D389, Box 1, Political: US-Hungary, Crown Follow-up, 1978.
Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Boutin, Gerth, and Nimetz on May 18; cleared by Armitage,
Hansell, Katz, and Jenkins. Sent through Nimetz. A handwritten note on the document
indicates that it was forwarded to Vance on May 26.
2 At this point the word “draft” is crossed out in pen. On May 18, Nimetz informed
Andrews he fully agreed with the recommendations in the memorandum to the President,
but that he rewrote the draft in order to shorten it. (National Archives, RG 59, Office
of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State and
Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, January 1977 thru
December 1980, Lot 81D85, Box 1, MN Chron—Official—January–June 1977)
3 Attached but not printed. A significantly revised version was signed by Vance
on June 3. See Document 142.
