918  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
had virtues apart from the relocation paper. The concept of how the 
NSC night be used under emergency conditions was important. The 
Planning Board should therefore prepare a report identifying and ana­
lyzing problems involved in alternative concepts for the use of the NSC 
organization in wartime. The Vice President agreed with Mr. Gray that 
war-­gaming should be further discussed by the Planning Board. Mr. 
Gray said he would also like to have NSC 5917 referred back to the 
Planning Board.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed the draft statement on the subject con­
tained in NSC 5917, in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
(transmitted by the reference memorandum of December 16, 1959) and 
a proposal by the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs for test­
ing national security policy-­making in a crisis by a gaming technique.
b. Directed the NSC Planning Board to prepare a report identifying 
and analyzing questions and problems involved in alternative concepts 
of the use of the NSC organization in wartime.
c. Referred NSC 5917 back to the Planning Board for revision in the 
light of the discussion and the report referred to in b above.
[Omitted here are agenda items 2 and 3.]
4. TOPICS FOR FUTURE DISCUSSION OR CONSIDERATION BY 
THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
(Memo for NSC Members and Advisers from the Special Assistant 
to the President for National Security Affairs, same subject, dated 
December 3, 1959; memos for NSC from the Executive Secretary, same 
subject, dated December 14 and 15, 1959)
Mr. Gray briefed the Council on each of the topics listed in the NSC 
Action below and after describing each topic paused to allow opportu­
nity for discussion. (A Copy of Mr. Gray’s Briefing Note is filed in the 
Minutes of the Meeting and another is attached to this Memorandum). 
With respect to some topics, the Council, without discussion, reached 
the agreement set forth in the NSC Action below. However, certain other 
topics elicited discussion as indicated in the following paragraphs.
Cuba. Secretary Dillon said the problem of Cuba was extremely 
complex and delicate, not only because of action taken with respect to 
Cuba, but also because of the psychological reaction to any actions which 
might be taken. Since there had been continuing discussions between the 
President and the Secretary of State with respect to Cuba, Mr. Dillion 
believed that the Planning Board should not be hasty about taking up 
Cuban policy until the President and the Secretary of State returned. In 
any event, the problem of Cuba should be handled under special secu­
rity precautions. The Vice President did not believe that Cuba should 
be handled in a routine fashion through normal diplomatic channels. 
Congress was an important element in the situation. The Administration
