Panama 927 and had left them, I believed, with a clear impression of three points: first, that the Panamanian government had a responsibility and a duty to protect American lives and property; second, that the United States government would not negotiate under the threat of disorder and violence; and, third, that with the restoration of calm there were certain measures which could come into effect which would be beneficial to the Panamanians and which had been already decided upon prior to November 3. This together with the statement on titular sovereignty provided the Panamanian government with something which they could use if they were disposed to take a firm line on the maintenance of order. The government, however, is weak and there is some doubt as to the reliability of the National Guard. Under the circumstances President de la Guardia’s radio address last night,2 I thought, had been quite good and it seemed clear that an effort was being made through the press, radio, the faculty at Panama University and in the provinces to hold demonstrations on Saturday3 to a peaceful purpose and character. If we got by Saturday without real trouble when I said I thought we should be looking ahead with a view to correcting any justifiable sources of complaint and grievance. The President said that three years ago after the trouble at Suez4 he and Secretary Dulles had talked about the situation of the Panama Canal many times and had sought to ensure that steps would be taken which would head off any developments in the Canal Zone comparable to what had occurred in Egypt. He spoke of the discrepancy in wage rates and said that he had not felt that we had done all that we should have in this regard under the agreements of 1955. The question of third country purchases also had needed fixing and he had been anxious to see a training and apprentice program put into effect. Considerable progress had been made on these last month but then the inability to get his letter to the Panamanian government before trouble clearly threatened had resulted in the Panamanians not being aware of these corrective actions already decided upon. The President asked me to follow the situation closely with the Department of Defense and make sure that with a return to more normal relations and a better atmosphere that there was no foot-dragging anywhere and that we consider constructively and sympathetically Panamanian requests. The President then volunteered that he thought we should have the Panamanian flag flying not all over the Zone, as 2 The Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of President de la Guardia’s radio address to the Department of State under cover of despatch 337, November 27, not 3 November 28. 4 For documentation on United States policy with respect to the Arab-Israeli Dispute
