International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1123
Bennet estimated water/sanitation share of AID housing program
brought total bilateral AID (including SSA) to some $230 million a year.
On priority: There was agreement that “water” did not rank with
energy, food, health, and population as top ranking priorities but that
the Decade was a serious enterprise that deserved support. Two ele-
ments of previous strategy were questioned (which led to the change
of approach from attention to budget to attention to program
management):
—The realism of reaching for an unattainable target such as fixed
dollar commitments for a decade, or for health for all by 2000, was
questioned.
—An approach in which clean water competes with health for
funds when the relationship is interactive rather than serial seemed to
make no sense.
On rural bias: The group felt that the stipulation in the original
agreement was overdone. However urban areas are receiving a dispro-
portionate share of water funds. A few large urban SSA projects ac-
count for over half our bilateral aid, and the World Bank in the past lent
mainly to urban water and sanitation projects.
The discussion can be summed up as follows: While no one sup-
ported announcement of a fixed dollar target, consensus did develop
on managing the water programs already under way, which are con-
siderable in extent, in a way which is more directly supportive of the
Decade and LDC national interest as it unfolds and which would give
evidence of the contribution of the United States. Mr. Bennet indicated
he would examine the effectiveness of current AID water activities and
their desirable priorities. There was agreement that reaffirmation of
support for U.S. participation in the goals of the Decade was necessary
and desirable but that the support not be ranked as a top priority issue
with Energy, Food, Health, and Population (thus diluting emphasis on
these topics), but as a component with important social and economic
aspects.
In conclusion, Mr. Nimetz’ call for a memo to be written to Henry
Owen and others directly involved to suggest inclusion of the issue in
the Summit talks this June (Tab D),6 and for the meeting’s deliberations
to be written up for Mr. Cooper’s use in the N/S discussions. With re-
spect to the latter McDonald had a number of specific recommenda-
6 Attached but not printed is an April 8 memorandum from Nimetz to Owen,
Cooper, and Hormats regarding a possible Venice Summit statement on the UN Water
Decade.
