Chapter 4, February–April 1990  467
Shevardnadze said that if we could find a solution with respect to 
the UK, then all remaining questions, definitions and standards should 
be a matter of common interest.
Burt said this sounded constructive. Secretary Baker suggested 
our experts engage on this question and see what might come up. 
Shevardnadze remarked that it was seldom that heads of delegations 
said their partner’s views were constructive.
The Secretary said that on other START issues we were prepared 
to add some new ideas to the overall package. We proposed a treaty 
duration of 15 years or until superseded by a follow-­on treaty, with a 
review one year before the end of the 15-­year period to decide on the 
future of the treaty. Regarding START II, the Soviets had proposed to 
begin discussions of what might go into such an agreement. We did 
not yet have fixed views on the subject but were prepared to authorize 
Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin informally to discuss this subject and 
hear Soviet ideas.
On the phasing of reductions, the Secretary said the U.S. proposed 
that this take place in four phases of two years, two years, two years, 
and one year duration, with equal levels somewhat below current U.S. 
levels after the end of the first phase. He had a paper on elements of 
common ground on this question that explained U.S. ideas in detail.
On another miscellaneous item, the Secretary said the U.S. was 
prepared to drop the SS–N–5 SLBM from START on the basis of the 
statement by Ambassador Nazarkin that all these missiles would be 
eliminated by the date of signature. Finally, he wanted to present a draft 
elements of common ground on attributing warheads to future types of 
ballistic missiles. He hoped the Soviets would respond in due course.
The Secretary said this concluded his presentation of the new 
START ideas he had brought to Moscow. We would be prepared to talk 
with the Soviets over the next days to see if we could reach agreement 
on these proposals.
Shevardnadze responded that on treaty duration the Soviet position 
was on the record and he would not repeat it. As for the destruction 
timetable, the Secretary’s suggestions should be discussed at the expert 
level. He suggested instructing the working group to address this and 
report back.
Shevardnadze said the Soviets attributed fundamental impor-
tance to the fact that, at this stage and at the summit, we should deter-
mine how to behave after the completion of START I. For both the U.S. 
and USSR the question of strategic stability was of basic importance, 
as was the entire future of the disarmament and confidence-­building 
process. The future would depend on how our two countries moved 
down this road. Therefore, the Soviets would like our delegations to
