World Hunger and Food Policy
721
tion estimate indicates that a 10 percent set-aside may be needed just to
keep our stocks from climbing to excessive levels.
Since 1975, the world’s total grain stocks have increased from 126
to 183 million metric tons. Nearly 60 percent of the increase the past
two years has occurred in the United States where stocks rose from 27
to 61 million metric tons. Two years ago world wheat stocks were 62.5
million tons and the U.S. held only 19 percent of them. Today, world
stocks total 100 million metric tons and the United States holds 30 per-
cent. In the case of feed grains, world stocks totaled 51 million metric
tons last year; the United States held approximately 34 percent. This
year world stocks total nearly 69 million tons of which the U.S. holds 44
percent.
Current estimates place total world stocks at 200 million tons and
U.S. stocks at nearly 80 million tons by the beginning of the 1978/79
season. At this level, the U.S. would hold nearly 35 percent of the
world’s stocks of wheat and approximately half of the world’s food
grain stocks.
Stocks of this magnitude are quite adequate to meet our domestic
and export requirements. Furthermore, the establishment of strategic
reserves insures the United States commitment to world food security.
Our analysis indicates that even after we acquire sufficient reserve
stocks, world production in 1978/79 under the “most likely” weather
conditions will again be in excess of market requirements, causing
stocks to rise even further.
If this does occur, two results are likely. First, there would be re-
duced incentive for other nations to participate in an international
grain reserve system. Though the United States is willing to hold its
“fair share” of world stocks, we expect other nations to do likewise.
Second, we are concerned that with excessive stocks and low grain
prices there would be reduced incentive for the developing countries to
increase their own food production. Over the long-term this could have
disastrous consequences. In our conversations with world leaders and
world food experts, there is one issue on which all agree: the devel-
oping countries of the world must increase their food production sig-
nificantly in future years to meet the demands of growing populations.
Thus, in an effort to keep U.S. and world grain stocks in reasonable bal-
ance with consumption, we are implementing a modest set-aside pro-
gram for 1978-crop wheat.
Since a decision to have a set-aside is an annual determination, a
set-aside program for 1978 crops should not be interpreted to imply
that there will be set-aside programs for subsequent crops. This is a de-
cision made for this year alone based on the current situation.
Loan Rates
Given the severe cost-price squeeze that is now adversely affecting
many farmers, loan rates for 1977-crop feed grains are being raised im-
