732
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
208.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Embassy in
Israel1
Aboard Air Force One, March 13, 1979, 2030Z
For Ambassador Lewis from Secretary Vance.
1. Please deliver following revised message to Begin from President.2
2. Start text.
Dear Mr. Prime Minister,
As I write this message, my heart is filled with emotions. When I
left you this morning in Tel Aviv, I had hoped that my talks3 with Presi-
dent Sadat would be successful. I am pleased to inform you that they
were. Consequently, we are on the verge of consummating the peace
treaty between Egypt and Israel for which you, President Sadat, and I
have worked so hard. I think we can feel justifiably proud of our work
in pursuit of peace. In the difficult weeks and months ahead, we must
all remember how far we have come in the past two years, how many
obstacles we have overcome together, and how many times hope has
triumphed over despair.
With President Sadat, I reviewed the progress that we made in Je-
rusalem. The Egyptian delegation had reservations about the formula-
tions on Article VI and was concerned about the deletion of the refer-
ences to Gaza and to liaison. After discussion, however, President
Sadat agreed to the text of the letter without mention of Gaza or liaison
and to the agreed minutes on Article VI.
We also discussed staged withdrawals and the exchange of ambas-
sadors. If the Israeli Cabinet reinstitutes phased withdrawal as we dis-
cussed, namely the approval of the sub-staging which was proposed
and discussed at Blair House, President Sadat will send me a letter con-
firming his agreement that ambassadors will be exchanged one month
after the completion of the interim withdrawal.
During our discussion of oil, President Sadat has accepted the
agreed minutes to Annex III which we proposed. For our part, we will
proceed to formalize the oil guarantee from the United States which
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 8, Pre-Signing Negotiations: Cairo,
Tel Aviv, Washington, & New York 3/20–26/79. Secret; Nodis. Sent for information to
the Department of State and the White House Situation Room. The telegram is not
numbered.
2 Lewis delivered the letter to Begin on the morning of March 14. (Telegram 5154
from Tel Aviv, March 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–
2668)
3 See Document 202.
