626
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
231.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, March 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
Alleged Soviet Use of Chemical Warfare in Afghanistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Overview
We believe the evidence is sufficient to conclude that Soviet forces
have used nonlethal chemicals against insurgents in a number of areas
of Afghanistan. The chemicals employed almost certainly have
included irritants such as riot-control agents, probably mixed with
smoke. Continuing allegations of deaths resulting from chemical
attacks lead us to conclude that the chances are about even that lethal
agents, such as nerve gas, also have been used.2 ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
The bulk of the reporting on chemical agent attacks has come
from Afghan refugees in Pakistan and from insurgent leaders. [3 lines,
classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]
The Soviets have deployed chemical defense battalions with the
three motorized rifle divisions in Afghanistan, and Soviet troops in the
Kabul area have been seen carrying what appear to be gas masks in
canvas cases, suggesting that Soviet forces in the country are prepared
to operate in terrain contaminated by chemical agents. These units and
the chemical defense equipment seen in Afghanistan, however, are
standard in all Soviet divisions, and we do not consider it unusual that
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 23, folder 9. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A statement
on the cover page reads: “The authors of this paper are [name not declassified] Science
and Technology Division, Office of Scientific Weapons Research, and [name not declassified]
Theater Forces Division, Office of Strategic Research. This report has been coordinated
with the Office of Political Analysis, the Office of Imagery Analysis, the Afghan Task
Force, the National Intelligence Officer for General Purpose Forces, and the Directorate
of Operations.”
2 The Soviet Union signed and ratified the 1925 Geneva Protocol prohibiting the
first use of chemical warfare but took a reservation under which the protocol would be
binding on the USSR only with regard to other signatories. Because Afghanistan is not
a signatory, the USSR would not be in violation of the protocol if it used CW agents in
Afghanistan. [classification marking not declassified] [Footnote is in the original.]
