International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 on the grounds that the low level of temporary impact is not significant enough to warrant contradiction of your present arms sales policy. Approve increase in arms sales (Blumenthal) Disapprove increase in arms sales (Schultze, Vance, Eizenstat)15 IV. PACKAGING OF THE OPTIONS SELECTED Blumenthal believes that a demonstration of your concern is of far greater importance than the actual statistical effect to be expected from these specific measures. Therefore, he recommends that you announce your determination to maintain a strong dollar, relying primarily on: • policies to maintain a growing, non-inflationary domestic economy; • an effective energy program, but including as specific balance of payments actions such energy-related measures as you select; • expansion of CCC and EXIM budgets; • speculation against the dollar might then be stopped and some visible improvement in the current account position achieved during 1978. Blumenthal further states that although we should continue to urge economic expansion abroad in appropriate cases, we should recognize that we have pushed the Japanese and Germans about as far as they will tolerate at this time. In an effort to avoid further currency appreciation both countries are now turning to restrictive measures on capital inflow. Vance, Schultze, Schlesinger, and we recommend against such an announced package on the grounds that: • even if all of the options were selected, the total impact on the balance of payments is fairly small. If this is touted as our whole program, it may appear too small and discourage international confidence in the dollar; • calling particular attention to the problem could set off more alarm in the international market than not doing so; • the U.S. balance of payments picture is already relatively well-known by sophisticated observers and participants in international money markets and it has not seemed to do the dollar great or disorderly harm. In fact some appreciation of the mark and the yen will encourage the stimulative policies by Germany and Japan which we seek. As long as this appreciation occurs in an orderly way, it is not undesirable. 15 Carter indicated his approval of this option.
