442
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ultimately the balance of power between East and West. Our response
will determine how several key states will adjust their foreign policy
and particularly whether they will accommodate themselves to the
projection of Soviet military power.
Before outlining for you an agenda of possible responses, let me
put the foregoing in a brief historical context, which may also be useful
to you when you comment on the subject. We have, in effect, entered
the fifth decade in the U.S.-Soviet competition. Each of the decades
has had a specific historical character:
1. The 1940’s: consolidation of Soviet gains in the context of U.S.
disarmament after World War II and probes for Western weakness;
2. The 1950’s: lines drawn sharply in the West and in the East (the
Iron Curtain, the Korean buffer);
3. The 1960’s: premature Soviet global challenge; increasing compe-
tition in other areas: economic (we will bury you); space (Sputnik);
with the U.S. then becoming bogged down in Vietnam after the respite
won in Cuba, with massive Soviet investments in defense.
4. The 1970’s: detente and continued buildup of Soviet strength;
5. The 1980’s: the danger of conflict in the context of wider global
turbulence.
It is both symbolic and significant that Soviet action in Afghanistan
occurred in the first week of the new decade of the 1980’s. To respond
to that initiative, we need to generate a wider domestic consensus
behind legislative and budgetary matters. Anything less will cause
vacillation and accommodation by our allies and by states within the
Persian Gulf region.
The context for a major response is provided by the three interde-
pendent central strategic zones of our concern: Western Europe, the
Far East, and the Persian Gulf. We have an alliance system and military
deployments in two of these regions. We are only beginning to create
a significant military posture in the third, the Persian Gulf. Accordingly,
our response to the Soviet Union action ought to deal with the
following aspects:
I. Regional Security
A. Unilateral U.S. Actions
1. Covert Assistance. We have in recent months authorized a num-
ber of new programs of covert assistance. David Aaron, Frank Carlucci
and David Newsom will be reviewing each and recommending neces-
sary additional steps (e.g. YAR, PDRY or Eritrea).2
2 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “We should share more with Spain & other
countries.”
