66 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement The information we got from Elting Arnold of Treasury, who is in charge of Foreign Assets Control (our 429) does not afford you any­ thing useful for your discussions with Wang. As you can see, Treasury has followed a very hard-­boiled policy on remittances from Mainland China for repatriation of Chinese. We can not thrash out the matter with Treasury now because your instructions are so closely held. Of course we do not anticipate any difficulty with them if the matter ever comes to a head, since your instructions were explicitly approved by the President. Actually it will be a good thing from an economic war­ fare standpoint to require the Communists to remit dollars to pay for the travel of those who want to return. I am enclosing a copy of the Ludwell Denny article from Geneva which disturbed the Secretary and which seems to involve a leak some­ where. Nobody is accusing anyone of leaking. It is just that we are mys­ tified where all the information is coming from and trying to run down all leads. It is not inconceivable that the information could have been deduced by Denny from information supplied by Wang to Communist correspondents. I suppose you got the copy of the memorandum of conversation of August 3 between Murphy, Robertson, Devaney and myself. I think INS is well in line. I am proposing that we give them copies of those parts of your conversations which directly concern their practices. I believe it will help to keep them happy and insure that they are dis­ posed to cooperate fully. We are considering your cable on a junior assistant to help you when Ed Martin departs and Ralph Clough moves up. If we can raise the money I would like to send one of our junior China Language offi­ cers. It would put a strain on us here but I believe he would be more useful to you than an officer from a European post and it would be very valuable experience for him. I am still awaiting word from you as to whether you think Martin should stay on a few days after the War College opens. I do not want to encourage this unless you consider it highly desirable, but I believe the Commandant would agree if the Department requested it at a high level. And I do not think it would spoil the course for Ed since the first days are largely for orientation. The added insight he will have on Chinese Communist aims and nego­ tiating tactics will be a very valuable contribution to the course at the War College. The Secretary is holding a press conference in a few minutes. We will send you a transcript of the pertinent portions as soon as we get it. Good luck and good wishes,
