30
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Today I would like to speak about our alliances, and ways they can
be improved to serve our national interests and the interests of others
who seek peace and stability in the world.
Partnership With Europe, Japan
We need to consider how—in addition to alliances that were
formed in years past for essentially military purposes—we might de-
velop broader arrangements for dealing with such problems as the
arms race and world poverty and the allocation of resources.
The time has come for us to seek a partnership between North America,
Western Europe and Japan. Our three regions share economic, political
and security concerns that make it logical that we should seek ever-
increasing unity and understanding.
I have traveled in Japan and Western Europe in recent years and
talked to leaders there. These countries already have a significant
world impact, and they are prepared to play even larger global roles in
shaping a new international order.
There are those who say that democracy is dying, that we live in
the twilight of an era, and that the destiny of modern man is to witness
the waning of freedom.
In Japan, Western Europe, Canada, some countries in Latin
America, Israel, and among many other people, I have found not a de-
cline of democracy but a dynamic commitment to its principles.
I might add that I can testify personally to the vigor of the demo-
cratic process in our own country.
In addition to cooperation between North America, Japan and
Western Europe, there is an equal need for increased unity and con-
sultation between ourselves and such democratic societies as Israel,
Australia, New Zealand, and other nations, such as those in this
hemisphere, that share our democratic values, as well as many of our
political and economic concerns.
There must be more frequent consultations on many levels. We
should have periodic summit conferences and occasional meetings of
the leaders of all the industrial democracies, as well as frequent cabinet
level meetings. In addition, as we do away with one-man diplomacy,
we must once again use our entire foreign policy apparatus to reestab-
lish continuing contacts at all levels. Summits are no substitute for the
habit of cooperating closely at the working level.
In consultations, both form and substance are important. There is a
fundamental difference between informing governments after the fact
and actually including them in the process of joint policy making. Our
policy makers have in recent years far too often ignored this basic dif-
