International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
955
288.
Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance
(Benson)1
Washington, July 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Focus within Department of State to Deal with International Health Issues
As you are aware, there have recently been a number of initiatives,
some coming from the White House, to develop an international health
strategy for the US Government. In addition, there are a number of im-
portant areas which touch upon international health such as nutrition,
population and scientific cooperation which the Department of State is
heavily engaged in, and in which a number of Bureaus have an interest.
At present there appears to be no central focus within the Depart-
ment of State to deal in a systematic and comprehensive way with in-
ternational health issues: IO focuses primarily on the World Health Or-
ganization, OES views international health from the perspective of our
separate international bilateral agreements, or of international environ-
mental dangers, the individual regional bureaus give little attention to
the health problems of their regions, except when there are local dis-
asters or plagues. AID has an Office of Health within its Bureau for
Technical Assistance but its focus is primarily on bilateral aid to devel-
oping countries.
To tie these different points of interest together, a focus within the
Department of State to integrate international health issues and to coor-
dinate the various efforts into some coherent strategy should be estab-
lished. Given your responsibilities for OES it might be useful to have
your office act as the senior level focus for international health matters.
But in addition to this, OES could be designated as the lead bureau with
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 7, TL 7/1–15/77. No classi-
fication marking. A copy was sent to Moose. At the top of the memorandum, Lake wrote:
“LB—We might discuss this at a Small Group meeting. TL.” Additional handwritten no-
tations on the memorandum read: “7/12/77 Christopher mtg.” and “Mtg with Christo-
pher Tues. 7/12 4:00 p.m.” In a July 12 memorandum to Tarnoff and Lake, Brizill pro-
vided background information on the meeting between Bourne and Christopher to be
held later that day. She also attached an organizational chart outlining the structure of the
proposed Cabinet-level Task Force on International Health Policy. According to Brizill,
Bourne planned to discuss “a number of international health initiatives he and his staff
are considering. They include: (1) the current assessment of US international health
policy being undertaken by the staff; (2) a proposal for joint US–USSR health cooperation
in selected third world countries; (3) a medical cooperation program for Mozambique;
and (4) White House interest in developing a world hunger initiative.” (Ibid.) No minutes
of this meeting were found.
