January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1079 was good reason for what he made. He mentioned, for example, that he had followed Israeli politics closely and had had various contacts with Israeli leaders (he named Peres). He had consistently been disappointed and had concluded that on the matter of a peace settlement there is no real difference between Begin and Peres. In his only expression of criticism during the entire meeting, Hussein said he had been disappointed in the US. He had hoped to work closely with us. Then Camp David came along and he wasn’t told of what was happening either by us or by Sadat. When the Agreement was signed he had “felt betrayed” by Sadat who had assured him that he would let him know in advance. He said people wondered why he hadn’t gone along with the Camp David Accords; it was because he felt himself on the outside. Hussein acknowledged that his stance had affected his relations with the US and President Carter but said he felt he had been misunderstood. The President had interpreted his actions as challenges, which was not at all his intention. 5. When Hussein finished this discourse I briefed him at some length on our efforts in the autonomy negotiations. I said broadly speaking it seemed to me we have a choice of two courses in dealing with the Palestinian issue, either to proceed through the plan of Camp David to gain autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza and thereby further the lot of the Palestinians, or to go back to confrontation. I said we were not asking Hussein to support the Camp David Accords but we do hope to have his understanding for our efforts and would like to be sure he won’t interpose objections or create problems. 6. Hussein assured me that he wanted to be helpful and had no intention to create problems. I said under the circumstances it seemed to me that our work under the Camp David Accords deserves Jordanian understanding and at least no opposition, since some sort of future linkage between the West Bank/Gaza and Jordan would seem to be in Jordan’s interest and not inconsistent with our mutual objectives after the transition period. Hussein agreed that linking the West Bank/Gaza with Jordan might be the right solution. I said it seemed to me therefore that we are on parallel rails and in the end our courses may merge in the same rail. Hussein again assured me that he would not do anything that would hamper our efforts. Our dearest wish is that the negotiations succeed, he said. Hussein did say, however, that it would be important to him that the US come out and state its position on the issues clearly. He felt it important that the US say what it means, even if achievement of its goals may take a long time. He was not specific beyond a reference to 242. 7. Hussein then spoke of his concern over trends in the region, describing developments particularly what he described as the very worrisome situation in Saudi Arabia. He described Saudi leadership as
