704  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
consider such limits in future negotiations—­but talking about all ballis-
tic missiles, not just land-­based. It would be up to future negotiations 
to decide the scope and categories of limits.
— Burt said it was important to be candid about the American per-
spective on such missiles, since the sides tentatively agreed to highlight 
strategic stability in future negotiations. In the U.S. view, MIRVed land-­
based missiles were not particularly stabilizing. They had “C-Cubed” 
elements more adaptable to a first strike than was the case with sea-­
based missiles. Moreover, fixed land-­based systems were more vul-
nerable to a first strike. Fixed heavily-MIRVed ICBMs, combining both 
features, were the most destabilizing of all. In a crisis, either side would 
be tempted to use them before they could by destroyed in a first-­strike 
attack. Therefore, it was difficult for the United States to equate land- 
and sea-­based forces in terms of stability.
— Nazarkin contended that any concentration of warheads on 
delivery vehicles was destabilizing; the more the concentration, the 
more the temptation for a first strike. Mobility served to make missiles 
less vulnerable, and in this respect, the Soviets saw some commonal-
ity between land- and sea-­based systems. In any case, Nazarkin con-
cluded, the sides would not be able to reach a decision during the next 
few days on the very serious issue of which systems should be banned.
— Regarding the third paragraph of the U.S. draft (on defense 
and space), Nazarkin advocated a non-­classical, pragmatic approach 
to arrive at mutually acceptable language. According to the classical 
approach, he observed, the Soviets would have to counter-­balance the 
American paragraph by bracketing it and proposing an alternative 
paragraph with a pure version of the Soviet argument.
— Ambassador Smith expressed agreement that the sides should 
use a pragmatic approach to paragraph three. He said that the beauty 
of the logic of delinking START from defense and space was that it 
allowed talks to continue. Nazarkin affirmed that the Soviets viewed 
positively the continuation of negotiations, “because they did not agree 
with the U.S. defense and space language.” Smith emphasized the 
urgency of these negotiations as reflected in the use of 1992 in the joint 
statement, and asked if Nazarkin had any problem with that date.
— Nazarkin noted that the U.S. side had always rejected so-­called 
“artificial deadlines.” The Soviets also opposed artificial deadlines, but 
would be willing to set a date when the end was in sight. It would not 
be an exaggeration to describe the difference between START and DST 
in terms of being able to foresee their conclusion. In the space group, 
the sides differed on fundamental issues. Establishing an ending date 
would thus constitute an artificial deadline. Concerning the other lan-
guage in the paragraph, Nazarkin said that while it posed problems, a 
compromise could be worked out.
