equipment but remain capable of being utilized for military
purposes to the exclusion of any other utilization.
(c) Component parts of the items listed in (a) and (b) above, if
capable of being utilized only in the manufacture or repair of the
items listed in (a) and (b) above, for land, sea or aerial warfare.”
The War Department suggests the omission of Category II.
In view of the fact that the control of the export of such weapons as pistols, revolvers
and sporting arms may be desirable within the “prohibited zone”, there would be no
objection, in principle, to retaining a second category to include such arms. The export
to the prohibited zone, except under license, of arms in both Categories I and II might
be prohibited.
In connection with the definition of categories, or wherever in the convention it might
be considered most appropriate, the Department would desire to see an article inserted
absolutely prohibiting international trade in asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases for
use in war. In this connection you will recall that the Treaty between the United States,
Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan, signed on February 6, 1922,49 contained, in
Article 5, a prohibition against the use of such gases. This Treaty, it may be noted, is
not yet effective as it has not been ratified by France. However, as this Government and
various other governments are clearly committed to the principle that poisonous gases
should not be used in warfare, there is every reason for you to press for the inclusion of
an article prohibiting the shipment of such gases in foreign trade for possible use in
time of war. The form which such an article might take, following in part the
phraseology of the Treaty of February 6, 1922, might be somewhat as follows:
The use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and all analogous
liquids, materials or devices, has been justly condemned by the general
opinion of the civilized world and a prohibition of such has been declared in
treaties to which a majority of the civilized Powers are parties. The High
Contracting Parties therefore agree absolutely to prohibit the export from
their territory of any such asphyxiating poisonous or other gases and all
analogous liquids, intended or designed for use in connection with operations
of war.
ARTICLE 2
“The High Contracting Parties undertake not to export themselves, and to
prohibit the export of arms, munitions and other implements of war
enumerated in Category I, except on the conditions hereinafter mentioned.”
