592 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement may be required to counteract these threats, and should not hesitate to make known the grounds they have for complaints of Cuban intervention in their domestic affairs. However, we certainly would not wish to see action taken against Cuba used as a pretext for violent repression of all those forces working for social improvement in other countries. Though we deplore the direction in which the Cuban government is now moving, we have long supported not only in principle, but in practice, some of the necessary social and economic reforms which not only Castro but many democratic governments seek, the most obvious example being land reform. 4. Only the Salvadorans can resolve the problems their country faces. The wealthy must be prepared to make real financial sacrifices to feed, clothe and educate the poor. They must be more responsive to social pressures, or they will be wiped out totally. The recent anonymous letter forecasting the assassination of the loading members of the military and the aristocracy in El Salvador may have been only agitation, but it is not at all unbelievable that such a thing could happen if present trends continue. 5. We should be able to express our concern to Rochac without fear of personal affront, for we know of his outstanding efforts in his field to promote the development of his country, and do not consider him insensitive to his country’s problems. Many of those with whom he deals are insensitive, however, and might be interested in knowing how the U. S. Government views conditions in El Salvador. We hope he can convey this message to President Lemus and to the economic leaders of his country. We are eager to help out with well-­ planned aid projects, but it is difficult to help those who will not help themselves.5 5 The source text bears approval lines, but no indication of action by Assistant Secretary Rubottom. ES–15. Editorial Note El Salvador had “reportedly quiet and orderly elections” for municipalities and the Legislative Assembly on April 24, 1960, according to Ambassador Kalijarvi. The elections appeared “freer than anticipated,” as indicated by the outcome in Salvador, giving the opposition Partido de Acción Renovadora 53% of the 27,000 total vote for mayor. (Telegram 323 from San Salvador, April 25, 1960; 716.00/4–2560) Final election results
