1030  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
one plant in the USSR; we now have limited evidence pointing to two 
Soviet cities as possible production sites.
5. There is no new evidence to establish the Soviet ICBM deploy­
ment concept. The available evidence suggests that the Soviet ICBM 
could be rail mobile, but we do not know whether the deployment 
pattern as a whole will comprise rail mobile units, hard or soft fixed 
installations, or some combination of these methods. In any case, 
Soviet ICBM sites are not likely to be found at locations remote from 
rail support.
6. Configuration. On the basis of data obtained from ICBM and 
space vehicle launchings, we believe the Soviet ICBM to be a one and 
one-­half staged (Atlas type) vehicle or a parallel staged vehicle, with 
the former now considered somewhat more likely. It almost certainly 
employs nonstorable liquid propellants. Data acquired on the re-­entry 
vehicles used on the shots to the Johnson Island area indicate that the 
nosecones employed in those tests were of the ablative rather than 
heatsink type. We therefore estimate that the Soviet ICBM employs an 
ablative nosecone. Use of such a nosecone would permit the delivery 
of a 6,000 pound nuclear warhead to a range of about 6,500 n.m., that 
is, from virtually any point in the USSR to virtually any point in the US. 
A reduction in warhead weight would permit a greater range or the 
incorporation of penetration aids in the nosecone.
7. Accuracy. [text not declassified] the Soviet ICBM probably has 
radio-­inertial and not all-­inertial guidance. The guidance system 
is believed to employ radar tracking with radio command, and to 
include inertial components within the missile. The data available for 
estimating Soviet CEPs are far from exact; considerable reliance has 
been placed on general state of the art and US analogy. These fac­
tors, together with our estimate of Soviet capabilities in related com­
ponents such as gyroscopes and accelerometers, point to a theoretical 
CEP at IOC date of about 2 n.m., which we believe would be degraded 
to about 3 n.m. under operational conditions.4 This is an approximate 
figure and we apply it to all ranges to which ICBMs are likely to be 
fired.
8. We believe that operational considerations will lead the Soviets 
to incorporate an all-­inertial system in their ICBM sometime during 
1961–1962 or possibly earlier. A Soviet all-­inertial system, as of today, 
would probably have a theoretical CEP of about 3 n.m., degraded to 
4 Under operational conditions, theoretical CEPs will be degraded by several factors 
such as: (a) re-­entry errors induced by undeterminable winds and air density over the 
impact area; (b) human and experience factors; and (c) geophysical errors including grav­
itational anomalies, geoidal uncertainties, and uncertainties of target location relative to 
launch point and local verticals. [Footnote is in the original.]
