488
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
On September 18, Haferkamp replied to Strauss’s letter of the pre-
vious month. Haferkamp asserted that countervailing duties on EC
goods “would inflict grave damage on our exporters, would lead to
strong pressures for retaliation and since not only Community exports
would be affected could thus unleash a trade war of considerable di-
mensions.” Warning that “the slim chance, as you now judge, of the
waiver being prolonged at this point in time creates a very serious situ-
ation,” Haferkamp stated that it would not be “realistic for us to pro-
pose to our member states that we conclude these negotiations in the
absence of an assurance that the waiver on countervailing duties will
be extended. Nor indeed do Finn Gundelach and I think it realistic to
put to our member states the need for the political decisions which all
of us will have to face in the final stage of the negotiation when it will
be clear that as a consequence of US legislation a trade war is in pros-
pect in only a few weeks time.” Haferkamp assured Strauss that the EC
would continue to “pursue vigorously discussions and negotiations in
Geneva with the aim of concluding these negotiations by 15 De-
cember,” but cautioned “that unless the uncertainty over the imposi-
tion of countervailing duties from 4 January can be resolved the
common assumption of shared responsibility on which we have based
the Tokyo Round would no longer exist and these negotiations could
not be concluded.” (National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special
Trade Representative Subject Files, 1977–1979, Box 2, Countervailing
Duties 1977) The next day, September 19, Denman notified the U.S.
Mission to the EC in Brussels that the EC Council “was unanimous in
its support” for the position set out by Haferkamp. (Telegram 17722
from USEC Brussels, September 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780381–0146, D780404–0193)
On September 19, the head of the U.S. Delegation to the Multilat-
eral Trade Negotiations, Alonzo McDonald, cabled Strauss from Ge-
neva: “To add a sense of urgency and solid credibility to December 15
deadline, we are taking the line here that our only hope to find a solu-
tion to the CVD waiver problem depends on having a completed MTN
package in hand before January 1979. In effect, we are thus attempting
to use the waiver deadline for the same purposes that the expiration of
our negotiating authority served in the Kennedy Round. It is our un-
derstanding that this was Congress’ original intent to avoid a last
minute scramble in which the subsidies issue would be simply post-
poned because it is too hard to resolve. We need some legal or manda-
tory date against which to work to force our other negotiating partners
to close out, particularly the LDC’s who would prefer to wait until the
opening of UNCTAD V next May, thinking that a political furor then
might improve their Tokyo Round results.” McDonald concluded:
“This is not a proposal but an assumed reality. Unless otherwise in-
structed, will pursue the line persistently that CVD waiver deadline
