1956 1213 obtaining any more information and, if not, whether we then intend to use the issue further publicly to indict the Chicoms. If it is solely the latter I believe Geneva to be the best forum. I do not agree with the statement in the draft memo enclosed with your letter (No. 56) that Geneva offers a slightly better chance than Panmunjon for obtaining an accounting for at least a few of the 450. I can build up a good public record on the subject here and can probably embarrass Wang to a certain degree, but he is never going to give me any accounting for individuals here, and we should not raise the subject here on the assumption that there is any possibility he will do so. He has frequently and strongly taken the position that the lists he gave me at the outset of the talks accounted for all Americans in China and it cannot be expected he will reverse that position. 3. As a minor point with respect to numbered para (2) of the draft memo, I did in fact allude to the POW question at our 56th meeting (para 16 mytel 173) and drew a response from him on it. 4. With regard to the less likelihood of their countering with our failure to account for communist prisoners if the subject is raised here, you will recall that when I first raised the suject here he fortunately countered only with the 14,000 sent to Taiwan which was not hard to handle, but he may now be better prepared to counter with others and I will have to be prepared immediately to reply if he does so. Of course, by raising the subject here we will probably avoid the more difficult subject of the Koreans released by Rhee. 5. In this connection it is my recollection that their list may be wholly or primarily based on the lists of notification of capture that we transmitted through the ICRC. It is also my recollection that a large discrepancy in these lists arose from the fact that a capture form would be made out at the time the man was taken with a copy to the ICRC. On arrival at Kojedo the man’s tag would be missing and another would be made out with another copy to the ICRC. Because of the language problem, difficulties of transliteration, and sometimes through the POW giving a different name, the name would not appear as identi­ cal with the first report. Thus ICRC would receive and transmit to the Communists two names covering the capture of only one man. I do not recall whether this appears anywhere in the records, but I know it was explained to me when I made my “POW trip” to Korea with General Hull. 6. Also pertinent to all of this was an exchange of numbers of per­ sons held in the early days of the armistice negotiations. My memory on this is dim but I believe we gave the Communists some definite numbers on those we held. 7. I do not recall what the circumstances are and when the commu­ nist list of missing personnel mentioned in the last sentence of the first
