372  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Incidentally, I fully share your concern over the detailed material I 
have available to support my position on the 450 and hope I am never 
forced into details.
There is another subject I have never raised in my telegrams on which 
I would appreciate some word in a telegram if you do not agree with my 
understanding. It has not yet arisen in our meetings but may well do so. 
Even accepting our present position on a list of subjects for discussion 
under item two, I do not interpret this as precluding the raising of other 
subjects by either side during the course of the talks. We, of course, do 
not in any way commit ourselves in advance to discuss any subject, but 
it seems to me that either side can raise any subject it might desire. We 
might change our mind about old subjects, or something entirely new 
might come up which it would be desired I raise here. In any event it 
seems to me consistent with our position that we not close the door to the 
raising of new subjects.
I believe that the suggestion with regard to giving some restrained 
publicity to the possibility of travel to the PRC when detained Americans 
are out to be excellent. You will recall that in my dinner conversations 
with Wang he showed considerable interest in this and believe that it is 
a very definite bait for them. I would think it well that anything that is 
said not be in too black and white terms; i.e., not to say that never will 
any passport be issued until all Americans are out, but rather somewhat 
blandly to assume that implementation of the Agreed Announcement 
will shortly be completed and then passports could in appropriate cases 
be validated.
Incidentally, I thought the Secretary’s press conference statement 
on Tuesday was excellent and very helpful. Just as a small note I have 
got some ribbing from the correspondents here that after all my expla­
nations of the difference between an “Agreed Announcement” and 
an “Agreement”, the Secretary uses “Agreement” in his statement 
although I feel his usage was entirely unexceptional.
I am also sorry about all the confusion with the CAS man and 
Colm. He was a very nice fellow and I hope that CAS does not feel 
I was ungracious, as it certainly was kind of them to offer to help. As 
I told you, he stoutly said CAS had no desire to keep him here to gather 
background although I made it entirely clear to him that he was entirely 
welcome to do so and I would give him full cooperation.
I do appreciate your successful efforts to get my instructions to 
me at least the day before the meeting although I know the problem 
this represents at times. For a time I was receiving them on the morn­
ing of the meeting and this makes things pretty tight for me. One of 
the difficulties with this is the danger that because of decoding diffi­
culties I would miss something. One morning I had to go to a meet­
ing with the knowledge that there was a NIACT for me which they
