620
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
at 5 p.m., to ensure that you get off to Korea at 7 p.m.3 This means that
the Saturday afternoon meeting will end no later than 3:30 p.m. to
allow time for reproducing the communique.4 Given the amount of
time usually required for the heads of government to review the com-
munique, this means that the Summit will be virtually a one-day
meeting. (C)
3. The other heads of government want very much to meet infor-
mally before the first meeting, since two or three of them (Ohira,
Thatcher, and perhaps Clark of Canada) will be new. They wanted a
dinner the night before, but I think we have persuaded them to go for
an 8 a.m. breakfast just before the Summit instead. (C)
4. We agreed that the following might be discussed at the two
lunches, rather than at the regular meetings: political and economic re-
lations with China, aid for Egypt (as per Schmidt’s request to you),5 and
aid for Turkey, if it hasn’t been cleared up by then. Frank Press tells me
you would like internationalization of automobile research discussed
at a lunch; I think it would fit better under the regular agenda heading
of energy.6 (C)
II. Substance
1. Energy. All agreed that the Summit’s success will hinge on
whether the heads of government come up with specific actions to ad-
dress the energy problem. This means:
a. Demand Restraint: We discussed whether the heads of gov-
ernment should extend the 1979 International Energy Agency 5% re-
duction7 into 1980, with each country specifying the means that it
would employ to this end. There was general agreement that most
countries would need to do more than they are now doing, if the 5%
goal is to be achieved.8 (C)
b. Increased Production: We agreed the Summit should call for in-
creased use and production of coal, and should ask IEA to establish an
international coal advisory board that would recommend to gov-
ernments the specific steps that they should take to achieve this in-
crease. Schmidt wants the Summit to underline the usefulness of nu-
3 Carter made a State visit to Korea June 29–July 1 after the Tokyo G–7 Summit.
4 Owen’s reference to a “Saturday afternoon meeting” appears to be an error. Given
that the Tokyo G–7 Summit took place on Thursday, June 28 and Friday, June 29, Owen
apparently intended to refer to the Friday afternoon meeting.
5 Not further identified.
6 Carter drew an arrow pointing toward the phrase “would fit better under the reg-
ular agenda heading of energy” and wrote “ok” in the adjacent margin.
7 On March 2, IEA members agreed to cut their oil imports by 5 percent. (John
Geddes, “West Sets 5% Cut in Oil Demand,” The New York Times, March 3, 1979, p. 29)
8 Carter wrote “I agree” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
