1979 647 White House Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski David Aaron Hamilton Jordan Jody Powell DETAILED MINUTES FROM THE NSC MEETING Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by noting that there were four items on the agenda: first, the choice of the missile, second, the question of basing mode (four concepts would be discussed), third, the question of verification, and finally, the conclusions and recommendations of the principals, including public relations aspects. (C) Secretary Brown opened the question of missile size by describing the 190,000 lb. missile and stating that it was deployable in all of the ground deployment modes, though not in aircraft or in the Trident submarine. He stated that this missile was designed to carry 10 MarkÔÇô12A warheads, though, if necessary, it could probably be uploaded to as many as 12. He also argued that this missile was already designed whereas other possibilities such as the partly common missile or common missile would involve at least a one year delay. He noted, however, that the 190,000 lb. missile involved no common elements that would be usable in the Trident missile. Finally, he stated that the capability of this missile would be comparable to that of the SSÔÇô18. He then discussed the 110,000 lb. common missile, stating that this missile could carry 6 or 7 MarkÔÇô12As, or a mix of 4 MarkÔÇô12As plus 6 smaller MarkÔÇô4 RVs. He said that the effectiveness of the smaller RVs would be more sensitive to the accuracy achieved by the missile. (S) The President asked if the common missile would be as accurate as the larger MX missile. Secretary Brown responded that this would depend upon whether we were thinking about the sea-┬şbased or the land-┬şbased deployment. At sea, the missile would certainly be less accurate, and in this case it would be hard to make the argument that its capabilities would be comparable to those of the SSÔÇô18. (C) Secretary Vance asked what RV sizes were being considered. [1 line not declassified] (S) Secretary Brown said that DOD had also looked at the 160,000 lb. partly common missile, and that he had come to the conclusion that this was probably the worst of both worlds. In particular, it would pose quite a management challenge to design a single missile for operation in both the Air Force and the Navy environments. (C) Secretary Brown and General Jones responding to a question from the President, noted the differences in the two environments, and cited the fact that the Air Force employs missile designs that use a liquid fueled post-┬şboost vehicle, while the Navy is not willing to use liquid fueled rockets aboard submarines for safety reasons. (C) Secretary Brown noted that savings could probably be obtained, but they would be delayed until we actually decided to go forward with
