218
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
MINUTES
After the meeting reduced itself solely to the statutory members,
Dr. Brzezinski noted the previous discussion of diplomatic and eco-
nomic steps and outlined the proposed agenda for this portion of
the meeting.
—The military steps that might be required;
—The longer-term political actions which we might take regarding
the Khomeini Government; and
—Our future military posture in the region.
Before turning to this agenda, Secretary Vance reported on an oral
message to the President on Iran from President Brezhnev.2 He said
that the first two-thirds of the message was all right and that the last
third was about what could be expected from the Soviets. He explained
that it had been given to him by Dobrynin over the phone. Dobrynin
has been called home for consultations and Secretary Vance would meet
with him on Wednesday, December 5 and review both Iran and SALT.
The President noted that the Soviets had taken a very negative line
in TASS. He said the private assurances about their position were of
no help. Secretary Vance indicated that he would pursue this issue
vigorously with Dobrynin. The Vice President added that a continua-
tion of the Soviet press line will kill SALT.
Turning to the agenda, Dr. Brzezinski said that the principal issue
is the relationship between the military and diplomatic steps and the
economic measures which we had under consideration. He noted that
we had sent the message to the Iranians concerning holding trials of
our hostages3 which foreshadowed certain steps that we would take
to interrupt commerce with Iran.
More specifically, Dr. Brzezinski noted the decision of whether to
deploy the AWACS, whether to deploy F–111s and whether to revitalize
planning for rescue operations which had become dormant. Separate
from these deployment decisions, he added, were action decisions
2 The oral message stated that the Soviet Union held “a clear and unequivocal
position,” “consistently stand[s] for a just settlement of the conflict to mutual satisfaction
of both sides,” has told the Iranian leadership to release the hostages, and hopes the
United States appreciates this Soviet effort to relax tensions. The Soviets counseled
restraint, particularly should the United States adopt means “which are far from a
peaceful resolution of the conflict.” At the top of the paper, Carter wrote: “This is b.s.
J.” (Dictated by Ambassador Dobrynin’s Assistant, December 4; Carter Library, Plains
File, Box 23, Iran 6/75–12/79) The full message is in telegram 312888 to Moscow, Decem-
ber 4. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Box 54, Country Chron File, USSR 12/79) Telegram 312888 is printed in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 236.
3 See Document 41.
