was requested to give an explanation of what took place at the Washington Conference on this subject. He stated that it was the purpose of the Washington Conference to abolish all distinction between land and maritime frontiers save as might be required in view of any reciprocal arrangement which was not capable of being withdrawn. To state it more clearly, it was his understanding that in cases where in return for the reduction in Chinese duties at the land frontiers there had been given an advantage which could not be reconsidered, the adjustment would, in some way, have to be made equitable, but on the mere ground of reciprocity, there was no distinction to be made between land and sea frontiers. A suggestion was then made by Colonel Peel that the American, Chinese and Japanese Plans be made a composite plan for purposes of discussion, the American Plan being, in the opinion of Colonel Peel, the most complete in form and the one which would make a very good basis for such discussion. There was general agreement that a composite plan should be put before the Conference for discussion and it appeared that there was a decided preference on the part of a considerable number of the foreign Delegates in favor of using the American Plan as the basis of the composite plan for discussion as it was complete in form, yet simple and concise in defining proposals. Colonel Peel suggested that the Chinese Delegation particularly should follow the American Plan as regards form and that in order to weld all the schemes into one and accomplish something for China it would be necessary to work in a spirit of mutuality and reciprocity. Colonel Peel also stated that the British Delegation did not contemplate proposing a plan, but would be content to proceed on the basis of the three plans already submitted. Other Delegations, on inquiry by the Chairman, stated that they had no definite plan to submit, but were prepared to proceed on the basis of a composite plan made up of the American, Japanese and Chinese proposals. The Italian Delegate, Mr. Cerruti, however, read a formal statement (See pp. 42 and 43 of the Minutes of November 6, 1925). It was finally agreed that the three plans, i. e., American, Chinese and Japanese, should be arranged in the forqri of a table of three columns, each proposal side by side, for convenient consideration at the next meeting.
