North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
1093
$370 million will be in the form of paid in shares, and $100 million will
be in the form of “payable” (i.e., callable) capital. This $370 million of
paid in shares is scheduled to be paid in three installments: a $111 mil-
lion cash payment upon entry into force, a payment of $74 million in
cash plus $37 million in promissory notes at the beginning of the
second year, and a $148 million deposit of promissory notes at the be-
ginning of the third year. The payable capital of $100 million is to be
subscribed upon entry into force, but will be called only in a default sit-
uation. The U.S. share of direct contributions is $73.85 million, the first
cash installment of which is $15 million to be paid upon joining. One
year later, a payment of $10 million in cash plus $5 million in promis-
sory notes would be due, with $20 million in promissory notes due at
the beginning of the third year. The payable capital of $23.85 million
would be subscribed upon joining. The direct contributions will be
used to meet the liquidity needs of the Fund, to secure its creditworth-
iness and to provide revenues to meet administrative expenses.
The First Account will secure resources to finance associated ICAs’
buffer stocking needs through the use of the pooled cash deposits of the
associated ICAs and by market borrowing on the basis of the gov-
ernment guarantees provided by ICA participants. Pooling of ICA cash
deposits permits the use of the cash deposit of an ICA not in a buying
phase to meet the buffer stocking needs of another ICA which is. This
“pooling effect” will reduce the average level of borrowing the Fund as
a whole will need to undertake by comparison with the individual
agreements operating alone. The direct contributions, by enhancing the
Fund’s creditworthiness, will also serve to reduce the interest rate
charged the Fund on its borrowings.
In the early 1970s the LDCs (unrealistically) envisaged the
Common Fund as a financial institution with sizable resources (several
billion dollars) which would finance the creation of ICAs for the indi-
vidual commodities, end-running the opposition of several DCs (not-
ably the United States) to ICAs and their resultant unwillingness to
finance same. This objective was mooted when the Carter Administra-
tion indicated its support for ICAs, and subsequently negotiated U.S.
participation in (and financing for) several of them—tin, natural
rubber, sugar, and coffee. At the same time, we indicated we could only
accept a Common Fund based on the pooling of the resources of
ICAs—a concept which basically survived the final negotiation. Hence
the institution which now emerges is a far cry from the original LDC
idea, representing only a modest financial backstop to existing ICAs
(though also something of a political victory for the “South”).
The major carry-over from the original LDC idea of a Common
Fund with its “own resources” is the Second Account which will be fi-
nanced by voluntary contributions. Governments may allocate part of
