680 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX will face from labor sector no challenge that it cannot control, regime may be in race with time to complete industrialization/development program and begin disbursement of substantial material rewards before embryonic worker militancy flowers and spreads as it has, for example, in Poland. 18. Scientists, academicians, technicians, sub-managers, career bureaucrats, and other professionals are crucial to success of Romania’s modernization effort. Aware of this, regime has been generally successful in providing them with status, facilities, promotion opportunities, and material rewards. Nevertheless, there are indications that at least some of these persons feel their talents are underutilized and insufficiently recognized, especially in a situation in which political reliability is still a more important criterion for advancement than individual competence in situations where one of these two elements is missing. Consequently, while Romania’s late start at intensive modernizationcum-industrialization has probably postponed the conflict between technocrats and apparatchiks generally predicted for this type of society, as emphasis switches more and more to quality rather than quantity this problem could become more acute. June 7 appointment of Elena Ceausescu as President of National Council of Science and Technology will not help. 19. Peasants traditionally have constituted most exploited and most explosive element in Romania (e.g. 1907 Peasant Revolt), but postwar industrialization program has changed situation radically and sapped countryside of its destabilizing potential. Agricultural labor force now consists preponderantly of women and old men, as young male (and many female) workers have been absorbed by industry. Further, conditions in the countryside today are light years better than they have ever been, with schools, health care, decent housing, roads, electricity, and potable water systems extended into all areas of the country. Youth and Students 20. Communist Youth Organization (UTC) and Communist Students Association (UASCR) are all-encompassing organizations controlled by the adult party for which they serve as a principal training and recruitment ground. In spite of some differences in style and outlook, they have shown little tendency to strike out on their own as party youth movements have in other countries; they probably could not do so here even if they wanted to. Nor have we detected any inclination to form ad hoc groups outside UTC/UASCR framework around specific issues or personalities. As a rule, Romanian youth/ students are not a volatile element as compared to similar groups elsewhere. Concerned about career opportunities and a job assignment system rigorously based on academic achievement, most Romanian students have neither time nor energy to become involved in non-
