172  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
projected threats indicate that the Soviet Union is rapidly closing the 
technology gap which will allow it to enhance its capability to wage 
nuclear conflict at various levels of intensity. Therefore, it is prudent 
to maintain US deterrent capability over a wide spectrum of possible 
conflict through a concept that embraces both strategic and theater 
nuclear weapons. This close coupling of US strategic capabilities to the-
ater forces and the extension of the nuclear umbrella to theaters with-
out stalwart US conventional defenses are believed to have enhanced 
deterrence of nuclear and conventional coercion and attack, especially 
in the face of Soviet force improvement.
—Targeting for an assured retaliation capability should remain 
focused on the postwar recovery resources and, as practical, national 
leadership and primary military threats. This is particularly true in 
light of evident Soviet hardening efforts (storage facilities, work force 
shelters, political/military centers, etc.) and other civil defense pro-
grams. Targeting of national leadership (includes political/­military C3) 
and military nuclear/conventional capabilities enhances deterrence, 
helps limit damage to the extent practical, and denies the Soviets the 
capability to seize industrial resources in Europe as a basis for their 
recovery. Additional intelligence support is needed to provide an ade-
quate data base which will enable recovery forecasting and improve 
the capability for targeting post-­attack recovery resources.
—A survivable strategic reserve force is considered even more nec-
essary as a means for the United States to deter further attack (following 
a major nuclear exchange) from either the USSR/PRC or other world 
powers, or to achieve objectives which were not fully accomplished by 
the initial SIOP laydown.
—Escalation control appears to be an increasingly viable concept in 
view of the extensive Soviet ICBM hardening efforts, the SLBM threat, 
and ABM Treaty agreements. Counterforce (as a damage limiting capa-
bility) has limited effectiveness, making escalation control one of the 
few means of limiting damage to the United States, particularly in the 
absence of improved US civil defense measures.
—US NATO Allies’ confidence in deterrence is strengthened if they 
believe the United States has options that are usable and effective to 
defend NATO. NATO’s Nuclear Operations (NOP) provide for general 
nuclear war attacks on the Warsaw Pact which can be simultaneously exe-
cuted with the US SIOP. Included in the NOP are Selected Employment 
Plans (SEPs) developed by NATO which are similar in concept to US 
LNOs and RNOs. Any US limited nuclear capability strengthens Allied 
confidence in the US willingness and capability to defend NATO. Con-
sideration of current policy must include its impact on Allied solidarity.
RECOMMENDATIONS
(TS) I endorse the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the pol-
icy stated in NSDM–242 appears valid for the immediate future, and 
I recommend that NSDM–242 be retained for employment planning 
purposes. I do this because even if further analysis indicates that sig-
nificant policy modifications should be directed at some future point, 
adequate lead time will be necessary to transition to a new employment 
policy. Indeed, because of the complexity of the planning process, while 
some limited modifications might be introduced more rapidly, two or
