368 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV the world in October 1957 with the impression that the Soviets were far ahead of the United States in space technology. In the late 1950’s and early 1960’s, it took a “catch-­up” program costing many billions of dollars and years of concentrated effort to correct that impression; in the more perilous area of strategic weaponry in the 1980’s, the consequences could be much more serious. We believe it is also important to bear in mind that Soviet doctrine does not mirror the widely held view in the United States that nuclear war is unthinkable. Soviet doctrine treats nuclear conflict as undesirable, but also as both possible and winnable. We do not believe this doctrine can be dismissed as declaratory posturing, for they suit the action to the word. Across the whole range of strategic capability—­force structure, command and control, hardening, dispersal, civil defense, etc.—­we see evidence of a nation which takes seriously the possibility of nuclear conflict. Tactical Nuclear Forces: The formal clear-­cut US lead in tactical nuclear capability has been overtaken by the Soviets. The implications of this vanished edge are particularly serious in a NATO context. The previously cited NIE 11–4–78 makes a persuasive case for the Soviet expectations of a better-­than-­even chance of gaining a quick conventional victory in Europe. Many of our European allies share this view and consider a credible threat of escalation as an indispensable element of the NATO deterrent. Our NATO Allies have long viewed tactical nuclear weapons as both an essential leg of the “NATO Triad” (general purpose, theater nuclear, and strategic nuclear forces) and a key element in assuring the credibility of the escalation option within NATO’s MC 14/3 flexible response strategy. However, given the state of essential equivalence in US–USSR strategic nuclear forces and clear Warsaw Pact numerical superiority in conventional forces, the absence of an Allied edge in tactical nuclear capability is an added source of deep concern especially to defense planners in NATO capitals. General Purpose Forces: The United States and its allies have never attempted to match the Soviet predilection for mass and numbers in conventional warfare. Rather, we have tended to rely upon the force multiplier effect of technologically superior forces to offset more numerous but relatively unsophisticated forces of potential opponents. In recent years, however, Soviet quantitative advantages have persisted or widened while many of the key US qualitative advantages have been systematically overtaken. This qualitative erosion is a consequence of an extensive Soviet R&D effort and a reequipment program that has outpaced our own by a wide margin. Soviet progress has been evident across the board. They are modernizing their ground forces with improved armor (new main battle tank), firepower (artillery with superior range and rate of fire),
