24 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII The one exception was the Station Chief whose life was considered to be in danger. The general consensus was that the new government should commit the first overt action. Our recommendations in this regard would of course change if we came to the conclusion that effective short term action could and should be taken against the regime. We also decided to resist Peace Corps who apparently have asked for permission now to increase their presence in Afghanistan as a result of the new situation. The following assignments were given out: 1. A paper on recognition which could if necessary be sent to the President.4 If the Iranians are willing to move quickly on recognition this paper will not be necessary and we will go in step with them. 2. State is to ensure that all concerned agencies have current guidance on our attitude towards the new regime (for instance we want to avoid conjuring up a red menace). State will also meet with USIA to ensure that they have proper guidance. 3. State is to undertake more active diplomatic contacts, notably with the FRG and China. 4. CIA will prepare a paper on prospects for Afghan-Soviet relations.5 This will be a quick look at the subject to be followed later probably by a SNIE. 5. CIA will prepare a paper examining the prospects for successful covert action and the utility of black propaganda.6 4 No paper was found. Instructions regarding de facto recognition of the new Afghan Government were relayed in telegram 110057 to Kabul on April 29: “In brief, the basic thrust of the Dept’s present approach is to play down question of recognition as much as possible with a view to avoidance of seeming to approve or disapprove the new government. Generally, once the situation has clarified, the new regime is effectively in control of the machinery of government and of the territory of the state in question, and other governments have begun to recognize or formally continue diplomatic relations, we find an appropriate opportunity to advise the new government of our intention to maintain diplomatic relations. Recognition is not mentioned but may be implied by USG continuing to deal with new government.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780184–0669) The Embassy presented a note to the Afghan Foreign Ministry on May 6 stating “the intention of the Government of the United States of America to maintain diplomatic relations with the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.” In telegram 3601 from Kabul, May 6, the Embassy reported that the protocol officer of the Afghan Foreign Ministry received the note “with a smile, and seemed relieved.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780193–0987) In his first conversation with the new Afghan President, May 6, Eliot informed Taraki that “we do not extend formal recognition but indicate, as we have done, that we want to continue normal diplomatic relations.” (Telegram 3619 from Kabul, May 6; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780193–1106) 5 See Document 13. 6 See Document 25.
