Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
109
48.
Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to Telegram the
Department of State1
Vienna, May 7, 1979, 0942Z
4406. US ASAT Three 014. From Buchheim. Mil addressees handle
as Specat. NASA for Krueger. Subject: (U) Restricted Meeting, May 4,
1979—Part Two.
1. (Secret—Entire text.)
2. Part one of this report is ASAT Three 013;2 there are only two
parts.
3. Summary: Restricted meeting was held at Soviet Embassy at
10:30 a.m., Friday, May 4, 1979. Attendees: U.S. side: Buchheim, Brad-
burn, Darbyshire and Smith (interpreter); Soviet side: Khlestov, Mayor-
skiy, Pisarev, Terekhov (interpreter). Buchheim presented prepared
statement (see ASAT Three 013) on view of U.S. side on possible differ-
ences of approach between U.S. and Soviet sides with respect to what
we are trying to deal with in a prohibited-acts element. U.S. side seeks
prohibition of certain acts against space objects; Soviet side appears to
be trying to deal also with acts against missions in which space objects
are used. U.S. side suggested that unknown future contingencies can be
dealt with through provisions for consultation, amendment and with-
drawal, and argued against an exception for cases of “hostile acts”. So-
viet side did not agree. Soviet side asserted need to be permitted by the
terms of the agreement to take immediate steps, including the acts oth-
erwise prohibited in the agreement, to defend itself in case of a “hostile
act” against it. End summary.
4. Following Buchheim’s prepared statement, Khlestov said he un-
derstood that the U.S. side appeared to be recognizing the viewpoint of
the Soviet side, that a state whose legitimate interest had been violated
retained the right to defend itself. But, he said, he had the impression
that the U.S. was opposed to including an exception for “hostile acts” in
a prohibited-acts element. He said the U.S. had suggested a right of
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790206–0901. Se-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the National Security Council,
the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Moscow.
2 ASAT 013 is telegram 4398 from Vienna, May 4, and reported that Buchheim read
a prepared statement to the Soviet Delegation that focused around the question that was
“impeding general agreement between us.” The two sides needed to decide whether they
were “seeking solely to set forth undertakings not to carry out certain acts against space
objects, or are we also trying also to deal with missions?” The United States believed that
the answer was the former and that “in these discussions we are not engaged in the latter
task, and that we should not try to deal with that task.” (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D790204–0313)
