796 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 145. Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts1 Washington, June 2, 1990, 0607Z 177921. Subject: U.S.–Soviet Summit Joint Statements on START and START Follow-­on Negotiations 1. There follows the texts of the joint statements on the START Treaty and on START follow-­on negotiations issued at the summit on June 1, 1990. Posts may use these statements as appropriate in briefing on the summit. 2. Begin text of joint statement on the treaty on strategic offensive arms: The President of the United States George Bush and the President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Mikhail S. Gorbachev discussed the status of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. The two presidents expressed their satisfaction with the great progress which has been made in the negotiations on this treaty. In particular, they welcomed the mutually acceptable solutions which have been found on major issues in the talks and reaffirmed their determination to have the treaty completed and ready for signature by the end of this year. They instructed their negotiating teams in Geneva to accelerate their work to complete the joint draft text recording the details of these solutions in order to fulfill this goal. The START treaty will be a major landmark in both arms control and in the relationship between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. It results from the recognition by both sides of the special obligation they bear to reduce the risk of outbreak of nuclear war, enhance strategic stability, and strengthen peace and international security. As such, the START treaty will signal a turning point in U.S.–Soviet arms control efforts toward a more rational, open, cooperative, predictable and stable relationship. The treaty will complement to a remarkable degree the important political changes which have recently begun to remove the hostility and suspicion and will facilitate the reduction of the sizeable stockpiles of strategic offensive arms which now exist. The benefits of this treaty are many. For the first time ever, both sides will carry out significant reductions in strategic offensive arms—­up to 50 percent in certain categories. More importantly, these 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, D900499–0798. Unclassified; Priority. Sent Priority for information to the Special Embassy Program and Leningrad. Drafted by Jack Deasy (EUR/SOV) from a text from the White House; cleared by Vershbow and Pifer, and in S/S, S/S-O, and NSC; approved by Seitz.
