6  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
8. After making a brief over-­all summary of the agency comments 
in relation to the Panel recommendations, I shall ask Dr. Killian, who 
has helped with this summary, to comment at the end, before the indi­
vidual agencies discuss their views.
9. To facilitate Council consideration, the Panel recommendations 
have been grouped on the sheets distributed to you (and to be collected 
at the end of the meeting), in accordance with the position taken by 
the agency having primary responsibility to comment. Such a grouping 
does not indicate the position of any other agency, or that implementing 
action would be taken before Presidential decision.
10. As to Group A: “Panel recommendations which the agency 
assigned primary responsibility for comment fully concurs in, and 
would carry out in general conformity with Panel views”, I shall advert 
to only four items:
No. 1. Using SAC’s planning criterion for reaction time to a bomber 
attack, i.e., 30 to 120 minutes, depending on the base location; only 1/10 
SAC (157 bombers) are at present on an alert status to get off, weapons 
aboard, on way to target, within the assumed tactical warning time. By 
mid-59, 1/3 SAC (515 bombers) will be on such an alert status.
No. 3. We will have 3 nuclear-­powered Polaris submarines (each 
with 16 Polaris missiles)—­currently budgeted for—­operational well 
ahead of the Panel’s CY 62 deadline. We are still studying whether to 
increase the force from 6 to 18 submarines.
No. 4. While concurring in the urgency of this anti-­missile area 
defense program against ICBMs and of research and development 
therefor, Defense believes a decision as to installation of such a system 
would be premature before the research is completed.
No. 5. Because of the complexity of the fallout shelter program, 
and because the final comments of certain agencies have not yet been 
received, it will be desirable to put this item over until the January 16 
NSC Meeting, together with certain other items not yet fully ready.
11. As to Group B: “Panel recommendations which the agency 
assigned primary responsibility for comment partly concurs in, and 
would carry out on a modified basis.”
Generally speaking, current Defense plans would not implement 
Nos. 11 to 18, inclusive, as rapidly as or in the quantities recommended 
by the Panel.
For example, No. 11 and No. 12, which seek to lessen SAC’s vul­
nerability to now-­existing bomber threat. The main part of our early 
warning network from Midway to mid-Atlantic is now operational 
with substantial capability, and will be operational with modernized 
equipment by mid-1960. Segments of the network and the 100,000-­ft. 
altitude radars will not be effective until 1960–1962. Only 29 of 52 SAC 
bases will have anti-­aircraft missile defenses by mid-60. Whether to 
provide missile defenses at all SAC bases, in addition to area defenses, 
has not yet been decided.
