Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I their position the litmus test. At the same time, since May they have, in effect, adjourned the substantive discussion of major SALT issues until September at the earliest, while continuing their public attacks on our SALT position and dismissing the B–1 decision.2 Their strategy appears to be to put maximum pressure on you at the eleventh hour of the existing agreement and, in the meantime, keep up a drumfire of public pressure in the hopes that American opinion will cause you to compromise on key points.3 Looking backward, it may well be that the Soviets have misinterpreted our willingness to compromise last May on a three-part SALT agreement.4 Coming only six weeks after we tabled our comprehensive proposal they may have felt that the rough treatment they gave us at the time paid off and may believe that further public pressure along those lines may pay off again. They seem to be adopting a similar attitude on the summit: we wanting it and they putting it off. Our Nervous Allies Our European allies are always anxious. If we do not get along with the Soviets, they are concerned about the threat to them. If we get along well with the Soviets, they fear condominium over them.5 The allies are particularly anxious with a change of Administrations. The Soviets traditionally have sought to drive a wedge between the United States and the Europeans at each change of Administration by suggesting either that we will not defend their interests or that we are incompetent to do so. The Soviets are making the same effort again. Their opportunities are enhanced by the political and personal insecurities of several West European leaders. That this is, in fact, a campaign is clear by the fact that they are using the human rights issue on which Schmidt, in particular, is vulnerable because of his desire to liberate ethnic Germans in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. The human rights issue is being portrayed by the Soviets as a campaign which you undertook “out of the blue.” It is important to bear in mind that we have had indications that make clear that there was a 2 Reference is to the administration’s decision to discontinue deployment of the B–1 bomber, which the President announced at a June 30 news conference. For Carter’s re-
