Comprehensive Test Ban
329
test. China has accorded high visibility to weapons testing which it has
indicated that it would continue, and could be expected to severely crit-
icize a CTB as superpower collusion. While we could not expect to alter
Peking’s opposition to a CTB, we should consult with them early in the
process to minimize any possible concerns that we would seek to iso-
late or embarrass them through a CTB.
Similarly, it may be expected that France will be reluctant to ad-
here to any test-limiting agreement within the near term. (Embassy
Paris reports that even a leftist government would be expected to con-
tinue testing in the near term.)8 They are currently in the midst of major
strategic and tactical weapons modernization efforts. The UK, on the
other hand, although concerned as to whether its Polaris Improvement
Program could be completed, could be expected to respond favorably
to a US CTB initiative and adhere to a CTB agreement.
The fact that some nations, particularly China, will continue to de-
velop nuclear explosives would undoubtedly be viewed with concern
by the Soviet Union. However, since current Chinese weapons tech-
nology is believed significantly inferior to that of the US and USSR, the
Soviets would probably be less concerned about a short-term continua-
tion of Chinese testing. In the long term, this situation would be viewed
as a serious problem by the Soviets and could even pose a problem for
the US from the national security standpoint. The result is that an indef-
inite duration CTBT without periodic reviews is unlikely to be accept-
able to the Soviets. A more realistic test ban goal for both US and Soviet
interests would be a treaty which had to be reviewed periodically and
which provided a supreme interests escape clause.
E. Allied Perceptions
Allied confidence in the reliability of our commitment to their se-
curity is based on their perceptions of a number of factors including the
quality and level of US conventional forces assigned to their defense,
the quality and level of US tactical and strategic nuclear forces relative
to those of their potential adversaries, alliance doctrine and declaratory
policy on the use of nuclear weapons and their perceptions of US polit-
ical will to defend them. A mutual cessation of testing by the US and
USSR would probably not, in and of itself, particularly concern them.
Indeed, most have strongly supported the concept of a CTB in their de-
claratory policies. However, if it were to be interpreted by them as a
signal of the beginning of US disengagement from its commitment, this
would create the potential for serious political and non-proliferation
considerations. Thus, while all our allies except France would publicly
8 The report is available in telegram 3727 from Paris, February 7. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770042–1173)
