312  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
— Acceptance of the Soviet package proposal. The Soviets have pro-
posed a package that accepts our right to use our preferred method of 
verification (CORRTEX) in exchange for the right to use theirs (seismic 
plus additional on-­site inspection—OSI), and splits the difference on the 
issue of what yield will trigger CORRTEX/seismic verification (75 kt).
Although DOD argues that acceptance of seismic verification puts 
us on a slippery slope to a comprehensive test ban, we can agree to this 
package without jeopardizing our case that a CTB is unacceptable as 
long as we rely on nuclear weapons for deterrence. The Soviets’ “addi-
tional” OSI is no more intrusive than that used for CORRTEX, and 
could enhance verification and strengthen our hand during ratification. 
A 75 kt trigger was our position until we changed to 50 kt last year.
— Instructions to finish the job. Once we get a decision from the 
President accepting the Soviet package, instructions to complete 
the protocols would be essential to minimize agency foot-­dragging 
on the remaining issues.
START. The one major START subject that we think can be resolved 
is air-­launched cruise missiles (ALCMs), but it will take a decision from 
the President to break the interagency logjam:
— ALCM Range/Distinguishability/Counting trade. We need to agree 
with the Soviets on what ALCMs are limited by the treaty, as defined 
by: (1) range (the Soviets want to include all ALCMS above 600 kms, we 
want to include all ALCMs above 1500 kms) and (2) warhead type (we 
both agree that only nuclear-­armed should be counted, but have not 
agreed on how to tell what is conventionally-­armed).
We also need to agree on how to count ALCMs against the 6000 
warhead ceiling (the Soviets want each ALCM to count as one, we 
want them to count less). Because we want a high range and low 
count and the Soviets want the opposite, there are package deals that 
might split the difference.
We need to get USG agreement in principle to the idea of a pack-
age approach with some US give. Then we need to define our bottom 
lines and select a strategy for making the proposal: (1) modification 
of our current “attribution” approach which undercounts the number 
of ALCMs on each bomber, or (2) counting the number of ALCMs on 
bombers as the bombers are actually equipped, with an explicit dis-
count that counts each ALCM as only 5 or 75).
In addition, the package should exclude conventional ALCMs, and 
allow for a limited number of conventional bombers outside the START 
limits.
— V/S. An agreement to notify strategic exercises should be ready 
for signature by the Ministerial. We will send a draft agreement to ban 
short time-­of-­flight SLBM tests to the Soviets before the Ministerial; it 
could also be ready for signature. (We may have to fend off the argu-
ment that such agreements violate our Krasnoyarsk pledge.)
We plan to flesh out our proposals for early missile production 
monitoring and data exchange, and other proposals may be brought to 
the point of agreement in principle.
