1150
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Sadat said that before Camp David, he felt they would
reach nothing. There was a heavy campaign by each side against the
other. He had an inner confidence that was tactical, not strategic. Now
Begin gives nothing, because of what he has lived for the last 40 years:
the West Bank. A mutual friend of theirs heard that Begin wants the
West Bank. This raises difficulties. In history, Begin wants to go down
as the man who made peace with Egypt, which has been important
since Moses. Until Begin visits here, and the President hears him, then
he (President Sadat) can’t give his idea about the whole thing. He
knows that Begin doesn’t want to act in the West Bank as he did in
Sinai, for ideological reasons. He (President Sadat) sent Begin a letter,7
saying that if Begin stayed in the middle of the road, then the person
after him would take the whole credit: for both the comprehensive
peace and the treaty with Egypt. He (President Sadat) will not make up
his mind until Begin meets here with the President.
The President said that the hardest for Begin of all was dismantling
the settlements in the Sinai. He (the President) does not believe Begin
will give East Jerusalem to the Arabs, so it will need to stay unified. Ex-
cept for Jerusalem, Sinai was the worst problem; it was torture for
Begin on the settlements.
Dr. Brzezinski said that at Camp David he had referred to the settle-
ments as colonial. Begin had asked him to go for a private walk, and
had upbraided him for using that word. Begin said that his right eye
would fall out, and his right arm would fall off, before he would agree
to give up the Sinai settlements. But 10 days later he did.
President Sadat said Begin told him the Sinai settlements would go
with him (Begin) to the grave.
The President said that Begin had had a good reception at those
settlements.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said that the problem of the West Bank
settlements was worse.
President Sadat said that if he could solve the Jerusalem problem, he
insists. . . . There should be public opinion here and in the whole world;
why should Israel put the U.S. in such a position with 800 million
Moslems? He tells Israelis, how many of you are there, 16 million? Why
not take U.S. interests into account in the Muslim world? When Begin
agrees on Jerusalem, then he (President Sadat) will give water.
7 Although Sadat had sent a letter to Begin regarding the state of negotiations on
March 17 (see Document 351), the Egyptian newspaper Al-Ahram announced March 30
that Sadat would send a “new message” to Begin in the next two days. (Telegram 7052
from Cairo, March 30; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800160–1041) The text of this second letter, likely the one Sadat referenced here, was not
found.
