National Security Policy  367
107.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 385th NSC Meeting1
Washington, November 6, 1958
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 385th2 NSC Meeting on Thursday, November 6, 1958
Present at the 385th Meeting of the National Security Council 
were the President of the United Sates, Presiding; the Secretary of 
Defense; and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. 
Also present were the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director, Bureau of 
the Budget, and the Deputy Secretary of Defense. The following mem­
bers of the Comparative Evaluation Group also attended this meet­
ing: the Under Secretary of State; the Director of Central Intelligence; 
and the Special Assistants to the President for Science and Technology 
and for National Security Affairs. Also attending the meeting were the 
Director and Mr. John H. Daniel of the Weapons Systems Evaluation 
Group; the Assistant to the President; the White House Staff Secretary; 
the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; Lt. General Karl W. Barnes 
and Mr. Charles Ahern of the Central Intelligence Agency; the 
NSC Representative on Internal Security; and the Acting Executive 
Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. COMPARATIVE EVALUATION GROUP
(NSC 5815)
Mr. Gray opened the meeting by noting that its purpose was to 
hear an oral presentation of a Comparative Evaluation Study of U.S. 
and Soviet Air Defense Radar Developments and Capabilities. He said 
the study was undertaken pursuant to NSC 5815, which established, 
under the NSC, a Comparative Evaluations Group (CEG) responsible 
for making comparative evaluations of U.S. and Soviet capabilities in 
selected weapons systems. He mentioned that the CEG is comprised 
of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Under Secretary of State; the 
Director of Central Intelligence; the Chairman of the President’s Board 
of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities; and the President’s 
Special Assistants for Science and Technology and for National Security 
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Comparative Evaluation Group. Top Secret; Eyes Only. 
3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
2 This was a Special Meeting with limited attendance to hear the report of the 
Comparative Evaluation Group. [Footnote is in the original.]
