Negotiating Channels SUMMARY Per your instructions, we met to review our Iran strategy.2 We reviewed the key channels which are now being used: the United Nations; the PLO, which may be useful again in the future; the Sudanese Sadiq al-Mahdi; Professor Richard Cottam who talks directly with Ghotbzadeh; Swiss Ambassador Lang in Tehran, who has access to key individuals for relaying messages; the Egyptian journalist Heikal; and the French lawyers who will see Ham and Hal Saunders again tomorrow.3 All agreed that we should keep all of these channels open and exploit any others which may become available. However, none of them have any immediate prospects of producing significant movement toward release of the hostages. The key problem remains that we do not have an authoritative individual with whom we can negotiate. The elections this weekend may produce someone who will be willing and able to take more direct action. Some believe that once the new President is elected, Khomeini will accept a less active role and turn over greater authority. However, this may not occur until after the legislative elections in late February, and there is considerable skepticism that it will happen at all. The French lawyers told Ham that a new President will immediately be faced with a challenge from the clerical elements on the Revolutionary Council and will be unable to take independent action. The French lawyers felt that the runoff period after the preliminary balloting this weekend may provide the most promising window for a U.S. initiative, by approaching opposing candidates with a U.S. plan. Three basic strategies were examined, which are not mutually exclusive: 1. Accept a high-risk strategy in which we agree to take a series of steps unilaterally, with some corresponding steps by the Iranians to confirm acceptance at each point. This would mean we would have to give up our present position of demanding release of the hostages as a starting point. We would have to be willing to play some cards without real assurance that the hostages would be released at the end 2 Brzezinski told Turner the meeting was necessary because he was “having difficulty keeping it together.” (Memorandum from Turner to Carlucci, McMahon, and Cogan, January 24; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
