Negotiating Channels
431
SUMMARY
Per your instructions, we met to review our Iran strategy.2 We
reviewed the key channels which are now being used: the United
Nations; the PLO, which may be useful again in the future; the Sudanese
Sadiq al-Mahdi; Professor Richard Cottam who talks directly with
Ghotbzadeh; Swiss Ambassador Lang in Tehran, who has access to
key individuals for relaying messages; the Egyptian journalist Heikal;
and the French lawyers who will see Ham and Hal Saunders again
tomorrow.3 All agreed that we should keep all of these channels open
and exploit any others which may become available. However, none
of them have any immediate prospects of producing significant move-
ment toward release of the hostages.
The key problem remains that we do not have an authoritative
individual with whom we can negotiate. The elections this weekend
may produce someone who will be willing and able to take more direct
action. Some believe that once the new President is elected, Khomeini
will accept a less active role and turn over greater authority. However,
this may not occur until after the legislative elections in late February,
and there is considerable skepticism that it will happen at all. The
French lawyers told Ham that a new President will immediately be
faced with a challenge from the clerical elements on the Revolutionary
Council and will be unable to take independent action. The French
lawyers felt that the runoff period after the preliminary balloting this
weekend may provide the most promising window for a U.S. initiative,
by approaching opposing candidates with a U.S. plan.
Three basic strategies were examined, which are not mutually
exclusive:
1. Accept a high-risk strategy in which we agree to take a series
of steps unilaterally, with some corresponding steps by the Iranians
to confirm acceptance at each point. This would mean we would have
to give up our present position of demanding release of the hostages
as a starting point. We would have to be willing to play some cards
without real assurance that the hostages would be released at the end
2 Brzezinski told Turner the meeting was necessary because he was “having diffi-
culty keeping it together.” (Memorandum from Turner to Carlucci, McMahon, and
Cogan, January 24; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence, Job 95M01183R: Policy Files (1977–1981), Box 1, Folder 3: DCI Turner—Eyes Only
Files—Memos and Meetings with Various Officials and Subjects) In a January 23 note
sent to Brzezinski for this January 24 meeting, Turner wrote: “Iran is rapidly crumbling,”
the left is making advances, “the hostage issue is forcing us to cause Iran to crumble
and not to give help, advice, support, etc.,” “the time is coming when timely resolution
of the hostage crisis will be in the national interest,” and “a rescue attempt may be the
only avenue open to us.” (Ibid.)
3 Villalon and Bourguet; see Document 164.
