50
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the Secretary had a chance to consult with the President and others.3
End summary.
1. The Secretary met with Pakistan Foreign Affairs Advisor Agha
Shahi in New York on May 25. Shahi was accompanied by Pakistan’s
UN Perm Rep Akhund, Ambassador Yaqub-Khan, Additional Foreign
Secretary Niaz Niak and Minister-Counselor Hayat Mehdi. Also pres-
ent were Counselor Matthew Nimetz, Assistant Secretary Saunders,
and Ambassador Leonard. PAB Country Director Jane Coon was
notetaker.
2. Shahi opened the discussion by noting that there had been an
exchange of views in Islamabad with the U.S. Embassy but he was
disquieted because our perceptions varied so much.4 Pakistan believes
there has been a profound qualitative change in the regional situation;
the USSR is on Pakistan’s borders. Pakistan is following a correct policy
toward the new regime in Kabul but that government has served notice
of its intentions with respect to the Baluch and Pathan problems. In
this connection, Shahi cited the Afghan Foreign Minister’s statement
in Havana calling for settlement of these problems in light of their
quote historic antecedents unquote.5 The new regime says it is non-
aligned and it may choose to consolidate its position first, but then it
will begin subversion against Pakistan.
3. Pakistan has taken a quote independent attitude unquote toward
the Soviets, e.g., the refusal of the overflight permission for Soviet
planes to Ethiopia. Now Pakistan faces the external danger of having
the Soviets use the Afghan regime as a tool against Pakistan. In addition,
there is also the internal danger from leftist elements in Pakistan who
may try to follow the Afghan example. He claimed Pakistan already
had information on subversion by Afghan/KGB agents in Iran and it
may reach as far as Saudi Arabia. If Pakistan’s intelligents see the USSR
as the stronger power in the region he fears for the future of Pakistan.
4. Agha Shahi referred to his May 7–10 visit to Iran. The Shah, he
said, is perturbed and wants to initiate closer cooperation among Iran,
Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and India. Agha Shahi, however, has great
reservations about the Iranian tendency to go over Pakistan’s head to
India and equal difficulty in accepting the U.S. and Iranian perception
that we can loosen Indian ties to the USSR. Indeed, the Delhi-Moscow-
Kabul axis has revived. Pakistan, according to Shahi, is a front line
3 Vance and Shahi met again on June 2, as reported in telegram 141229 to Kabul,
June 3. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
4 See Document 18.
5 The text of Afghan Foreign Minister Hafizullah’s speech in Havana during the
Ministerial meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement was relayed in telegram 4225 from
Kabul, May 24. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780218–0877)
