Yen considered that it would be necessary for the subcommittee to agree upon certain principles before proceeding, the first being whether it was the sense of the subcommittee that the 2½ per cent surtax must be exceeded during the interim period and as to how much money would be required to meet China’s needs. Mr. Strawn pointed out, as he had done several times before, that the American Delegation was prepared to give China the 2½ per cent and 5 per cent surtax at once and proceed to the negotiation of a new treaty for the so-called interim surtaxes. For his part, he felt that the subcommittee should take up each of the subjects within the scope of the subcommittee’s work and dispose of them as they could agree and leave for later decision those upon which they could not agree. He considered that the uses to which the money would be put and the rates, were necessarily related and it seemed to him that they ought to be discussed together. Mr. Hioki agreed with this view and particularly with the order of procedure suggested by the American Delegation, and the Delegates from Belgium, France and Denmark also endorsed Mr. Strawn’s statement. A discussion ensued as to the classification of certain articles, the method followed in preparing the Luxury List, and the approximate revenues to be derived from the several plans. Mr. Strawn remarked that if the rates proposed were not high enough he favored considering higher rates or a readjustment which would bring in the necessary amount of revenue. He said also that the American Delegates would not insist on the adoption of their plan if some better plan could be evolved, the American proposal having been submitted merely as a basis of negotiation. Mr. Stewart announced that the British Delegation was not prepared to discuss even the main principles suggested by Dr. Yen because these principles depended, largely, upon what they had been discussing at other meetings. Briefly, the position of the British Delegates was that it was premature to discuss the principles in the mind of Dr. Yen until several other important questions connected with the Conference had either been thoroughly discussed or agreed upon. Mr. Stewart suggested that, before going further, they should postpone the meeting until some of the Delegates had expressed themselves as ready to discuss the proposals made by the Chinese, American and Japanese Delegations. He considered this to be most essential, but Admiral Tsai wished his “B” Grade Luxury list discussed either by the Delegates or Technical Advisers. Mr. Oudendijk suggested, however, that the “B” Grade Luxury List properly belonged to all three proposals that had been
