XLVIII Summary of Print Volume State Dulles, viewed the plan as laudible in its intention yet unrealistic and potentially divisive in its reliance on American funding (254, 261). Despite tensions between the nations, President Eisenhower’s visit to Brazil in February 1960 was very successful. Eisenhower’s personal popularity with the Brazilian people was credited with having contributed to a more positive tone in U.S.-Brazilian relations, although nothing concrete resulted from his visit (282–286). As 1960 ended, the Kubitschek government was replaced with that of Janio da Silva Quadros (296). U.S. policymakers were concerned that the Quadros government, though not likely to upset dramatically the course of U.S.-Brazilian relations, would pursue a more willful and neutralistic foreign policy than his predecessor (300). The Eisenhower administration assigned a high priority to cultivating good relations with Mexico. Eisenhower himself corresponded regularly with Presidents Adolfo Ruíz Cortines and Adolfo López Mateos. He met three times with López Mateos during 1959 and 1960. Numerous contacts at the ministerial level were maintained. U.S. policymakers welcomed the inauguration of López Mateos on December 1, 1958, believing him to be more realistic in his views on Mexico’s domestic economy and economic relations with the United States than Ruíz Cortines. Senate majority leader Lyndon B. Johnson, who had met with López Mateos in November, however, found him to be “reserved and somewhat prejudiced” against the United States, particularly American business interests (320). U.S.-Mexican relations continued to be characterized by an air of outward friendliness coupled with a traditional suspicion, on Mexico’s part, of U.S. intentions and power (334). Economic questions, particularly on trade, dominated the U.S.- Mexican agenda during the late 1950s. U.S. tariffs on Mexican lead and zinc troubled the Mexican Government and Eisenhower administration alike. Discussions of the coffee and cotton trade, of the promotion of tourism, and about territorial waters and fishing rights were pursued in this period. Politically, the Eisenhower administration tried to impress upon the Mexican Government the dangers posed to the hemisphere by the Cuban revolution and Fidel Castro. The López Mateos government, however, was sympathetic to the aspirations of the Cubans in overthrowing the Batista dictatorship (345).
