1028 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II and provincial, there is no information upon which to base nation-wide estimates of the birth rate or to gauge the means whereby success in reducing fertility is being achieved. Considerable progress has been recorded in two other Asian countries among the 13, namely, Indonesia and Thailand. The latter’s population growth rate is estimated to have declined from 3.1 percent at the start of the Third Five-Year Plan in 1971 to 2.5 percent in 1976. Progress has been made in the Philippines, although organizational and administrative problems have impeded the program’s potential. Vietnam’s— by all indications—vigorous birth control program is still too new to have produced significant nation-wide results. There have also been encouraging developments in Mexico, Brazil, and Peru, reflecting Latin America’s increasing acceptance of population policy as a legitimate component of comprehensive national development plans. In Mexico, new organizational arrangements and program initiatives in family planning are evidence of the serious attention which the Government is now giving to the issue. Brazil, with a population policy primarily directed toward family welfare needs, has made slow but concrete progress with a decision to provide public family planning services to women at “high risk” who cannot afford to pay for them. In Peru, a Presidential decree, issued in August 1976, established a population policy based on the dual concepts of individual freedom of choice and procreative responsibility to the state. Continued progress in reducing traditionally high fertility levels was recorded in a number of less populous developing countries. The most sizeable reductions in the birth rates over the past decade or so occurred in rapidly modernizing Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, the Republic of Korea, as well as in Costa Rica, Colombia, Panama, the Dominican Republic, Sri Lanka, and ten or so island-nations of one million population or less. Finally, on the positive side, special mention should be made of the increasing contribution to population programs being made by the UN system, notably the UNFPA and the World Bank. These are discussed in Section III below. . . . and disappointments. Family planning programs have run into difficulties in a number of countries, particularly in the South Asian region of India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan—three countries whose aggregate population surpasses that of Latin America and Africa combined. For example, there has been a slowdown in India’s family planning program which reflects public (and the new Government’s) reaction to the compulsion in sterilization activities in some areas, carried out in the last year of the Gandhi Administration. Lack of progress in certain countries (discussed in Section II below) may relate in large degree to such basic factors as male-dominated rural societies, the weakness of
