1028
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and provincial, there is no information upon which to base nation-wide
estimates of the birth rate or to gauge the means whereby success in re-
ducing fertility is being achieved.
Considerable progress has been recorded in two other Asian coun-
tries among the 13, namely, Indonesia and Thailand. The latter’s popu-
lation growth rate is estimated to have declined from 3.1 percent at the
start of the Third Five-Year Plan in 1971 to 2.5 percent in 1976. Progress
has been made in the Philippines, although organizational and admin-
istrative problems have impeded the program’s potential. Vietnam’s—
by all indications—vigorous birth control program is still too new to
have produced significant nation-wide results.
There have also been encouraging developments in Mexico, Brazil,
and Peru, reflecting Latin America’s increasing acceptance of popula-
tion policy as a legitimate component of comprehensive national devel-
opment plans. In Mexico, new organizational arrangements and pro-
gram initiatives in family planning are evidence of the serious attention
which the Government is now giving to the issue. Brazil, with a popu-
lation policy primarily directed toward family welfare needs, has made
slow but concrete progress with a decision to provide public family
planning services to women at “high risk” who cannot afford to pay for
them. In Peru, a Presidential decree, issued in August 1976, established
a population policy based on the dual concepts of individual freedom
of choice and procreative responsibility to the state.
Continued progress in reducing traditionally high fertility levels
was recorded in a number of less populous developing countries. The
most sizeable reductions in the birth rates over the past decade or so oc-
curred in rapidly modernizing Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, the Re-
public of Korea, as well as in Costa Rica, Colombia, Panama, the Do-
minican Republic, Sri Lanka, and ten or so island-nations of one million
population or less.
Finally, on the positive side, special mention should be made of the
increasing contribution to population programs being made by the UN
system, notably the UNFPA and the World Bank. These are discussed
in Section III below.
. . . and disappointments. Family planning programs have run into
difficulties in a number of countries, particularly in the South Asian re-
gion of India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan—three countries whose aggre-
gate population surpasses that of Latin America and Africa combined.
For example, there has been a slowdown in India’s family planning
program which reflects public (and the new Government’s) reaction to
the compulsion in sterilization activities in some areas, carried out in
the last year of the Gandhi Administration. Lack of progress in certain
countries (discussed in Section II below) may relate in large degree to
such basic factors as male-dominated rural societies, the weakness of
