548
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ippines, Indonesia, the Republic of China (ROC), and Thailand. In addition,
there have been indications of improvement in the People’s Republic of
China (PRC). Conditions have deteriorated in Vietnam and continue to
be deplorable in Cambodia, where Western influence generally has
made no impact.
—In South Asia, India’s return to constitutional practices dramati-
cally improved its human rights record. Conditions have also bettered
in Iran due to the Shah’s program of liberalization. Bangladesh has seen
some improvement. The human rights situation in Afghanistan has de-
teriorated since the April 1978 military coup.
—Over the past year human rights practices in some African coun-
tries have improved, including Benin, Djibouti, Ghana, Guinea, and the
Ivory Coast. Nigeria has welcomed the U.S. emphasis on human rights
and has proposed a regional UN human rights commission for Africa.
There have been some improvements in Rhodesia but no real change in
South Africa. Uganda and Equatorial Guinea remain two of the worst vio-
lators in the world today.
—Of the 26 countries in Latin America, human rights progress has
been made in 12. There has been a marked decrease in the worst kinds
of abuses, such as officially condoned killings, torture and prolonged
and illegal detention. International and regional human rights organi-
zations have taken a more active role in the region and have been re-
ceiving cooperation from many governments. Peru, Ecuador, and Brazil
have all taken steps toward more constitutional procedures. Improve-
ments have been noted in Chile, Uruguay, Honduras and Guatemala. Re-
cently there has been a deterioration in Nicaragua.
—In Western Europe there have been two positive developments.
Spain’s overall human rights rating has clearly improved. A new consti-
tution, soon to be submitted for ratification, contains comprehensive
guarantees of democratic freedom. In Cyprus, the human rights situa-
tion has improved markedly during the past 18 months.
The causes of the changes cited above are complex. Increased U.S.
attention to human rights practices have contributed to a global climate
of greater sensitivity to the issue and to the heightened concern of a
large number of countries. In a number of cases, U.S. bilateral repre-
sentations have been an important factor in the improvements noted.
In other cases, governments that have rebuffed direct U.S. initiatives as
interference in their internal affairs have, as a compensating action, per-
mitted Amnesty International or some regional human rights organiza-
tion to conduct its own investigation.
In many cases, however, especially where substantial and far-
reaching improvements have taken place (for example, India and
Spain), these changes have reflected dramatic internal political devel-
opments. Similarly, the several instances of retrogression can be ex-
