464  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Proposed Position:
It is in our interest to carry on normal cooperative relations with 
the Dominican Republic in as many fields as, and to the extent that, 
such cooperation can be effective and mutually beneficial within a 
framework of mutual respect. At the same time, it should be made clear 
to the Dominican Government that the deterioration in relations during 
the past year stems directly from improper activities of Dominican 
officials in the United States and elsewhere. The disappearance of an 
American citizen in the Dominican Republic (Murphy) and the dis-
appearance of another individual in New York who was entitled to 
United States protection (de Galíndez) have been of particular concern 
to us. The Dominican Republic would not countenance activities by a 
foreign power within the Dominican Republic which it itself is carry-
ing out in other countries, and therefore, it should not be surprised by 
our official and public reaction to improper Dominican activities in the 
United States. Until such activities cease the Dominican Republic can-
not expect the U.S. to overlook them; we shall continue to investigate 
evidences of improper or illegal activities and to take such measures to 
curb these activities as the facts warrant. Naturally, evidences of illegal 
or improper activities thus uncovered do not redound to the credit of 
the Dominican Republic and make it more difficult for the U.S. to treat 
other aspects of our relations in a normal way.
The initiative of the Generalissimo in bringing this question up 
with Ambassador Farland presents us with an opportunity to get our 
relations with the Dominicans back on a “normal, cooperative” basis. 
We believe that the Ambassador, upon his return to Ciudad Trujillo, 
should discuss the range of problems in U.S.-Dominican relations, 
pointing out the Dominican activities to which we object and stating 
the things the United States is prepared to do if these activities cease. 
The essence of our side of the bargain would be reestablishment of 
­normal, friendly relations.
We must consider the alternatives to taking a positive approach 
to this question. If the Generalissimo actually were to let the authority 
drop from his hands at this time, without adequate preparation, a polit-
ical breakdown could occur which would run contrary to U.S. interests. 
Over the years, under the authoritarian regime of the Generalissimo, no 
one has been prepared to assume any real measure of authority. If the 
Generalissimo bowed out now, we might expect (1) Ramfis to become 
the real locus of power or (2) Hector6 and Ramfis to take over jointly. 
But, (3), if these two possibilities failed, a struggle for power would 
probably ensue among the military with resulting instability in this 
6 Hector Trujillo, brother of Generalissimo Trujillo, President of the Dominican 
Republic.
