Chapter 6, June–December 1990  943
Non-ALCM B1Bs
11. The United States handed over the following paper proposing 
elements of common ground on the B1B:
Begin text of U.S. draft elements of common ground on the B1B
1. All B1Bs not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs will count 
as one unit against the 6000 warhead ceiling.
2. The following features will distinguish B1Bs not equipped for 
long-­range nuclear ALCMs from those so equipped:
A. A bomb bay configuration involving a bulkhead that without 
change, would not permit a long range nuclear ALCM to be loaded 
internally. Unique equipment for reconfiguring a bulkhead would not 
be present at airbases for B1B bombers.
B. Covering by a process equivalent to welding all but two ALCM 
pylon attachment joints. The two attachment joints which also serve 
as jacking points will not be covered. These distinguishing features 
will be exhibited during the technical exhibitions under Article XI, 
Paragraph 12.
3. During the baseline inspection period, each B1B not equipped 
for long-­range nuclear ALCMs will be subject to inspection in order to 
allow confirmation that they possess the appropriate distinguishability 
features.
4. Unique, specialized equipment to remove the movable bulk-
head in the B1B and equipment to load B1B nuclear ALCM pylons will 
be listed as support equipment in the MOU) and will be banned from 
all airbases for heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other 
than long-­range nuclear ALCMs and from all airbases for heavy bomb-
ers equipped for non-­nuclear armaments. This ban would not, how-
ever, expand existing inspection rights. FYI: Washington notes that the 
Soviets have objected to including non-TLI in the MOU. Negotiating 
group should recommend to Washington how best to handle this 
equipment. End FYI.)
5. Pylons for long-­range nuclear ALCMs and rotary launchers 
which carry long-­range nuclear ALCMs will be banned from all air-
bases for heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than 
long-­range nuclear ALCMs and from all airbases for heavy bombers 
equipped for non-­nuclear armaments. This ban would not, however, 
expand existing inspection rights.
End Text
12. Negotiating group should renew this offer, which was com-
mented upon favorably (but not formally accepted) by the Soviets. 
Negotiating group should make clear that B–2s are not to be included 
in any inspection regime. Negotiating group should draft appropriate 
implementing language, making sure that it does not apply to B–2s or
