208
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Tab E5
Option No. 1
Washington, undated
OPTION NO. 1
Provide additional funds to the Afghan insurgents, jointly (with the
Saudis and Pakistanis) and unilaterally, for the procurement of non-military
supplies; and provide additional funds for the continuation and expansion of
propaganda activities.
1. A 3 July 1979 Presidential Finding authorized CIA to expend
up to $695,000 to support the Afghan insurgents, either unilaterally or
through third countries, by providing cash or non-military supplies;
and also authorized CIA propaganda operations in support of the
insurgency. At the time the SCC discussed this proposal, it was agreed
that consideration would be given in the future to increased support
should circumstances indicate additional funds were warranted.
2. Since receiving this authorization, CIA has expended or obligated
$575,000 in FY 79, and has programmed the remaining $120,000 for FY
80. These funds have been or will be expended as follows:
—[amount not declassified] in cash payments to the insurgents and
the provision of a limited amount of medical supplies.
—[amount not declassified] for propaganda operations.
Pakistani liaison has begun to disburse some of these funds and
medical supplies to insurgents inside Afghanistan. Unilateral assets
have separately transferred funds into Afghanistan, and to insurgent
leaders in Pakistan. Propaganda activities have included the procure-
ment of two complete radio broadcasting stations which are now in
Pakistan awaiting onward shipment into Afghanistan. A support mech-
anism to produce propaganda material, including tapes for broadcast
on insurgent radios and for hand-to-hand passage inside Afghanistan,
has been created and is in operation.
3. The Afghan insurgency has intensified and spread, and Afghan
Government forces are increasingly stretched thin in their efforts to
suppress it. At the same time, it is clear that the insurgents continue
to lack funds and as yet are uncoordinated. The Soviets appear to have
stepped up their support to the Afghan Government. It is likely that
this winter will see something of a hiatus in military operations by
5 Secret; Sensitive.
