Your stand on Articles 2, 3 and 4, especially as concerns the system of
licensing, is approved. The Department is firmly convinced that the fullest
publicity should be called for in Article 5, for both public and private arms
manufacture, and is in full accord with your reservations under this article.
You are requested to continue your endeavors to secure the agreement of
the other Governments to the publication of full particulars of weight,
number and value of arms manufactured.
The object of the words “for it” in paragraph two of Article 5 is not
altogether clear. If they are intended to exclude from the annual returns
arms manufactured by the State for a foreign Government or for private
individuals or organizations, they are clearly open to grave objections. The
Department would like to be informed of the object of these words, and
suggests that you endeavor to have them stricken out.
The Department continues to believe that Article 4 of its draft is preferable
to Article 6 adopted by the Commission, as being more specific, and you
should endeavor to secure the adoption of the American proposal appended
to Article 6 relating to naval specifications. In this connection it is pointed
out that since the data referred to may often be obtained in such manuals as
Jane’s “Fighting Ships”, there would appear to be no valid reason why
Governments should be unwilling to publish the details requested. If the
other Governments remain unwilling to accept the proposal, you need not
insist on this point. You may also make a concession with regard to the two-
month period in which returns must be published, although the Department
is of opinion that it may prove difficult to collect the necessary statistics in
so short a time.
With regard to Article 8, it appears evident that in the event of a major war
the convention would in fact be suspended, whatever its provisions.
However, the Department is of opinion that certain European states are
more concerned in this provision than is the United States, and that this
Government may find it possible to acquiesce in a text acceptable to the
other Governments; provided that the text adopted is not manifestly to the
disadvantage of this Government, as, for example, being so phrased as to
exempt all European Governments from publicity in the event of a
European war, while imposing upon this Government a continued
