3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
505
and it may be dwelt upon at your forthcoming meetings with the
leaders of some Western states. On our part, we have already drawn
the attention of a number of states allied to the US to the acuteness of
the question of arming China. So far they are slow about giving official
replies which is evidently not coincidental. Meanwhile the time runs
and the things move in the direction of concluding concrete deals for
deliveries of weapons to China, including the transfer of sensitive
technology.
It should be obviously clear to you that intentions of the US allies
to sell weapons and military equipment to China cannot but make us
consider possibilities of appropriate reaction on our part. Indeed, the
question here is of arming a country with the biggest ground forces, a
country whose leaders proclaim for all to hear the inevitability of a new
world war and are driving in practice at unleashing such a war.
It would seem that the US, which along with the USSR share spe-
cial responsibility for the maintenance on international peace and secu-
rity, should neither bypass facts and trends of such kind. It is the more
true that international relations are now, so to say, at a crossing of roads
leading to peace, stability and cooperation and roads leading to con-
frontation and increased threat of a war pernicious in its consequences.
So, the promoting of the armament of China in whatever form and
under whatever pretext as a cover, predetermines objectively the devel-
opment of international situation in a direction dangerous for the cause
of universal peace.
To all appearances, some people yield to the temptation “to play
up” to such orientation of Peking’s foreign policy course which is hos-
tile to neighboring countries and increases the threat to international
security. I will say straight, this is a game dangerous for all. It is built on
a very shaky ground—on momentary political considerations. Not too
distant lessons of history, both in Europe and in the Pacific, do not
allow to forget that such plans bring results which in no way conform
to the calculations of those who embark on the road of arming a big
country which in the end decides for itself in what direction to turn its
military might.
Sometimes one hears that the sales of weapons and transfer of
technology to China promise some commercial, although rather prob-
lematic so far, advantages. I must say with all conviction that the con-
siderations of a responsible policy, concern for broad interests of the
world not only of today but also of tomorrow outweigh many times ref-
erences to such commercial considerations.
Of course, we take note of the statement by the US side that the
United States will not sell weapons to China and does not intend to en-
courage other countries to do so.
