Non-Proliferation
961
In looking at the countries of special proliferation concern—in-
cluding India, Pakistan, Israel and South Africa—we find it striking
that each of them has endeavored to produce weapons-usable material
in unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. Thus they can proceed down the path
of nuclear explosive development, pointing out that they are violating
no international undertakings, while at the same time enjoying the ben-
efits of international cooperation with their nuclear power program.
We believe it is time to try to plug this loophole by facing them with a
choice.
We do not believe this would involve any serious sacrifice of
market opportunities, since the number of potential customers who
have not already agreed to accept full-scope safeguards has become
very small, and some of these are now moving toward such acceptance.
Moreover, a common policy requiring full-scope safeguards would
avoid the unfortunate type of situation we have been witnessing in the
competition for Argentine sales,3 where perceived differences in safe-
guards requirements appear to have influenced the award of the
contracts.
If you are prepared to move with us in this direction, we see more
advantage to having the supplier states who are members of the NPT
announce at the NPT Review Conference their adoption of full-scope
safeguards as a condition of future supply commitments. I believe this
would significantly strengthen support for the Treaty by defusing the
arguments of the developing world that NPT Parties derive no real
benefits and are, in fact, penalized with regard to conditions of nuclear
supply compared to non-NPT Parties. While we realize France is, of
course, not a party to the NPT, your support for this new policy would
be extremely important in bringing the NPT supplier states along, and
we hope you could take whatever parallel action seemed suitable to
make clear your approach at that time.
We understand the possible reluctance of a supplier state to re-
quire its customers to have safeguards on materials that are not trace-
able to its own exports. But we are convinced that this requirement is
necessary not only to prevent additional states from nuclear explo-
sive development but also to achieve effective safeguards on one’s own
exports. Examples of why we believe this is so are set forth in the
enclosure.4
As you know, President Carter attaches considerable importance
to this goal, and I would appreciate your calling this letter to the atten-
3 See Document 420.
4 Attached but not printed.
