768
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
240.
Memorandum From Jeffrey Garten and Carol Lancaster of
the Policy Planning Staff to Acting Secretary of State
Christopher1
Washington, December 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Peter Bourne’s World Hunger Initiatives
We know Tony has been discussing the Bourne initiatives with
you and we wanted to keep you posted in his absence.
On December 23, we received a draft memorandum for the Presi-
dent on the World Hunger campaign (see attached).2 Bourne’s staff has
requested comments by January 3. We understand that EB has ar-
ranged for an extension for State. But work on a response has not yet
begun.
Bourne’s memo raises several major problems:
—it poses the option to the President to reorganize AID by estab-
lishing a separate “Ministry of Development”, an International Re-
search Foundation, etc., proposals which are under consideration in the
Henry Owen circuit and by no means ready for decision now.
—it asks the President to commit the US to eliminate poverty in the
world by the year 2000, the feasibility of which is highly questionable
and needs close examination.
—some of the proposals are unclear (e.g., seeking legislation to
make food aid more human needs oriented) or insufficiently consid-
ered (e.g., offering financial assistance to an International Food Corps).
—some of the options presented to the President could imply large
budgetary expenditures; yet no estimates of budgetary costs are avail-
able for any of the options.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 3, TL 12/16–12/31/77. No
classification marking. Drafted by Lancaster. Sent through Kreisberg, Acting Director of
the Policy Planning Staff. Vance accompanied President Carter to Poland (December
29–31), Iran (December 31–January 1), India (January 1–3), Saudi Arabia (January 3–4),
Egypt (January 4), and France (January 4–5). Vance then traveled to Hungary (January
5–7) and Ireland (January 7) before departing for Washington. Christopher served as
acting Secretary in Vance’s absence.
2 Not attached. A copy of Bourne’s December 22 draft decision memorandum, sent
to members of the World Hunger Working Group, is attached to a January 7, 1978, cov-
ering memorandum from Tarnoff to Bourne transmitting the Department of State’s com-
ments on Bourne’s draft. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of International Organiza-
tion Affairs/International Development Assistance/Agriculture Division, Subject Files
of FAO, US Mission, International Food Organizations, Lot 88D305, Box 2, World Hunger
Initiative)
