National Security Policy  343
102.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 382d NSC Meeting1
Washington, October 13, 1958
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 382nd (Special) Meeting of the National Security Council, Monday, 
October 13, 1958
Present at this special meeting (382nd) of the National Security 
Council were the President of the United States, presiding; the Secretary 
of State; the Acting Secretary of Defense; and the Acting Director, 
Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present were the 
Acting Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Chairman, Atomic Energy 
Commission; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Secretaries of the 
Army and the Navy; Mr. Richard Horner for the Secretary of the Air 
Force; the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; 
the Chief of Naval Operations; the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force; the 
Acting Commandant, U.S. Marine Corps; the Assistant to the President; 
the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and 
for Science and Technology; the White House Staff Secretary; and the 
Executive Secretary, NSC. The following members of the Weapons 
Systems Evaluation Group, Department of Defense, also attended the 
meeting: Vice Admiral Sides, Director; Charles A. Boyd, Director of 
Research; Richard H. DuBois, Assistant; Lt. Col. Bolton Miller; M/Sgt. 
Ralph Pearson; Michael Picchioni.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. EVALUATION OF OFFENSIVE AND DEFENSIVE WEAPONS 
SYSTEMS
(NSC Action No. 1733)
Mr. Gray explained the background of the subject report. (Copy of 
Mr. Gray’s briefing note is filed in the minutes of the meeting.) Mr. Gray 
asked Secretary Quarles if he had anything to add before calling on 
Admiral Sides.
Secretary Quarles emphasized that this evaluation should be viewed 
as an abstraction of the problem, as are all such evaluations. It treats of 
the problem apart from some of the practical aspects which are normally 
cranked in by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense. 
Secretary Quarles stressed that this was a report by the Weapons Systems 
Evaluation Group and not by the Joint Chiefs of Staff as such.
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Evaluation of Offensive and Defensive Weapons Systems. 
Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
