1100 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI should be a type 1(a) but that we accept it as a type 1(b) without prejudice to our ability to raise issues in the future. 4. We will accept 4350 kg (throw-weight of SS–19) as the cut-off in the heavy SLBM/heavy ICBM definition. 5. We will tell the Soviets we want to verify dimensions only on live missiles. We can accept that if they can. If they balk, we’ll phone home. Photographs of U.S. SLBMs will be inert missiles; can’t have a live missile with a shroud horizontal. 6. We can accept 10 reentry vehicle inspections a year with no increase for downloading. 7. We can accept either one or two cooperative measures after an operational dispersal (and no inspections). If the Soviets balk, we can accept nothing. 8. We can require roofs of fixed structures for road mobile ICBMs to be openable. 9. Furniss has the mandatory SSI site diagrams. We can discuss with the Soviets. We can show them the sample Soviet diagrams we want. Sample is to do this. 10. We thought the Soviets had agreed to a one time exhibition of all BEAR D. Now they say (a) only valid before signature; thereafter we just get to see one and (b) we pay, hard currency. Cost is $20K for the base in the European USSR, $142K for the base in the Asiatic USSR, and $152K for both. We are to try to get them off this and phone home if we can’t. 11. On stub silo launchers, we can: (a) give Soviets the list and coordinates of the stub launchers they haven’t declared, (b) tell them it will be a big flap if they violate their agreement and don’t declare, (c) offer to avoid the flap by dropping the requirement if they will accept our swimmer delivery vehicle Agreed Statement. 12. We won’t seek provisions in the treaty for random selection of missiles/stages for exhibition. We will seek a peg to allow raising this in the JCIC. O’Fallon is to draft such a peg. General Procedures and Authority Since we are to finish in two weeks, I have been authorized to settle all issues without reference to Washington except: Those relating to PPCM, SSI, stage dimensions and telemetry Space launch from airplanes Distinguishability (only if I can’t get old and new launchers and launch canisters distinguishable by NTM) RV sized objects on front section Anything that removes restrictions on NDM-limited retired ICBMs Verification of silos by GPS Accepting any Soviet walkback on fixed structures. Accepting ALCMs as “treaty-limited items.”
