prohibited by the law of either of the High Contracting Parties, may be
brought into its territories.
It is understood, however, that this privilege shall not be extended to
consular officers who are engaged in any private occupation for gain in the
countries to which they are accredited, save with respect to governmental
supplies.
ARTICLE XXII. Subject to any limitation or exception hereinabove set forth, or
hereafter to be agreed upon, the territories of the High Contracting Parties
to which the provisions of this Treaty extend shall be understood to
comprise all areas of land, water, and air over which the Parties claim and
exercise dominion as sovereign thereof, except the Panama Canal Zone.
ARTICLE XXIII. Nothing in the present Treaty shall be construed to limit or
restrict in any way the rights, privileges and advantages accorded to the
United States or its nationals or to Austria or its nationals by the Treaty
between the United States and Austria establishing friendly relations,
concluded on August 24, 1921.
ARTICLE XXIV. The present treaty shall remain in full force for the term of six
years from the date of the exchange of ratifications, on which date it shall
begin to take effect in all of its provisions.
If within one year before the expiration of the aforesaid period of six years
neither High Contracting Party notifies to the other an intention of
modifying, by change or omission any of the provisions of any of the
articles in this Treaty or of terminating it upon the expiration of the
aforesaid period, the Treaty shall remain in full force and effect after the
aforesaid period and until one year from such a time as either of the High
Contracting Parties shall have notified to the other an intention of
modifying or terminating the Treaty.
ARTICLE XXV. The present Treaty shall be ratified, and the ratifications thereof
shall be exchanged at Vienna as soon as possible.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the same and have
affixed their seals hereto.
