Eastern Europe Region 33 gence Agency (DIA) does not agree with this part of the estimate. According to DIA, the necessity for tight centralized party control, the likelihood of growing unrest, constraints imposed by the USSR, and the example of Soviet treatment of dissent all argue against these developments. —The US is not likely to have a major impact on how the internal picture develops in any of the East European countries. But the East Europeans will attach more importance to developing relations with the US. I mentioned above that the Soviets might feel compelled at some point to restore order in Poland. A recent CIA report entitled “Probable Soviet Reactions to a Crisis in Poland”3 assessed this possibility. The report noted that there have been three political-economic crises in Poland over the past 20 years—all without Soviet armed intervention. Here is the key assessment in that report: “The Soviets, of course, have the military capability to invade and occupy Poland (Tab A).4 The Kremlin evidently prefers, however, to have the Polish leadership make minor concessions to the people to reduce public frustration. Polish regimes have thus far successfully used such tactics. At the same time, they have preserved the leading role of the party, while initiating and executing the transfer of party authority. There is currently no evidence to conclude that either the Soviets or the Poles intend to alter this pattern. A crisis could come in the event that ameliorating tactics failed to pacify the public, or in the event that the economic situation became sufficiently untenable that austerity measures would have to be strictly enforced.” 3 Dated June 1977. (Ibid.) 4 Attached but not printed is a map of Poland and the surrounding area. The map listed major Soviet military units from which Moscow could draw in the event it deemed Soviet intervention necessary, including 10 motorized rifle divisions and 10 tank divisions in the German Democratic Republic; 3 motorized rifle divisions and 2 tank divisions in Czechoslovakia; 4 motorized rifle divisions, 3 tank divisions, and 1 Airborne division in the Baltic military district of the Soviet Union (comprised of the Baltic States and Kaliningrad); 2 motorized rifle divisions, 8 tank divisions, and 1 Airborne division in the Belorussian military district (comprised of Belarus); and 8 motorized rifle divisions and 3 tank divisions in the Carpathian military district (comprised of the western part of Ukraine). Soviet units in Hungary were not added to the map.
