1098 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 263. Briefing Note for the September 15 NSC Meeting1 Washington, September 14, 1960 SUBJECT U.S. Policy on Continental Defense 1. The first item before the Council is a Discussion Paper sub­ mitted by the PB on the subject of Continental Defense. The purpose of the paper is to provide the basis for a discussion by the Council of factors which in the judgment of the PB require a reassessment of our Continental Defense Policy. To this end, there are presented in the Discussion Paper six questions, some of the answers to which will have an important bearing on recommendations which the PB will make at a later date for specific revisions of the statement of U.S. Policy on Continental Defense presently set forth in NSC 5802/1. 2. In laying the predicate for the questions subsequently dealt with in the Discussion Paper, the PB has presented in Parts II and III a resume of Soviet Capabilities (drawn from relevant NIE’s) and an anal­ ysis of U.S. Policies and Capabilities having a bearing on the subject. At the risk of doing an injustice to the PB’s assessment appearing on pages 2 through 8 of the Paper, it can be summarized in briefest fashion as follows: a. Our present Continental Defense Policy was adopted during a period when the Soviet manned bomber force was the primary threat to the protection of our retaliatory capability based on the North American Continent, and that period is drawing to an end. (By the end of 1960 the Soviet ICBM threat will constitute a grave threat to U.S. metropolitan areas—by 1961 it will present an extremely dangerous threat to SAC bomber bases, ICBM sites and command installations—and in a few years the principal threat will be Soviet ICBM’s, supplemented by a mix of heavy and medium bombers, increased numbers of submarine-­ launched ballistic missiles, and possibly cruise type missiles.) b. The advent of major Soviet ICBM capability, and a consequent reduction in the reliability of our early warning capability, raise a ques­ tion as to the continuing validity of those provisions of present policy which are geared to the concept that attack warning would permit the launching of a significant portion of our SAC force before its destruction on the ground; would provide the lead time required for alerting key military forces; would permit the making of decisions by key officials 1 Source: U.S. policy on continental defense. Top Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
