Human Rights 459 would require the U.S. Executive Director of the IMF to initiate consultations to encourage the IMF to formulate stabilization programs which foster investment and employment, especially where designed to meet basic human needs. The U.S. Executive Director would also be required to take all possible steps to see that the Witteveen Facility does not contribute to the deprivation of basic human needs and the violation of basic human rights and to oppose any loans that would contribute to such deprivations or violations. Finally, the Secretary of the Treasury would be required to prepare an annual report evaluating the effects of the Witteveen Facility on the ability of the poor to obtain (a) an adequate supply of food, (b) shelter and clothing, (c) public services, including health care, education, clean water, energy resources and transportation; and (d) productive employment that provides a reasonable and adequate wage. The Senate version of this legislation has been reported by the SFRC and the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs. The bill includes no human rights provisions at present, although a Harkintype amendment could be added on the floor. State and Treasury are currently reviewing what position to take if such an amendment is introduced, as well as what position to take in conference. —Harkin Amendment: OPIC. On February 23, 1978, the House added a Harkin amendment to the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) Act of 1977, by a vote of 191 to 76. The report, including the entire Harkin amendment, was adopted by the Senate on April 5 and by the House on April 11. The amended OPIC legislation was signed by the President on April 24.6 The principal effect of the Harkin amendment is to apply Section 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act to OPIC. Section 116 requires that no assistance be provided to any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights, unless the assistance would directly benefit the needy. The amendment also calls for OPIC to take into account in the conduct of its programs in any country (in consultation with the Secretary of State) all available information about the observance and respect of human rights in such countries. Finally, the amendment establishes the following new reporting requirements. First, OPIC must include a description of any project for which it has refused to provide insurance, reinsurance, guarantee, financing or financial support because of the human rights provisions of the amendment. Second, OPIC must include a description of (Graham Hovey, “House Authorizes $1.7 Billion Outlay to Witteveen Fund,” The New York Times, February 24, 1978, pp. D–1 and D–7) 6 Reference is to H.R. 9179, the OPIC extension legislation, which the House revisited on February 23; see footnote 7, Document 108.
