February 20 for the text of these resolutions). A discussion ensued as to the differences between these two resolutions and between them and the resolution presented by Count de Martel at the meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures on February 18. Various questions of a technical character were discussed and considerable attention was devoted to the question of whether ratification would be required on the part of any of the participating governments to make the treaty effective. The committee proceeded to a discussion of the paragraph containing the reference to the ninety million dollars which it was estimated would be required to meet the needs of the Chinese Government. The chairman (Dr. Yen) defended the language of the paragraph and said that instead of being a part of the Resolution it was not put in as a statement of fact or a supposition in the preamble and he considered that this would remove objections voiced at the last Committee meeting. Count de Martel, Colonel Peel, Mr. Hioki and Mr. Strawn voiced objection to the naming of a specific sum and Mr. Strawn once more reminded the Chinese Delegation that the American Delegation had announced last November that they were willing to let China have the 2½ per cent authorized by the Washington Treaty and the Chinese Government declined to accept it because it feared that acceptance would result in the interim surtaxes not being provided. However, the present negotiation, Mr. Strawn pointed out, should plainly show that the foreign Delegations were both willing and anxious to allow surtaxes higher than those authorized by the Washington Treaty. These negotiations, he considered, had progressed satisfactorily, but had not reached the point where it could be said that $90,000,000 was the sum required to meet China’s needs. He thought it premature to name any specific sum and to obviate this difficulty Mr. Oudendijk proposed that after the words in the American resolution “whereas the representatives of the Powers assembled at this Conference are engaged in the negotiation of a treaty wherein provision is to be made for the levying of surtaxes at higher rates” there should be added the phrase “with a view to meeting the amounts required for the various purposes which are being considered at this Conference”. Mr. Oudendijk thought that this might satisfy the Chinese Delegation and at the same time, not mention the amount to which most of the Delegations had objected. Dr. Yen replied that the Chinese Delegation laid great emphasis on the figure and Mr. Strawn supported Mr. Oudendijk’s suggestion, saying that the Delegates were earnestly endeavoring to meet
