1198 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement billion to $46 billion. Dr. Kistiakowsky concluded by saying he would not attempt to estimate the cost of landing a man on Mars, but he knew it would be several times as great as the cost of a moon landing. Mr. Scribner asked about the cost of landing a man on the moon versus the cost of bringing him back to earth again. Dr. Kistiakowsky replied that a man could be landed on the moon without a return trip for the cost of SATURN—that is, $8 to $9 billion. Dr. Waterman said he wished to endorse Dr. Kistiakowsky’s state­ ments about the general attitude of scientists toward the man-­in-­space program. He believed scientific observation was important, but thought there was no need to send a man into space if scientific observation could be made by means of instruments alone. The President raised the question of the rate at which space activi­ ties were developing. He said the SPUTNIK complex impelled us to do everything yesterday. He noted that the first time a man was lost in an attempted space flight we would be compelled to start over again and spend twice as much. He agreed with the remarks of Dr. Waterman. He had to think about the country as a whole, the economy, and the other demands on the budget. He believed it might be necessary to establish an annual budgetary ceiling for space activities. Dr. Dryden said the total cost of space activities would not be reduced by spreading the pro­ gram over a longer period of years. The President agreed, but pointed out that not as great a sum would have to be spent in any one year. Secretary Gates wondered why it would not be desirable to spend more money on getting scientists to work in laboratories and less on hardware. He believed our space programs, as well as our defense programs, might advance more rapidly if more time was spent think­ ing and working on the drawing boards instead of building hardware which might not function when it was completed. Dr. Kistiakowsky pointed out that there was a human urge to build a prototype soon after it had been conceived. Mr. Stans said the NASA budget was the most difficult one on which he had worked, except for the Defense budget. The Bureau of the Budget had worked very closely with Dr. Glennan, and was convinced that the figures presented by Dr. Glennan were about as low as any that could be achieved short of the cancellation of major programs such as SATURN. The figures in the NASA budget were in effect the result of program deci­ sions made some time ago. The President noted that NASA had over 18,000 employees. He wondered whether money couldn’t be saved if the number of employees could be reduced to say, 15,000. Dr. Dryden said the really large expenditures in the NASA program would not be reduced by reducing the payroll. The President said he was concerned about the pace of accomplishment. He wondered why a particular flight had to be
