March 1952–February 1953
433
nians were intelligent, facile, and emotional to an almost suicidal de-
gree. The Ambassador stressed this emotional factor, which meant that
Iranians would not necessarily react as Americans might, but were ca-
pable of acting for purely emotional reasons.
2. Attitude toward foreigners and the oil issue. Historically the Iranians
had played off the British and the Russians, but had fared badly when
both worked together as in 1907. Now, the desire to expel all foreign in-
fluence from Iran had become an obsession. On the other hand, the de-
parture of the British had also created at least a temporary feeling of
loneliness, and this had contributed to the fact that the Iranians were
looking to the US more than at any previous time. They had no thought
of taking the British back or of having foreigners running the oil in-
dustry. On the compensation question, they were willing to give “rea-
sonable” compensation as a gesture, but were not willing to “mortgage
the country.” As to oil purchases, they badly wanted US companies to
buy oil, even if only at the rate of 4–5 million tons a year. If this was not
possible, they wanted US financial assistance, though because of the re-
buffs to this suggestion a year ago they would not ask directly for this,
but would only hint.
3. NIE–75: possibilities if US aid not forthcoming.2 The Ambassador
called NIE–75 an “admirable paper,” but added quickly that he would
stress its qualifications and dark side. Logically, he said that the esti-
mate was correct, but the situation was such that it was dangerous to
rely on logic. The most critical danger was that if the Iranians became
convinced that the US would not help, they might do “very rash
things,” and relations with the US could disintegrate very fast. From a
very low point three months ago (the time of the US–UK joint offer),3
the stock of the US had risen greatly, and the US was now looked to for
vital assistance. However, the Iranians must have something to show
that the US was supporting them, and this “something” must be forth-
coming very soon, at the latest by the end of February. The Ambas-
sador said that he himself was very nearly at the end of his tether in
making explanations for delay, and that a newly appointed Ambas-
sador would have a very short “tether.” As to the form of US assistance,
resumed oil sales would probably be too small to help much from a
strictly economic standpoint, but would help US prestige. On the eco-
nomic side, the Iranians did not want grandiose US-sponsored projects,
but rather would like the US to take over and support some of the
projects they themselves had started. Above all, the US must not inter-
fere in the government. The Iranians regarded US economic aid as in ef-
2 Document 143.
3 See Document 121.
