Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
703
As a part of this disinformation campaign, a message was sent to
Iranian Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh on April 23 through Swiss
Ambassador Erik Lang in Tehran suggesting that Iran and the United
States “take stock of our respective positions in the crisis” and noting
that the Carter administration was “willing to discuss practical steps
to resolve the crisis as soon as possible.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update
4/80) As Jordan recalled in his memoir, he volunteered to see Iranian
Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh again. The meeting was arranged
through lawyers Christian Bourguet and Hector Villalon. Jordan and
translator Stephanie van Reigersberg left Washington on April 18 and
met with Ghotbzadeh in Paris on April 19. (Jordan, Crisis, pages 264–
267, and Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in
Iran, page 135) Ghotbzadeh stressed that breaking relations had been
bad, and, in answer to Jordan’s question, said that the hostages “are
not important anymore,” but that it would still be “months and
months” before they returned home. He also told Jordan: “I just hope
your President doesn’t do anything rash, like attack Iran or mine our
harbors.” Jordan reassured him that this would not happen. On April
19, Carter read Jordan’s report, which Jordan had written on the return
flight, then called Brown to say “my last remaining doubt about the
mission has been removed. Tell Colonel Beckwith to proceed.” (Jordan,
Crisis, pages 265–267)
Carter recalled that Jordan had concluded from his meeting with
Ghotbzadeh that “there is absolutely no chance the hostages will be
released for two and a half to three months, and an even greater chance
that it will drag on five or six months. This only supports the tentative
decision that you have already made.” Carter also noted that he had
been impressed with a report from hostage Chargé Bruce Laingen,
urging strong action against Iran. (Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 511–
512) The telegram from Laingen, received via the British Embassy in
Tehran, is in Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot
81D154, Iran NODIS Cables Apr 1980.
No other records of these meetings have been found.
