1977  9
Mr. Cutter: He is on the Hill.
President Carter: Harold (Brown), why don’t you go ahead.
Secretary Brown: With regard to your comment about getting into 
things, I would applaud your deep participation at any time. I have 
made it clear both publicly and privately that these are very prelimi-
nary proposals. I need to get further reactions in my building. Unfor-
tunately they have gotten out, but they are certainly subject to further 
discussion. Input from the President and from other NSC members will 
have a substantial effect. I am not shooting at any particular number, 
but I wanted to show a decrease. I have tried to find things that were 
being done too fast or that should not be done at all. As you know, the 
cut amounts to about $2.5 billion. At the moment, of course, we are 
cutting the wrong things. I would expect to get most of the money from 
base closings and manpower adjustments, but that takes much longer. 
In these first few weeks, in order to get reductions, I have had to hit the 
procurement programs harder than I would choose to in the longer run.
President Carter: This is my first experience in a Departmental Bud-
get and I want to learn all I can about it. I would like OMB to make a 
critical analysis of all expenditures. Then I want a thorough analysis of 
ongoing programs. There is a tendency to consider them all sacrosanct 
in the absence of such an assessment. I need some understanding of the 
manpower problems. Possibly we need more rigid entrance standards. 
Within a few months or a year we will have to decide whether to have 
some kind of conscription or even an all-­out draft. Also, the ratio of 
combat to non-­combat troops concerns me. Jim Schlesinger told me that 
when he was in Defense he set an overall personnel level then told the 
forces to increase by two combat units in their own way.
I will, of course, need and will respect your advice. But on the mat-
ter of new weapons systems—­the B–1, M–X—I will have to make the 
decision myself. Before I make the final decision, I hope we will have 
some means to assess the Soviet attitude on global force reductions.
(General Brown arrived.)
President Carter: I assume NSC meetings are confidential. Cy (Vance) 
has an indication from Dobrynin that the Soviets would like to see mobile 
missiles banned in SALT. If we could get an agreement, that would be a 
major factor. Some elements might be decided by external events. Let’s 
proceed with a detailed presentation to me by OMB and Dr. Brzezinski. 
I want to be involved in this assessment with you. There’s a question at 
what point we bring in DOD and the JCS. In Georgia, I did an indepen-
dent analysis with the budget people, then I met with the Department 
leaders. But I have no preconceived notion on this. I will defer to the 
Defense Department’s judgement.
