August 8–September 17, 1978
113
has a responsibility to undertake this mission if the other Arabs are too
timid to do so.
Touhamy said that he had told Sadat that he, Touhamy, is pre-
pared to act as “marshal” of the West Bank/Gaza for as long as it takes.
This would even apply to Jerusalem. He claimed to know Teddy Kollek
well and was sure that he could work with him.
Touhamy stressed that Sadat’s purpose in making such a proposal
to Begin is to assure the Israeli Prime Minister that Egypt is willing and
able to negotiate the West Bank/Gaza, provided the other aspects of
the Arab/Israeli problem are satisfactorily resolved. He did not spell
out exactly what he had in mind by “the other aspects,” but seemed in-
tent upon emphasizing Egypt’s ability to do whatever is needed with
respect to the West Bank/Gaza.
COMMENT: Touhamy’s comments run squarely counter to the
views of Mohamed Kamel and Boutros Ghali on this matter.
32.
Memorandum Prepared by the Ambassador to Egypt (Eilts)1
Camp David, September 7, 1978
SUBJECT
State of Mind of Egyptian Delegation on Morning of September 7, 1978
I escorted President Sadat this morning from Dogwood2 to Aspen3
and also had opportunity to speak to various members of the Egyptian
Delegation. What follows is my assessment of state of mind of the
Egyptian Delegation as of noon today.
In my brief chat with Sadat, he said he was very pleased with the
way things were going. His meetings of the previous day with Presi-
dent Carter4 and jointly with President Carter/Prime Minister Begin5
had been very helpful. He expressed confidence that something posi-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 11, The Secretary Camp David [Briefing Book].
Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Eilts.
2 Dogwood Lodge, on the grounds of Camp David, was Sadat’s residence
throughout the summit.
3 Aspen Lodge, the President’s residence on the grounds of Camp David.
4 See footnote 7, Document 28.
5 See footnote 11, Document 28.
