Venezuela  1235
characterized Haight’s statement as a crude and unjustified reaction 
against an act of full sovereignty. Venezuelan students and government 
economists generally praised the Government’s action although some 
of the latter were dubious of the way it was carried out. Many local 
businessmen were angry or dismayed over the lack of public discus-
sion, Venezuelan businessmen avoided commenting on the effect of the 
decree on the oil companies but instead concentrated on the repeal of 
the 5 per thousand tax and other features of interest to local business. 
Dr. Angel Carvini, generally regarded as business spokesman, deplored 
the lack of consultation with commerce and industry. El Nacional men-
tioned the “sense of justice which inspired reform and which the whole 
nation shares.”
In reply to Mr. Haight, Mines Minister Diez issued a statement on 
December 23 saying that the tax reform “does not impair any acquired 
rights of petroleum companies nor modify any existing agreement 
with them”. He emphasized that it only altered internal tax rates which 
apply to all Venezuelans and is the sovereign right of the Government. 
Since the tax applies only to net income it does not increase the cost of 
the companies and does not alter their competitive position, he said. 
Most Venezuelan opinion thought Haight’s statement was too strong 
and inadvisable, and the press supported the government as having 
only exercised its sovereign right. However, many Venezuelan busi-
ness and professional men reportedly were not in accord with the 
secrecy involved and were cynical about the purposes of the act. COPEI 
reserved its position until it had further time to study the decree; AD 
did the same. However, Villalba of URD issued a strong statement 
supporting the decree and attacking Creole. He called Haight’s state-
ment absurd and referred to the billion dollars4 Eugene Holman of the 
Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) on December 23 was as strong, if 
not stronger, than Haight’s, warning that the Venezuelan Government 
action would “call for re-­examination of international investments”. 
On the following day, Venezuelan Ambassador Falcon Briceno released 
a statement emphasizing that the decree was an act of national sover-
eignty, and that the Government had no obligation to obtain Creole’s 
permission to act.
The net result of the position taken by Creole and Jersey Standard 
is that the issue has now become one involving national sovereignty, 
with the Venezuelans standing on their national pride. Just as the 
threatened U.S. troop movement overshadowed the anti-U.S. incidents 
that occurred during Vice President Nixon’s visit to Venezuela last 
May, the national sovereignty issue overshadows the issue over lack 
of advance consultation with the companies and the U.S. Government. 
4 A handwritten marginal notation reads: “something missing here.”
