Chapter 1, 1988  9
On conventional defense issues everyone spoke of the desirability of 
emphasizing the stability aspect of the (Vienna) Conventional Stability 
Talks. Asymmetrical reductions to equal levels are desirable, but opin-
ion was split about confidence building and early warning measures. 
To a man, all pushed me to urge you to speak in support of conventional 
defense improvements (such as: mobility, reinforceability, reserves, war 
reserve stocks, interoperability, cooperative research, and production 
programs—­all embodied in the NATO Force Goals).
As for US troops in Europe, we ought to always consider them a 
deterrent, and a force to fight, rather than just there to get the US and 
our nuclear might involved. We don’t want to see them as part of the 
long ago discarded “tripwire” concept.
Even as INF was being negotiated, NATO began thinking about 
maintaining its nuclear capability. The Montebello (Canada) 1983 meet-
ing, Luxembourg 1985, and the NATO 1988 Summit all looked towards 
modernizing NATO’s nuclear deterrent. Without Pershing II’s and 
GLCMs, NATO is looking to a Lance missile follow-­on of about 400 km, 
and a longer range Tactical-Air-­to-Surface Missile on a Dual-Capable 
Aircraft. This would require an increase in the START range limitation 
from 600 to 1500 km.
I saw the very latest in anti-­armor technology at Hunting 
Engineering, a leading UK arms firm. The U.S. Army has for years 
been trying to cope with quantum leaps the Soviets are making 
in tank armor—[1 line not declassified] One approach has been to 
improve “smart” weapons making them brilliant. Another approach, 
by Hunting, has been to rethink and refine the old shaped-­charge 
technology. [3 lines not declassified]
This project, like many others will probably become a joint US-UK 
project and thus qualify for funding under Senator Sam Nunn’s NATO 
cooperative project amendments. The cost-­saving feature of a project 
like this is that it can be fitted onto the existing missiles as it is only 
a warhead charge. These type advances are cheaper as no change in 
the launcher and guidance system is required. This also preserves the 
expensive training given the troops on the basic system. Of course, the 
road is long and must twist through more R & D, competitive bidding, 
and production. What needs to happen is for the US to end the research 
and buy a system that can be deployed. Research doesn’t stop Soviet 
tanks; deployed weapons do.
Al Keel is doing well and having a healthy effect at NATO. The 
word is that Mack Mattingly (as Robin Beard before him) is doing well 
pushing NATO arms cooperation forward.4
4 Bush drew a vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this paragraph.
