14  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the Foreign Minister and Secretary Shultz had established, as well as 
another area that the Vice President felt strongly about in which prog-
ress could be made if he won the election. This was an area in which the 
Vice President knew that the Soviet side was also interested, i.e. chem-
ical and biological weapons. He recalled the ghastly sight of a mother 
protecting her child in the Iran-Iraq war from an invisible and deadly 
gas. This must have affected people in the Soviet Union and it certainly 
affected people in the United States.
The Vice President continued that this issue involved difficult ver-
ification problems. It concerned not just the U.S. and the U.S.S.R., but 
many other countries. If he won the election he would work very hard 
to do more about this issue. The U.S. and the U.S.S.R. should lead other 
countries in the elimination of this barbaric weapon.
Shevardnadze said that the Soviet side had been watching the elec-
tion campaign and the Vice President’s statements, and the U.S. side had 
probably been watching the Soviet Union as well (the Vice President 
agreed). Judging from the Vice President’s statements Shevardnadze 
said that one could hope that the political level of cooperation which 
has existed between our countries for the past several years would be 
continued. The main thing was that the relationship had become less 
ideological. There was a tendency to seek a balance of interest between 
our two countries as well with other countries. We had gone from con-
frontation to cooperation, from competition to mutual understanding, 
and this was more difficult. A very important stage had been reached. 
This was the overall situation.
Shevardnadze continued that the Soviet side hoped that the Vice 
President would try to conclude the treaty on 50% reduction of stra-
tegic nuclear weapons. The Soviet side was glad to hear about the 
Vice  President’s approach to conventional arms. This was a very 
important issue. Shevardnadze said that if he was not mistaken, the 
Vice President had said that conventional arms should be put on the 
same level of importance as strategic weapons. He also said that he was 
aware of the Vice President’s stance on chemical weapons, and that the 
Vice President had said that the world should be freed of this terri-
ble thing. He was also familiar with the Vice President’s statement at 
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.2
Shevardnadze continued that he was aware of the Vice President’s 
stance on human rights and regional issues, so that he felt that there 
was a base on which to think and build plans for the future on the basis 
of the experience of the past. He wished to stress the importance of 
2 For Bush’s April 18, 1984, speech before the Conference on Disarmament, in which 
he presented a draft treaty on chemical weapons, see Department of State Bulletin, June 
1984, pp. 40–43.
