Yugoslavia “peaceful coexistence” in which North-South relations are institutionalized and regularized, i.e., the German formula.” This is a salutary development. Others should chime in, Tito included. —Yugoslavia’s position is itself somewhat curious. Belgrade wishes to assume the role of go-between. Yet it has not carved out a policy toward Korea that reflects the dominant movement toward international recognition of the reality of two Koreas. I recommend, therefore, that you emphasize the following points: —Our belief that North Korea’s diplomatic stance is increasingly anachronistic. —We are serious about implementing our troop withdrawal plan, but have no intention of responding to North Korean suggestions to discuss the Korean problems in forums which exclude the South. Our attitude toward contacts with Pyongyang will depend on the willingness of its allies to make reciprocal contacts with Seoul. —Our conviction that a prolonged period of institutionalized peaceful coexistence is the only plausible route toward reunification. In that context the diplomatic objective should be the reduction of tensions between the two Koreas and a resumption of the North- South dialogue. —Ask whether Honnecker’s veiled suggestions in Pyongyang that the North consider a two-Koreas policy comparable to arrangements worked out by the two Germanys reflects Soviet thinking on this subject. Inquire about North Korean reactions to Honnecker’s proposals. —The Yugoslav policy of shunning direct commercial relations with Seoul appears to be inconsistent with the diversification of relations by South and North Korea which Tito has asked us to accept. Post-Tito Contingencies. The Four-Power Political Directors have been working for some time on a general contingency paper in the event of Soviet pressure following Tito’s death. This paper seeks to identify the military supply needs of the Yugoslav military—for several contingencies—and Western ability to provide those supplies. It also surveys diplomatic efforts that could be made in support of Yugoslavia under those circumstances. The paper does not contemplate any form of direct Western military involvement. It will be discussed at the next Four-Power Foreign Ministers’ meeting, but this will not lead to any joint commitments, nor has the paper been discussed in any way with other countries, including Yugoslavia. Overflight. Last week, there was another overflight incident, when four U.S. aircraft from Italy briefly violated Yugoslav airspace. We have no indications that the Yugoslavs detected the violation; but the
