Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1063
ratification but that it would be at significant political cost to the Videla
Government. The issue is currently being studied by the Argentine
Government and a decision will be made in time to discuss with Secre-
tary Vance during his visit in November, according to CNEA Secretary
General Jorge Coll (protect).
3. Chief opposition to ratification comes mainly from nationalistic
elements—both right and left wing—from both within and outside the
government. While it is likely that the treaty is poorly understood by
many of its opponents, it has nevertheless come to be seen as another
issue in the sensitive area of Argentine national sovereignty.5 CNEA of-
ficials have said that opponents to the treaty are principally nationalist
elements who would take advantage of its ratification to accuse the cur-
rent leadership of selling out the country’s basic interests. CNEA Presi-
dent Admiral Castro Madero heightened such nationalistic sentiments
recently by declaring that Argentina cannot accept restrictions to devel-
opment of its nuclear plan for the sake of non-proliferation. (BA 7577).
The belief that advanced nuclear powers are pressuring and discrimi-
nating against smaller countries to impede their development of nu-
clear power has helped to harden sentiment against ratification.
4. Castro Madero himself has privately told Emboff that he person-
ally cannot see why the USG is so interested in Tlatelolco since the
treaty permits nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, a type of nu-
clear capability which could easily be diverted to non-peaceful pur-
poses. As Argentina has expressed willingness to accept full-scope
safeguards, Castro Madero claims that the treaty will not bind Ar-
gentina any more than it will already be under other safeguard
agreements.
5. Other opponents, seriously concerned with Brazilian intentions
and efforts in the nuclear energy field, claim ratification will further
weaken Argentina’s position as the most advanced nuclear power in
South America. Minister Diaz Bessone, for example, privately claimed
to Datt that Argentina cannot afford to do anything that will restrict its
chances or enhance Brazil in the competition to develop nuclear power
capability.
6.
The
perception
among
the
military
that
nuclear
non-
proliferation, and, more immediately, Argentina’s ratification of Tlate-
lolco are major U.S. foreign policy goals, has led some military to be-
5 On October 18, Castro Madero displayed “surprise that the USG attached
such importance to Tlatelolco” during a meeting with a U.S. Delegation headed by
Ambassador-at-Large Gerard Smith. He also “made clear that ‘political’ motivation” for
Argentina’s need to continue reprocessing nuclear materials was influenced by Brazil’s
determination to establish its own independent reprocessing program. (Telegram 255565
to Buenos Aires, October 26; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770392–1097)
