1978 483 to prevent post-­war coercion and thus protect these forces and their related C3I. While we lack the ability to limit damage to the US society meaningfully in a large scale Soviet attack, we are reluctant wholly to eliminate this as an objective of US policy, particularly because to do so explicitly would appear to confirm a major asymmetry between US and Soviet policy and would ignore important uncertainties about the effectiveness of a damage limiting strategy. However, if we focus on avoiding asymmetries in nuclear power in developing targeting plans, we are also likely to do as well as we can expect to do in limiting damage. We recommend the following specific guidance for targeting the Soviet nuclear threat to the US and our allies. First, we should, for reasons of alliance solidarity, continue to give equal priority to targeting threats to the US and to our NATO allies. Second, when forces are fully generated and there are sufficient weapons available to meet other targeting objectives adequately, including the maintenance of a Secure Reserve Force, we should continue to plan to place at least one weapon on each target that constitutes a nuclear threat to the US or our allies, using the most effective weapon for each type of target and taking into account the desirability of promptly using forces with less endurance. For the longer run we should have sufficient weapons with hard target capabilities to meet this objective without utilizing weapons with low PK. Third, in the retaliatory case, priority should be given (among nuclear threat targets) to [6 lines not declassified] It will be important in the longer run to improve the US capability to acquire information rapidly on the status of Soviet strategic forces following an attack. (See Issue #3)6 4. New priorities should be established for targeting Soviet non-­nuclear forces taking into account the probability that Soviet forces will be dispersed upon warning. Any victory-­denial approach should pay close attention to the ability of nuclear weapons to affect the post-­exchange balance of military forces, broadly defined, not just nuclear forces. This will require a special effort to identify the [1 line not declassified] does not decrease greatly with warning, to include [1 line not declassified] The target value system would be adjusted to assure the destruction of these targets and to give [1 line not declassified] For the longer run, we should initiate a high priority special study on the feasibility of targeting [1 line not declassified] requirements for accomplishing this. Particular attention should be given to how strategic forces might be utilized more effectively in support of NATO. A target package should be developed to [1 line not declassified] (See Issue #4)7 6 Issue #3 in the report is titled “Targeting the Nuclear Threat.” 7 Issue #4 in the report is titled “Targeting Soviet Theater Forces.”
