Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks Senator Glenn Senator Inouye2 Before the session got underway, Baker raised some questions about how genuine the consultation was to be. He noted the Gwertzman story in the New York Times last Monday3 and wondered whether, in fact, the President had already made his decisions. The Secretary informed him that the decisions had not been made and regretted the leak. He pointed out that the Gwertzman story concerned an options paper4 and what he was discussing today was a Presidential draft drawn up after considering the options paper. The Secretary then distributed copies of the draft5 to each Member and led the Members through a point-by-point consideration of it. Introduction Sparkman and Percy queried how we would be able to factor in the human rights element. Sparkman expressed some worry that commitment to human rights can be perceived as intervention; the difference is a fine line. The Secretary recognized the problem and assured the Senators that it was the President’s intention to deal with this problem with great precision and care. Paragraph 1 Senator Stone opened the longest discussion of the meeting by questioning the specific exemptions for NATO, Australia, New Zealand and Japan, criticizing the absence of Israel from the excepted list. He pointed out that the problem was exactly the same on points 3 and 4 in the paper. McGovern contested Stone, pointing out that, should we make a specific exception for Israel, we would then be cast in the role once again of one-sided support for Israel at the expense of the Arab states. He emphasized that pursuit of a peaceful settlement in the Middle East is the most important contribution we can make to Israeli security. Stone disagreed, insisting that the draft in its present form “discrimi- 2 Ducked in for a few minutes only. [Footnote is in the original.] 3 The New York Times published Bernard Gwertzman’s article “Carter is Studying Arms Sale Controls” on April 25. 4 Reference is to a paper prepared by the Ad Hoc Interagency Group on Arms Transfer, “Response to PRM/NSC–12: Arms Transfer Policy Review,” undated, attached to an April 7 memorandum from the Acting Staff Secretary of the National Security Council, Michael Hornblow. (National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Office of the Director, Subject Files Pertaining to Presidential Review Memorandum and Directives, MEMCONS with Foreign Officials, and National Security Decision and Study Memoranda, May 1963–October 1980, Accession
