116 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV On paragraph III B6, Dr. Brzezinski objected to the complexity of paragraph 6B. Following a suggestion of Mr. Christopher, the group agreed to add the phrase “subject to further analysis by the Secretary of Defense” before the sentence of paragraph 6A. In discussing paragraph III B7, Admiral Turner proposed the addition of the words “and targeting capability” at the end of the sentence “The US will maintain a secure reserve force.” He pointed out that [1 line not declassified] after the first nuclear exchange. Dr. Press asked Admiral Turner whether he meant that we needed a damage assessment capability. In response, Admiral Turner said that you needed to know what you have done in your initial attack, what you have not done, and what you need to do with your reserve force. Dr. Brown felt that we have not even begun to think about this problem. Mr. Jayne and Mr. Keeny felt that to insert such language would be to make a major programmatic decision. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that an analysis was needed and one should be called for in the document. The NSC Staff was directed to draft appropriate language. Having finished the strategic forces section, Dr. Brzezinski then turned to Section IV, General Purpose Forces. The group agreed to paragraph A1. Dr. Brzezinski said that paragraph A2 posed a difficult and serious issue. Dr. Brown explained the problem: do you buy forces separately for a contingency such as the Persian Gulf; or do you simply take the forces you need for the contingency from those you bought for NATO? But if you do not buy the forces separately, you will create a disfunction in the NATO force: that is, the NATO force will not be configured for a NATO war. In addition, just when you want to send the Persian Gulf force into action you find yourself drawing down on your NATO force at the time you least want to do it. Mr. Gelb wondered whether it was not possible to buy some forces on a separate basis but not the others—­such as logistical support, tactical air and navies. Secretary Brown felt that if you plan forces that way, you might not find much of a need for a navy. Mr. Gelb wondered whether there was not a difference between an add-­on land capability and an add-­on logistical or tactical air capability because the latter can be moved around much more rapidly than the former. Secretary Brown and General Smith agreed with that description but stated that there would be the risk of drawing down on forces that you required for the NATO contingency. Mr. Jayne felt that the issue was constrained by resources: we would like to have a lot of capability, but cannot afford it; we should take the issue to the President and tell him the price. Secretary Brown and General Smith felt that the price tag was not the whole story: there is the issue of how the forces are configured; for example if we want to fight outside of Europe, we don’t want all our Army units to be heavy.
