810 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 267. Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, June 17, 1977 Prospects for Expanded Soviet Bloc Role in North-South Problems Summary and Conclusions There are two contrasting motives for encouraging the Soviet Bloc to play a more active role in North-South problems,2 particularly in various measures for economic development, as you suggested at CIEC:3 a) to elicit a genuinely cooperative effort on the part of the Soviet Union, with the aim of maximizing the positive role they have to play in Third World development and dampening East-West political competition; or b) to silhouette Soviet inadequacies in contributing to Third World needs, with the aim of revealing the gap between Soviet rhetoric and reality and exposing the Soviets to criticism on the part of the developing countries. The relative weight to be accorded these motives shows up when the complex of North-South issues is broken down into its components: negotiations focusing on the International Wheat Agreement,4 other individual commodity agreements (except coffee), aid for basic human needs, and the producer-consumer dialogue in energy offer some promise of success in integrating the Soviet bloc into the North-South dialogue in a constructive way. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 48, Chron: 6/77. Confidential. Drafted by Theodore Moran and Jenonne Walker (S/P) and concurred in in EB, IO, INR (draft), and EUR/SOV (draft). Vance forwarded this memorandum to Carter as an attachment to a June 26 “Memorandum on Some Possible Measures for Stabilizing US-Soviet Relations.” (Ibid.) Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Some good ideas. J.” 2 In a May 31 memorandum to Carter on “Patterns of Communist Aid,” Brzezinski discussed the provision of military and economic assistance by Communist countries to non-Communist LDCs. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 12, unlabeled folder) 3 In his May 30 address to the CIEC, Vance asserted: “We believe the industrialized Communist countries also should increase their development assistance. We are prepared to join with them in such assistance, when and where they are willing to do it.” (Department of State Bulletin, June 20, 1977, p. 646) 4 The International Wheat Agreement, first signed in 1949 by 42 countries, including the United States, regulated wheat prices and sales among its wheat-exporting and wheat-importing signatories. In 1971, the United States signed a later iteration of the agreement.
