526 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Brezhnev has clearly pointed out that it is easy to destroy relations but much harder to build them up and develop them. The question arises of how a great power can simply throw aside all of the positive things which have been accumulated over the years by previous administrations. He described the administration as looking around, throwing things overboard rapidly, and if it finds any left throwing them overboard as well. He then mentioned with some forcefulness that the Soviet Union had not come into being due to some external force but through the forces of its own people, in the same way as the United States came into being and exists with all of its social and economic attributes without any external approval. Questions of whether we approve of a social and economic structure or not, it seemed to him, should be set aside in our relations. Meanwhile, he concluded, it was not the Soviet Union but the U.S. side which bears responsibility for the growth of tension and for damage to U.S.-Soviet relations. [Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.] —As for Afghanistan, I said I had heard what Gromyko had said but that I assumed he did not really mean that he thought the U.S. was involved in any aggression against Afghanistan. Nor was I aware from any information which had come to me that Pakistan citizens were involved in the conflict, though he had referred to Pakistan involvement. Gromyko responded that I simply then did not have the facts—that there was no doubt about Pakistani involvement. There was massive evidence about their assistance in training Afghan rebels, about the supply of arms, and about the fact that U.S. arms were also involved. —I told Gromyko I would like to understand more clearly what he had said about Soviet involvement in the events in Afghanistan, particularly with regard to the change of government. Our information, I said, was that Babrak had arrived in Kabul on a Soviet plane. Gromyko retorted that we put such information into circulation ourselves and then believed it when it comes back to us. I said I didn’t think that was where my information had come from and that I had in fact had the impression that Babrak had been living in the Soviet Union. 25. Gromyko then returned to my remarks on theater nuclear weapons to state that the principle of equality does not relate just to strategic arms. When this principle was addressed in Vienna it was understood that it related to the entire military and strategic posture and equilibrium of the two sides.7 How else, he asked, could it be? Otherwise there would be the absurd situation of reaching equality in one field 7 During the summit in Vienna held June 15–18, 1979, Carter and Brezhnev discussed arms control issues in two meetings on January 17. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents 203 and 204.
