3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
665
tiously and carefully nurture everything good that had been achieved
in Soviet-American relations in recent times.
The Secretary said he would not repeat himself, but would clarify
that there was no question of our having charged that this matter was a
violation of the ’62 understandings between us. We had made it quite
clear from the outset that the Soviet brigade as such, in its present con-
figuration, posed no threat to the United States. We had tried to be
honest and had not tried to build up this matter out of all proportion.
Gromyko said that he had not yet touched on one aspect of this
matter. The training center in Cuba had now been there for 17 years,
and over all these years no one had raised any questions about it. For
this lengthy period of time everything had been regarded as normal.
Why, then, had it been necessary to raise so much noise about it now?
Why expand the importance of this matter out of all proportion? This
aspect had not failed to attract the attention of the Soviet leadership,
and it had tried to find answers and explanations, but had not suc-
ceeded. In fact, there could be no answer to this question. Why was this
being done, since it harmed the relations between us and also harmed
the prestige of the United States? That was the Soviet view of the
matter, although the Secretary might see it somewhat differently. Nev-
ertheless, this view was quite prevalent throughout the world.
The Secretary wanted to ask Gromyko a direct question. From our
analysis over the years, we cannot specifically trace this unit all the way
through. On the other hand, our information showed that during 1975
and 1976 at this location there had been an increase in construction and,
after that time, all indications of training with Cuban forces, which we
had witnessed in the past, had disappeared. It was this that had led us
in July to investigate further into this matter again, coupled with
photos of the equipment of this unit and a configuration that was used
only for a combat unit.
Gromyko said that this kind of reasoning could lead to absurdity.
For example, the United States might notice that the trousers of Soviet
soldiers had increased in width or length and would then come to the
conclusion that this, coupled with a different kind of boot worn now,
had created a new situation. Logic of this kind was absolutely uncon-
vincing. After all, what did that change? As the Secretary probably
knew, US and NATO troops had also carried out maneuvers in dif-
ferent compositions. Sometimes officers stand at a table on which a
map has been spread, and move around little symbols, each symbol
standing for a corps, or an army, or a brigade, and yet these were only
little flags or markers and did not in any way reflect the true situation
on the ground. The Secretary had said that our information had indi-
cated that in the past more Cuban troops had been involved with this
unit, and that fewer Cubans were involved now (the Secretary inter-
