Hungary ant line and even to stand up against the Soviets in its defense.) This pragmatic attitude is shown repeatedly, such as in Hungary’s relatively liberal travel and emigration policy, its cessation of jamming of RFE and other Western broadcasts, and its general openness to Western information (including recent telecasting of several unprecedented East-West debates). Hungary’s leaders have also achieved a modus vivendi with the Catholic Church and the Vatican which probably goes as far as anywhere else in Eastern Europe. If, as a complement to our policy of speaking out on gross violations of human rights, it is useful to respond to positive trends, then return of the Crown to Hungary at this time could be justified further on those grounds. Opponents and Supporters While we have long assumed that some vocal Hungarian-Americans would object to return of the Crown, we have been inhibited in our efforts to assess their views more precisely lest we stir up opposition before we were ready to move. The Freedom Fighters Federation remains the major organization opposing return. The public position of such organizations usually is that the Crown should not be returned until Soviet troops leave and free elections are conducted. Privately, their bottom line seems to be: Don’t return the Crown as long as Kadar, “the betrayer of the 1956 Revolution”, is no longer in control. However, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible to get a clear reading of the Hungarian-American attitude, particularly since we are not really able to judge the degree to which the organization’s leaders reflect the views of their constituents. In Congress, supporters and sponsors of periodic resolutions opposing return consist primarily of signers of perennial “Captive Nations” resolutions such as Derwinski (R, Ill.), Crane (R, Ill.), Frank Horton (R, N.Y.), Rousselot (R, Cal.) and Dole. We are certain the Crown would not be an issue as far as the overwhelming majority of the American public is concerned. If presented in the right terms, we believe they would support return as a moral act of returning an object which does not belong to us. (See, for example, the persuasive Washington Post editorial at Tab B.)6 As for the Hungarian-Americans, in recent years, no doubt partly stemming from the evolution of more liberal Hungarian policies, we have begun to see that this ethnic community is by no means united in opposition to the Crown’s return. Several influential figures, including Ferenc Nagy, the last Prime Minister of non-Communist Hungary, and Zoltan 6 Not attached. Reference is to “A Cold War Relic,” The Washington Post, May 14,
