Afghanistan
827
made by the tribal gun makers are rifles and pistols, but they also
produce mortars and heavy machine guns in small quantities. Weapons
produced in foreign countries—including captured Soviet weapons
sold to gun dealers by insurgents—and weapons presumably stolen
from the Pakistani military and police are also available.
The insurgents have been supplied with arms by private Pakistanis
and Pakistani religious organizations, although the tribal gun markets
have apparently been the source of much of this equipment as well.
The Pakistani Government has furnished limited quantities of
ammunition, rifles, antitank rockets, and mines. Saudi Arabia and sev-
eral of the smaller Gulf oil producers have provided funds for purchas-
ing arms, although apparently not the arms themselves. Egypt has
also offered help to the insurgents, and some Egyptian-made weapons
reportedly are being used in Afghanistan. There are persistent, but
unconfirmed, reports of Chinese assistance, either directly or through
the Pakistani Government.
Some military supplies—most from stocks sold to Iran by the US—
have been supplied through Iran. Despite its announcements of support
for the insurgents, the role of the Iranian Government appears to be
slight. The weapons apparently are supplied primarily by religious
organizations.
Hundreds of passes are available to the insurgents to move weap-
ons into Afghanistan over the mountainous border with Pakistan. The
border with Iran and the western part of the Pakistani border are
largely inhospitable desert, most of it unpatrolled. The government
forces have firm control of only the few main border crossings, such
as the paved road from Iran to Herat, and the road through the Khyber
Pass. Soviet mining efforts along the border in Konarha province have
made cross-border movement there considerably more difficult, but so
far at least, most of the border remains virtually unpatrolled.
Within Afghanistan, military supplies move slowly, by animal or
man, over mountain trails, the same ones used before the war by
smugglers, or sometimes by bus or truck. The process can be slow—
insurgents in Vardak province report it takes two weeks to a month
to receive arms from Pakistan. Despite efforts to impede movement in
some provinces, government and Soviet forces do not seem to have
much success in interrupting insurgent arms shipments in the country.
Only rarely do government reports reflect the interception of an
arms shipment.
