1977 41 prospects for change in Soviet and American nuclear doctrine. What is the significance, both to the U.S. and USSR, of asymmetries in force structure? What responses would the USSR probably make to alternative U.S. postures? (2) Political uses of strategic forces in diplomatic confrontations. In what ways and in what types of crises might the Soviets attempt to exact leverage from nuclear capabilities or threats? (3) Military and political uses of conventional forces, in the context of strategic parity, in regions where the USSR or the PRC can deploy substantial conventional power either directly or through proxies. (4) Covert operations. What is their scale and effectiveness? Where are the Soviets likely to be most active? (5) Economic threats. To what extent will the U.S. and its allies be vulnerable to acts of “economic warfare,” such as resource embargoes, boycotts, debt leverage? 4. Regional Goals and Global Competition. The U.S. has a global interest in the balance of power with the Soviet Union. It also has other interests specific to countries and regions, such as political stability, economic development, and amicable diplomatic relations. In different regions these two sets of interests may either be complementary, contradictory, or unrelated. To assess the interaction of these aims on general strategies and specific policies, the regional net assessments consider: (1) Which local goals are caused by global competition with the USSR; which need to be modified by global strategic considerations; which are irrelevant to US-Soviet competition? (2) In which regions and in what dimensions—­political, military, economic, and diplomatic—­is it more and less important to counter Soviet influence? (3) The impact of specific U.S. policies such as those on human rights, arms transfers, and nuclear proliferation on the Soviet-­American interaction at the regional level. (4) Costs and benefits with respect to the global balance of alternative American options for involvement in regional conflicts. For example, what are the costs and benefits of U.S. alignment with one side (blacks in Southern Africa); diplomatic involvement with both sides (Middle East); military supply to neither side (South Asia), one side (Zaire v. Angola), or both sides (Greece-Turkey and Middle East)? 5. Consequences of Increasing Interaction. As the cooperative element in US–USSR relations has become more significant in recent years, it is particularly important to assess the extent to which increased economic interaction may be desirable, and the ways in which it would affect the competitive aspects of American-Soviet relations. Trade, credits, and
