1326 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement asking them also to furnish a secretary. In any event, I think that the FE budget is now getting off very easily. As you know, I know and respect Dave Popper tremendously, but he, of course, simply does not have the specialized FE experience that would be most useful to me. He also has more than a full time job here with not much time to devote to this and the office needs him badly in many ways. I therefore hope that we can shortly shake Ed Martin or someone else loose before long. Dave Osborn has some ideas he will discuss with you. I have been hit hard here by the press, particularly the New York Times, on the Secretary’s February 5 statement on the newsmen and the Americans, wanting to know exactly how and when the Chicoms made the proposition. I have, of course, said nothing except to point out our often reiterated statements that the Chicoms were holding the Americans as political hostages. In this regard there is, of course, no specific statement in the record. The most specific statements are, as you have noted, those on the “state of relations” which he long ago dropped when he saw the box into which it had placed him. Since his last “state of relations” statement on September 28, 1955 there are only a few relatively obscure statements bearing on this that I have been able to recall or Dave has been able to find. At the 56th meeting (para 16) I picked up his remark (para 15) that a “reasonable solution (on trade) would contribute to resolution other disputes”, but he sidestepped. At the 63rd meeting (para 6) he said “if U.S. had gen­ uine desire resolve problems it should make progress in second item agenda”. Both of these are very tenuous and only have any meaning at all within context. You will recall that in accordance with my original basic instruc­ tions, at our first dinner (Mytel 585 Aug. 23, 1955) I inferentially brought up the possibility of visitors after all Americans were released, and at our second dinner (Mytel 642 August 29, 1955) made this somewhat more specific with respect to correspondents. I cannot recall that the subject again came up until the Chicoms issued their invitations to cor­ respondents last August and at the 55th meeting I gave him a copy of our August 7 press release emphasizing the last paragraph (para 14 Mytel 135 and Wang’s reply in para 19). At the 58th meeting he introduced the cultural exchange proposal and I made preliminary comments (paras 11 and 12 Mytel 303) on which I expanded at the 59th meeting. Thus, while he took the initiative in raising “state of relations” as a factor in the timing of the release of Americans I took the initiative in specifically relating the travel of correspondents to their release. He has always been very careful not to be specific as to exactly what he meant
