788
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I. What does the public need to know about the world to make it more
receptive to the “hard options” of our policies?
Complexity:
Several of the bureaus see a need to convey a greater sense of the
complexity of today’s world and the constraints on our freedom of ac-
tion. We should not minimize the costs or risks associated with our pol-
icies, suggest quick or easy fixes, or downplay the degree to which
American foreign policy success depends on the support of other na-
tions, such as our NATO allies or Third World countries.
David Newsom singles out four issues that are particularly hard to
explain to the American people: Third World demands, unanticipated
political change, the relative strength of the U.S. in the world, and the
independent views of our allies.
A number of the memos suggest that more can be done to make
foreign policy seem relevant to everyday concerns. We can stress the
economic stakes we have in foreign relations (jobs, resources and
the prices paid for imports are three immediate suggestions). We can
relate development efforts abroad to pressures to emigrate to the
U.S. (OES), or to narcotics flows (INR, OES). A number suggest that
we can do more to explain foreign policy in human terms, without
oversimplication.
Resources
The growing reluctance of Americans to dedicate sufficient re-
sources to foreign affairs, particularly to economic and military assist-
ance, is a commonly recognized problem. It is also agreed that we
should actively seek to build support for aid, stressing that it is crucial
to our effectiveness in changed international economic and political cir-
cumstances. In addition to the competitive (with the Soviets) and hu-
manitarian rationales, we can show that aid helps create stable growing
economies which are increasingly important to us as markets for our
exports (H, IDCA, PA). Developing countries are sources of raw mate-
rials (AID, H). Helping LDC’s address their pressing social and eco-
nomic problems can enhance political stability (IDCA). The public be-
moans a supposed loss of U.S. influence in the world, yet desires
reduced aid levels. We can highlight the cost of aid cuts in terms of in-
fluence (NEA). One caveat, however: a tendency to exaggerate the ben-
efits of aid in the past is part of our problem today. We should, there-
fore, be willing to keep expectations reasonable (EB).
Specific Issue Ideas
Third World needs: dramatize with use of Caribbean area. Poverty at
home leads to migration pressures on U.S. (P).
