National Security Policy  497
156. The scale and timing of attack with bomber aircraft would also 
depend upon the availability and effectiveness of other delivery sys­
tems which will probably become available as the period progresses. At 
present the USSR is probably capable of employing small numbers of 
both bomber-­launched air-­to-­surface missiles and submarine-­launched 
surface-­to-­surface missiles against targets in the continental US. These 
weapons, together with ground-­launched surface-­to-­surface missiles 
with ranges up to about 700 n.m., could also be employed in initial 
attacks on Western nuclear striking forces deployed on the periphery 
of the Bloc. As the period advances, the numbers and types of offensive 
missiles available to Soviet forces will increase, and by mid-1962, Soviet 
guided missile capabilities for strategic attack could probably include 
more effective air-­to-­surface and submarine-­launched missiles as well 
as IRBMs and ICBMs. Soviet planners would probably recognize that 
long-­range ballistic missiles could impose maximum surprise and diffi­
culty of interception, but also that during this period the accuracy and 
payload capacity of such missiles will be inferior to those of manned 
aircraft of comparable ranges. The large-­scale use of missile-­launching 
submarines in an initial attack would probably be precluded by the risk 
of premature disclosure of Soviet intent.
157. Air Defense Capabilities.27 Although the effectiveness of Soviet 
defenses against nuclear attack would depend in large measure upon 
the success of an initial assault on Western nuclear delivery capabili­
ties, the USSR’s large air defense forces would be used to reduce the 
effectiveness of counterattack by Western forces. All Bloc forces with 
capabilities for air defense are integrated into an over-­all active air 
defense system, which places primary emphasis on providing defense 
in depth for key administrative, industrial, and military centers within 
the USSR. Large passive defense organizations contribute to the Bloc’s 
readiness for air defense, but we believe the general population is inad­
equately prepared against large-­scale nuclear attack.
158. Principal current weaknesses of Bloc air defenses include the 
limited all-­weather fighter capability, the low traffic-­handling capabil­
ities of communications and control components, the probable inade­
quacy of radar height-­finding capabilities at high altitudes in certain 
areas, inadequate low altitude radar coverage, and the limited early 
warning time available in Bloc border areas. Bloc air defenses are most 
highly concentrated in the European USSR (east to a line roughly 
from the Kola Peninsula to the Caspian Sea), East Germany, Poland, 
Czechoslovakia, and the Maritime and Sakhalin areas of the Soviet 
Far East, with some concentrations at specific locations elsewhere. The 
27 For a detailed estimate on this subject, see NIE 11–57, Sino-Soviet Bloc Air Defense 
Capabilities through Mid-1962, 16 July 1957. [Footnote is in the original.]
