Comprehensive Test Ban
387
would be the case if all nuclear explosions were banned; (b) provide in-
formation on the effects of nuclear explosions that would assist in the
design and protection of weapon systems; and (c) facilitate assessments
of the reliability of a state’s stockpile of nuclear weapons, whose explo-
sive design features could parallel or be identical to design features of
the explosives used in the PNE program. In addition, we indicated that
we were unaware of any reliable means of verifying that design im-
provements were not being introduced while conducting PNEs, but
emphasized that, even if device standardization could be guaranteed,
this would not eliminate the other military benefits enumerated above.
The Soviets, however, took a more narrow view of military ben-
efits, claiming that such could be precluded by freezing explosive de-
vice design and by prohibiting diagnostic measurements of explosions
and by verifying that each device used in the PNE program conformed
to certain specified parameters (in this connection, mentioning as ex-
amples total yield, fission yield, and the ratios of amount of selected ra-
dioactive debris products). Morokhov, head of the Soviet Delegation,
repeatedly sought to draw us into a technical examination of how de-
vice improvement could be effectively precluded. We resisted those ef-
forts, indicating that we did not consider it promising to get involved in
the technical consideration of proposals which, even if feasible and
practicable, did not even purport to deal with a number of important
military benefits (e.g., maintenance of nuclear explosive device “infra-
structure”) that we had identified. It should be noted that their pro-
posals as stated would not assure that some device development was
not being carried out.
On non-proliferation, the Soviet side contended that a ban on all
nuclear explosions would be resisted by non-nuclear weapon states
wishing to receive the benefits of PNE technology and would give
some of those states the excuse that only indigenous nuclear explosive
development would enable them to realize those benefits. On the other
hand, we maintained that non-nuclear weapon states have showed
little interest in PNEs, and that a number of critical states that have not
joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty would almost certainly reject a dis-
criminatory agreement which permitted only existing nuclear powers
to carry out nuclear explosions.
It is still difficult to predict how firmly the Soviets will maintain
their position on PNEs. Morokhov, who represents the Soviet agency
responsible for PNEs, has certainly made every effort to demonstrate
inflexibility. He has claimed that all Soviet government agencies are
agreed on the need to preserve PNEs, that the USSR cannot afford to
give up a technology that will make a major contribution to the national
economy, and that there will be no CTB treaty without PNEs. The ques-
tion remains, however, whether the Soviet political leadership will
