nonpartisan and who have been associated on and off for years with Central Government have privately given clear intimations of their feeling of distaste for the whole adventure. Naturally this so-called government is taken no more seriously by the people at large than by itself. I have grave doubts whether any Chinese consider it to be more than a pawn used in a fantastic game being played among military rivals having no loyalties and no principles. My feeling is that the idea of central government has lost its traditional prestige so far that in the future no administration can command greater respect than can be enforced by it upon the country. 7. Regardless of what is effect or cause, this decline of central government politically accords with an unmistakable trend in the political ideas of the Chinese. However little we may like the idea of administrative decentralization from the standpoint of American interests or from that of what we regard as the interests of China, it is becoming established. This is going on in the midst even of the so-called nationalistic movement, which, to a large degree, has aroused the people to a common impulse of assertion of themselves as against alien peoples. As I foresee the development through which China is destined to pass before it will be able to evolve a reasonably coherent organization of government, it must experience first a resolution into a loose confederation, with autonomous component regions, held together by bonds of sentiment rather than of law, merely tolerating in degrees both various and fluctuating the continuance of essential national services such as the railways and telegraph, customs, salt, posts, and perhaps the judicial system. I conceive it as possible that were these organizations able to keep beyond the control of any faction and aloof from politics, they might be permitted to function as quasi-independent entities fairly generally and regularly, as is now done in large degree by the Customs Administration. But if their subordination to the authority of a nominally central government exercising control only locally and for the benefit of a faction is to continue, they are bound to break up sooner or later.
