Dominican Republic  501
civilian provisional junta, to be composed of one high military figure, a 
respected civilian, and a high Church official as leader. The participation 
of the military and the leadership of the Church should insure a rela-
tively stable and conservative government to which anti-­Americanism 
would not be a major issue. Although the appeal of Castro and of his 
leftist radicalism is not now strong in the Dominican Republic, much 
leftist sentiment is concentrated among the exiles, who include some 
Communists and sympathizers. Their influence in a successor regime 
would not at first be important but many local observers predict that 
any new administration would soon collapse, amid bloody disorder. 
Radical sentiment would surely develop in such a milieu, and interven-
tion, in one form or another, by the Castro regime in favor of a leftist 
faction or leader must be considered a possibility.
DR–19.	
Memorandum of Discussion at the 441st Meeting of the 
National Security Council1
[Extract]

Thursday, April 14, 1960.
Mr. Dulles reported that in the Dominican Republic, Trujillo’s posi-
tion continued to weaken and was now quite precarious.2 The whole-
sale arrests ordered by Trujillo last winter had affected almost every 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Extract. Drafted 
by Marion W. Boggs. The extract printed here is the portion pertaining to the Dominican 
Republic from combined agenda items 1, 2, and 3: “Significant World Developments 
Affecting U.S. Security”, “U.S. Policy Toward Cuba”, and “U.S. Policy Toward the 
Dominican Republic.” Also omitted was agenda item 4, “Future NSC Agenda Items.”
2 At the 440th NSC meeting, April 7, 1960, General Charles P. Cabell, Acting Director 
of Central Intelligence, and Under Secretary Dillon made brief statements about the 
Dominican Republic. Cabell stated, inter alia, that Trujillo’s position continued to grow 
weaker, and Dillon commented that “Trujillo may fall before our policy of building up 
moderate successor elements has had time to succeed.” According to the memorandum 
of discussion at that meeting, drafted by Boggs, the NSC:
“Noted and discussed the statement by the Under Secretary of State that the posi-
tion of the Trujillo regime is deteriorating more rapidly than was anticipated at the time 
of the Department of State presentation on January 14, 1960 (NSC Action No. 2178). 
Therefore, alternative policies in the event of an early collapse of that regime were being 
actively considered by the Department of State, and would be the subject of consulta-
tion with the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.” (Eisenhower Library, 
Whitman File, NSC Records)
This action, approved by the President as NSC Action 2212, was subsequently 
transmitted to the Secretaries of State and Defense.
