420 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The Prime Minister said he had never attacked Mr. Saunders personally. However, he wanted the Secretary to tell the President that the replies to Hussein5 had been the gravest matter in Israeli public opinion and in Israel’s future. If Saunders had said that Ambassador Yost’s speech6 was still binding, that East Jerusalem is occupied territory, this was a serious matter. The greatest wrong that had ever been done to a nation had been done in this case. Why should united Jerusalem not be recognized as the capital of Israel? The Prime Minister then recounted Jordanian actions in East Jerusalem and Prime Minister Eshkol’s message to Hussein in June 1967,7 despite which Hussein had attacked. There was now free access to the holy shrines and Israel had rebuilt the Jewish quarter, yet East Jerusalem was called occupied. This had been said in the middle of negotiations with Sadat. It makes Israel’s position difficult when Sadat hears what the United States says. The Prime Minister said he had not attacked Mr. Saunders but had spoken of the position of the United States which concerns Israel’s future. He had also been attacked, the Prime Minister said, and called a traitor by his friends, all because Israel wants peace. This hurt deeply. Furthermore, the Prime Minister said, the phrase “whatever settlements remain” as applied to the West Bank implies that the Camp David Sinai Framework is a model for Judea and Samaria and for the Golan. This is wrong. Turning to the preambular language (at “noting”), the Prime Minister expressed deep astonishment that this should be made a condition for the treaty. He could not change the decision of the Israeli Government, which must decide. Israel will consider this problem but he, the Prime Minister, could do nothing without the Government. Perhaps he could speak about it today to President Carter. The Secretary said he had discussed this very issue with the President that morning. Turning to the language on Gaza in Article II, the Prime Minister said that the accepted forum is to say “without prejudice to the position of either party.” This was a simple issue. The Secretary agreed it was simple. Egypt wanted to remove some language and Israel wanted to add language. The Secretary said let’s leave the present language as it was agreed ad referendum. The Secretary said Israel’s additional language does not change the substance. The words “the issue of the status of the Gaza Strip” reflect Israel’s position. This is not worth arguing about and should be solved by leaving the language as it is. 5 See footnote 4, Document 91. 6 See footnote 12, Document 64. 7 For discussion of Israeli-Jordanian correspondence before the June 1967 war, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIX, Arab-Israeli Crisis and War, 1967, footnote 2, Document 160.
