778 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I additional 235,000 tons for emergency African food relief. We strongly urge that all nations able to contribute foodstuffs or funds join under the leadership of the Food and Agriculture Organization to coordinate relief to drought-afflicted regions. I am happy to note that the Director General will convene a meeting of concerned governments and international organizations in the coming weeks.4 Targets have been set for annual food assistance in the new Food Aid Convention,5 and for emergency food aid through the international emergency food reserve. We encourage others to join us in the effort to reach those targets, to guarantee that food will be available to those in need. Further, we should develop reserves that are adequate to back up donor commitments and assure that food emergencies can be met. My government is working toward a 4-million-ton reserve of wheat to assure our food aid commitments.6 Despite efforts to produce more food, many poor developing countries will still have to import substantial quantities over the next decade. We should consider new arrangements to assist those developing countries that are improving their own food production. We should explore ways to channel more international funds, both concessional and nonconcessional, into food production. We, therefore, support rapid agreement on an equitable replenishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). We would also consider further measures to strengthen IFAD. To help developing countries adjust to oil-driven balance-ofpayments deficits, we favor continued improvements in International Monetary Fund facilities, including subsidizing the Supplementary Financing Facility. Such arrangements should receive strong support 4 In an August 4 memorandum to Muskie, Owen indicated that an “extraordinary international effort” would be needed to avert starvation in drought-affected areas in Africa. Owen requested that at the 11th Special Session Muskie announce that the United States would ask Saouma to convene an emergency conference to organize aid relief for Africa. Lake forwarded a copy of the memorandum to Christopher under an August 7 memorandum, indicating that he was to inform Owen that “S/P, the bureaus, IDCA, and USDA” all recommend that Muskie make this announcement. At a September 20 meeting of donor countries and international organizations in Rome, Saouma announced that the United States, Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands, Australia, West Germany, Switzerland, France, and Algeria had made cash or food aid contributions. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 276, footnotes 3 and 4 thereto. 5 Signatories approved a new Food Aid Convention in London on March 6, which replaced the FAC negotiated in 1971 as part of the International Wheat Agreement (IWA). In a May 9 message to the Senate transmitting the Food Aid Convention, the President indicated that the United States intended to pledge 4,470,000 MT of grains. The complete text of Carter’s message is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 865–866. 6 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 277, footnote 14.
