612  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
this image of themselves and of the world situation they will press the 
programs they have developed in recent years: an active diplomacy, a 
large-­scale propaganda effort, trade and aid, and cultural exchanges.
224. Attitude toward war. We believe that at least for the period of 
this estimate the Soviet leaders will continue to put their main reliance 
in the struggle with the West on such political weapons. Despite the 
continuing growth of their military power, in particular their acquisi­
tion of growing capabilities for nuclear attack on the US, we continue 
to believe that they will not deliberately initiate general war. They will 
probably estimate that even with a lead in long-­range missiles, they 
could not be certain of winning a general war, and that the scale of 
damage in such a war would threaten the survival of their society.
225. In the Soviet conception, military power should be used in 
the first instance and by preference as a political weapon. The enemy 
should be maneuvered into such a vulnerable military-­political situa­
tion that he forfeits key positions without military resistance. Actual 
use of military power is envisaged only if there is confidence both that 
the gains will outweigh the losses, and that the risks are acceptable. 
Therefore, the immediate question posed by the growth of Soviet mili­
tary power is whether the Soviets will be increasingly tempted over the 
next several years to use the threat of their military power more overtly 
and boldly as a means of pressure on the West.
226. Another serious question arises from the increasingly aggres­
sive conduct of Soviet foreign policy on the one hand and the con­
tinuing growth of Soviet military power on the other: will the Soviets 
employ their own or other forces controlled by them in local military 
actions, estimating that the US will be deterred from making an ade­
quate military response by fear of general war or of adverse political 
consequences?
227. National Estimates have stated consistently over the last sev­
eral years that the Soviet leaders would try to avoid general war and 
that they would seek to avoid situations which in their view involved 
serious risk of general war. We believe that this estimate can be reaf­
firmed. However, we also believe that the Soviet judgment with respect 
to the kind of situations which do involve serious risk may be chang­
ing. The advance of their own military power, together with the grow­
ing political vulnerability of key Western positions, will probably lead 
the Soviet leaders to increase their general pressure on the West and to 
exploit local situations more vigorously. While we have always consid­
ered it possible that Bloc forces would be used in overt local aggression 
if this could be done without much risk of serious involvement with 
Western forces, we do not believe that the likelihood of such aggres­
sion has increased. However, we do believe that the Soviets will com­
bat more actively than hitherto the presence of Western influence in
