and chronologically, at the risk of repeating much of which the Department is doubtless informed. The Commandants of the military forces of the United States, Great Britain, Italy and Japan, stationed at Tientsin for the purpose of maintaining open communication between Peking and the sea by virtue of the terms of Article IX of the Protocol of 1901, necessarily had to establish about the district for foreign residence and trade in Tientsin a defense area to serve as a military base. This the Commandants rightly considered as an area which they must be prepared to defend and into which, therefore, no armed Chinese troops should be permitted to enter. This defense area included inter alia the British, French, Italian, and Japanese Concessions. The sector allotted each Command corresponded, generally speaking, with the concession of the respective nationality; but for military reasons the sectors included, in addition, certain adjacent areas, at the outer boundaries of which lines were to be established even during civil strife in order to divert any approaching troops from entrance into the defense area. By reason of there being no American Concession, the sector allotted to the American Command is in the former German Concession and other adjoining territory wholly under Chinese administration. It is adjacent to the British Sector. With the practical failure on the part of the Powers concerned to compel the observance of the Agreement of July 15, 1902 (See MacMurray’s China Treaties, p. 317 et seq.) respecting the marching and stationing of Chinese troops within twenty li of Tientsin, the question of the maintenance of such lines became increasingly important, and especially so for the American Command which, not being based upon a foreign concession, was left particularly liable to contact with Chinese troops by reason of the different trunk roads passing through its sector. Unless the other foreign commands, especially the British, were to maintain the lines assigned them under the combined defense plan, including the area outside of their concessions, our forces would be left in an untenable position. Disregarding the agreement entered into by the Commandants as to the exclusion of armed Chinese troops from territory within the defense lines, the British forces at Tientsin on December 25th, and the French on December 26th, permitted columns of such troops to pass through this
