National Security Policy 181 b. This alternative would make two major changes in existing pol­ icy guidance: first—­that, in this period of relative nuclear parity, limited aggres­ sion may not always be confined to less-­developed areas; second—­that, this period of relative nuclear parity, it may not be in the U.S. interest to deal with every limited aggression by applying whatever degree of military force necessary to suppress it. The purpose of the proposed changes is to ensure that the U.S. will have a flexible capability so that it can determine the application of force best serving U.S. interests under the circumstances existing in each case of limited military aggression. c. I will read the alternative on the blue sheet: (READ ALTERNATIVE) May 1/58—R.C. ALTERNATIVE VERSION OF PARAGRAPH 14 14. a. During a period of relative nuclear parity, it becomes increasingly important—­while maintaining our nuclear capability to deter general war—­to develop further and to maintain a capability to oppose limited military aggression wherever U.S. security interests are involved. b. In the case of any such limited military aggression, the United States should decide whether: (1) vital U.S. interests require the defeat of such limited aggression by prompt and resolute application of what­ ever degree of force is necessary, even at the risk that major Communist counter-­action may spread the hostilities into general war, or whether (2) U.S. interests would be served by the application of only the degree of force necessary to achieve objectives of limiting the area and scope of the hostilities and restoring the status quo ante, thereby seeking to minimize the risk that major Communist counter-­action would spread the hostilities into general war. c. Within the total U.S. military forces, therefore, there must be included ready forces which, with such help as may realistically be expected from allied forces, are adequate (1) to present a deterrent to limited military aggression, and (2) in accordance with b above, to defeat or hold, in conjunction with indigenous forces, any such lim­ ited aggression, pending the application of such additional U.S. and allied power as may be deemed necessary. Such ready forces must be highly mobile and suitably deployed, recognizing that some degree of mal-­deployment from the viewpoint of general war must be accepted. Military planning for U.S. forces to oppose limited military aggression will be based on a flexible and selective capability, including an appro­ priate nuclear capability for use as authorized by the President.
