874
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the East; 3) nationalist forces ready to tear the country apart. And when
that time comes we will, I predict, regret any earlier lost opportunities—
such as the one now before us—to demonstrate that we can be counted
upon.6
Eagleburger
6 On June 4, Aaron wrote on Rentschler’s covering memorandum forwarding the
telegram to him and Brzezinski (see footnote 1 above), that “Christopher will try to get
the dough from the cots and blankets fund. SSA, AID, and supplementals are out.”
Brzezinski asked if a memorandum from him to Vance would be necessary. Aaron’s
response is illegible. On September 13, Carter signed Presidential Determination 79–16,
providing $10 million for economic assistance. The justification for the decision noted
that the assistance “would help the Yugoslavs overcome the economic difficulties caused
by the earthquake.” The justification also noted that “in so doing, it would support
Yugoslavia’s continued political independence. Of equal importance, such assistance
would demonstrate that the United States can be relied upon in time of need.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country
Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–8/79)
266.
Memorandum From Robert Kimmitt, Marshall Brement, and
Steve Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 11, 1979
SUBJECT
VBB: Arms Sales to Yugoslavia (S)
We recommended that this issue be discussed at the luncheon
because of our belief that our emerging military supply relationship
with Yugoslavia is at a critical juncture, and because State and Defense
appear to be handling this issue in much too routine a fashion. Our
hope is that your raising the issue will be a signal to Vance and Brown
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: Military: 1/79–1/80. Secret.
David Aaron wrote at the top of the memorandum: “Not such a big deal.”
