414
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
(C) But from the population’s vantage point, Ulbricht remained
synonymous with hard-line communism. Thus, his rehabilitation was
not merely an attempt to define his place in East German history. It
was also intended to signal that there might be a return to Ulbricht’s
policies in the face of mounting socioeconomic problems and politi-
cal dissent.
(U) This signal was reinforced by the sentencing in July 1978 of
Rudolf Bahro and Nico Huebner—two of the GDR’s most noted dissi-
dents—to jail terms of 8 years and 5 years, respectively. These were
harsher tactics than Honecker had used in the earlier cases of folk
singer dissident Wolf Biermann—who was stripped of his citizenship
while in the West—and physicist/philosopher Robert Havemann,
who had been placed under house arrest following his protest of the
Biermann matter.
(U) The July sentencings were more reminiscent of Ulbricht’s han-
dling of the revisionist Marxists (centered around Wolfgang Harich),
who in 1957 were given jail sentences for suggesting an ideological
“third way” between East and West for the GDR. Bahro had published
in West Germany a political treatise, The Alternative, calling for a puri-
fied Marxist system in the GDR. Huebner, an East Berlin draft resister,
had used West German media to ventilate his view that the military
draft of East Berliners was illegal because all of Berlin remained demili-
tarized under postwar four-power agreements. This opinion flew in
the face of East German claims to sovereignty over East Berlin.
(C) These early signals, however, did not continue into the fall of
1978, probably because the regime wanted to conclude inner-German
transit agreements that would net the GDR at least an additional $1
billion in much-needed hard currency over the next 10 years. A crack-
down of major proportions probably would have made the FRG think
twice about concluding the agreements. With their signing in Novem-
ber 1978, both sides expected a lull in relations while an agenda of
new negotiations was being forged.
(U) The GDR was hit by disastrous winter storms in early 1979
which so disrupted the economy that economic performance for the
entire year has been adversely affected. The country continued to expe-
rience seriously sluggish growth rates into the spring, and the provision
of some basic consumer supplies remained disrupted. Western visitors
reported that complaining by the population was the most intense in
recent memory.
The Clampdown Phased In
(U) The signals of June 1978 turned into a torrent of restrictions in
the spring-summer of 1979:
