Arms Control and Disarmament  1423
363.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, August 20, 1958, 11:15 a.m.
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary Herter
Dr. Killian
General Persons
Mr. Hagerty
General Goodpaster
The meeting was held to discuss the timing of the statement of 
test suspension, and the timing of notification to the Congress concern­
ing the statement. Secretary Herter said that the timing problems are 
very difficult, and that much remains to be brought together before the 
statement is issued. It would be possible, he indicated, to take a calcu­
lated gamble that the effect would not be lost by waiting another week 
until the report of the Geneva negotiations is filed and made public. 
The special significance of August 21st is the signing of the agreement 
in Geneva. If we should wait, however, we run the risk that the Sovi­
ets would launch some sort of propaganda campaign which would 
deprive us of the effect we are seeking through our action.
The President asked if we had received any reply from the British as 
to their agreement with our proposed action, and Secretary Herter said 
we had not. The President said he understood that the item that is causing 
a great deal of difficulty in our own government is the ruling out of peace­
ful detonations during the period while an agreement is being negotiated. 
He thought a reasonable solution would be to permit these to continue. 
Secretary Herter said he understood there were some scientific objections 
to this, in that it would open the way for possible cheating by the Soviets. 
He said that the period of unilateral suspension could be cut down to nine 
months and we could negotiate with the Soviets during that period con­
cerning peaceful explosions. The disadvantage to the nine months period 
is that we would seem to be planning to discontinue simply until we were 
ready to start another test series the middle of next year.
There was then discussion as to the best means of notifying the 
Congress, and the President said he thought the best course was to 
ask Mr. Rayburn and Senator Johnson to get the appropriate leaders 
together, one group in the House and one group in the Senate.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
1 Source: Statement on cessation of nuclear testing. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, 
Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on August 25.
