893.00/5951: Telegram
[Document 575]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 16, 1925—2 p.m.
[Received January 16—11:44 a.m.]
27. My 15, January 12, 4 p.m. paragraph 5.
1. Consul general, Shanghai, January 15th telegraphed as follows:
[“] After the meeting of the American church mission board, Dr. Hawks Pott
confidentially stated that the anti-Christian move looks worse than he thought
at first and he regards it to be political. He stated the situation in connection
with anti-Christian propaganda is becoming more and more serious and is
looked upon by clear-thinking good educators and leaders as a dangerous
thing not only to the Christian institutions but to the nation at large.”
2. Dr. Pott, a graduate of Columbia who is president of Saint John’s University, is one
of the wisest and best informed missionary educators in China and understands Chinese
psychology. …
3. The Chinese Recorder, a monthly journal of the Christian movement in China, in
editorial in January number received today says:
“The situation facing Christian educational work in China today is a critical
one. For years past missionaries have been free to conduct such schools as
they saw fit. Their right to do so is not [now?] being questioned by
influenced [sic] groups of Chinese educators on the ground both of their
foreign nationality and of the religious character of the education given. The
resolutions passed by national federation of educational associations at its
recent meeting in Kaifeng if approved by the board of education in Peking
would force all Christian schools either to take religious courses out of their
requirements or to close their doors. Either of these courses would be fraught
with serious consequences for the growing Christian communities in China.
“We question whether the Government will press the issue at this time since
Christian schools are recognized by many responsible people outside
Christian circles as performing a useful function and since moreover the
Government is able to provide educational opportunities for only a fraction of
