1092
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
oping countries. Millions of children die annually of starvation and a
billion people suffer from chronic undernourishment. A sufficient food
supply supported by a distribution of income which, at a minimum,
supports food consumption is not only a developmental but also a
moral imperative. The recommendations of the Hunger Commission
can be carried out, but only by intense efforts.
Three major types of actions will be required in the next decade.
First, food production in developing countries, especially where
hunger is most severe, must be increased. Second, the earnings of the
poor must be increased to permit them to increase consumption of
needed food. Third, the United States must not only maintain its status
as a food surplus nation, but also must continue to provide financial re-
sources to help transfer food where it is needed and to increase
production.
These actions will require a variety of specific commitments by
both developed and developing nations. Developing countries must
accord higher priority to agriculture and food. Three-quarters of the
poor people in developing countries are engaged in agriculture. Many
countries must transform their economic structures to permit broader
access to productive resources, especially land and water. These na-
tions must also increase the political participation of their people. The
United States should support these efforts.
In recent years, we have increased the emphasis in our bilateral
AID program on agriculture, nutrition and rural development. The
level of funding has grown from $474 million in 1977 to a level of $758
million requested in 1981. In international discussions on a new food
aid convention, the United States pledged to contribute not less than
4.47 million tons of grain per year for food aid.7 Should domestic grain
prices continue to rise, a larger financial commitment for food aid will
be required to maintain this volume.
The lending record of the multilateral development banks also
shows a substantial concentration of resources in this sector over the
past three years. From 1977 to 1979 the World Bank Group, for ex-
ample, devoted more than $8 billion to projects in agriculture and rural
development. About one-third of the Bank’s concessional resources
were used for these purposes in fiscal year 1979. Within the sector,
there has also been a greater emphasis by all the banks on lending that
assists small farmers, helping them to increase their productivity and
incomes.
We are encouraging the multilateral development banks and the
specialized agencies of the UN to expand even further their agricultural
7 See Document 243.
