Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President: Do you object to the concept of dividing the two? Prime Minister Begin: The Camp David agreements talk about a single autonomy for Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza District. This is my preference. We may talk of this subject of a difference, but in writing we must stick to the Camp David accords. Second, it is written that Egypt will assume Jordan’s role. Where is this in Camp David? Did we ever agree that Egypt would assume Jordan’s role? The Camp David accords say that Egypt, Jordan, and Israel shall negotiate for the self-governing authority or administrative council, a vital concept, but it has become clear that Jordan will not join the peace-making process. So Israel said that it would negotiate with Egypt alone. Let me explain. We had the right to say that until Jordan joins there would be no such talks. It is vital to have Jordan along with Egypt. Egypt has no role in Judea and Samaria, and was only in occupation of Gaza because of an illegal act of aggression which gave Egypt no rights there. Egypt has nothing at all to do in Judea and Samaria. Nonetheless, we undertook to negotiate with Egypt on the modalities, the powers and responsibilities of the administrative council in Judea, Samaria and Gaza. We did this to prove that there was no Israeli intention to avoid negotiations if Jordan stayed out of the talks. We wanted to banish this idea, and to show our goodwill. So we are prepared to negotiate with Egypt alone. This is our concession, which we can give and we can take back. We are not obliged to do it under the Camp David Agreements. We can wait for Jordan. The President: In the Camp David Accords, it said that Egypt would assume the Arab role. Prime Minister Begin: It only said that in a letter,14 not in the Camp David Agreements. The President: All of the letters were discussed at Camp David. We never heard before of an Israeli objection to that letter. We heard that Dayan would prefer reference to Egypt taking the Jordanian role, rather than the Arab role. Secretary Vance: Khalil, Dayan, and I talked about this recently at Camp David. Dayan said he preferred reference to Jordan’s role instead of an Arab role, whereas Khalil preferred to talk about the Arab role. Dayan said that reference to Jordan’s role was reasonable and he would refer this to the Cabinet. Prime Minister Begin: On behalf of the Cabinet, I say this is unacceptable. It is preposterous that Egypt can take the Arab role, but Egypt cannot take the Jordanian role either. 14 See Document 57.
