3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
387
The Secretary wanted to say first that he would, of course, inform
the President about this discussion in great detail. Secondly, he would
point out that he knew absolutely nothing about the 50 devices Gro-
myko had mentioned; he had no information about them and did not
know if there were any such devices. He would look at the material
Gromyko had just handed him, but did not want his silence to indicate
that he was accepting the facts as described.
The Secretary pointed out that Gromyko had actually asked him
two questions. The first was how one could explain what Gromyko saw
as an explosion of anti-Soviet propaganda in the United States. He
would respond to this question quite frankly. There were several
factors which had given rise to concern about the Soviet Union as re-
flected in articles in newspapers, magazines and on television. He
would name three principal areas of concern as he saw them, which, as
he had been able to determine, were the basis for the development Gro-
myko had mentioned. The first was the very deep concern among
many Americans and among people in other countries apart from the
United States, particularly in the West, over the fact that during the last
several years the Soviet Union had been building up its military forces,
in particular its military forces in the European area, to an extent far ex-
ceeding the needs of deterrence in that area. As people took a look at
Soviet expenditures for conventional forces, they saw a constantly
rising line, rising steeply over the past 8–10 years. At the same time, in
terms of real growth the United States and other western countries had
kept military expenditures at a stable level. This had raised genuine
concerns in the minds of many Americans with respect to the intentions
of the Soviet Union in the military area. The question was asked
whether the Soviet Union merely intended to maintain a military bal-
ance. In that case, why these massive expenditures? This also led to the
second question—whether or not these expenditures indicated aggres-
sive intent as opposed to reduction of military confrontation and mili-
tary forces. There was another point the Secretary wanted to make: to
be fair, if we looked at the strategic side, some progress had indeed
been achieved, progress in concluding the ABM Treaty and the Interim
Agreement, and progress toward a SALT TWO agreement. These were
positive developments. However, the problem of ever increasing
forces, increasing sophistication of weapons on the conventional side,
had raised great concerns in the minds of many people. The second
major area which had given rise to concern among many people was
the question of African affairs which had been discussed in great detail
with Gromyko by the President and by the Secretary. He thought that
all recognized that there were elements of competition in the relations
between us, but recently it appeared when looking at the African situa-
tion that competition had transcended normal bounds and had re-
sulted in military conflicts fueled by Soviet equipment and by Cuban
