Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
729
COMJTF to execute, delay, or cancel the mission based on conditions
existing at the time of decision.
Through the period 19–23 April, the forces deployed. By mid-
afternoon on 24 April, the forces were in place and ready for execution.
Execution and Abort
24 and 25 April 1980
On the evening of 24 April, after 5½ months of planning and
training under very tight OPSEC, eight RH–53 helicopters took off
from the aircraft carrier NIMITZ and began a journey of nearly 600
nautical miles at night and low altitude to a preselected refueling site,
Desert One, in the desert. The C–130 element with the ground rescue
forces was also in the execution phase on a different track and time
schedule to Desert One. Approximately two hours after takeoff, the
crew of Helicopter #6 received cockpit indications of an impending
rotor blade failure; landed; verified the malfunction (an automatic abort
situation); and abandoned their aircraft. The crew was picked by
another helicopter, which then continued the mission individually.
Approximately one hour thereafter, the helicopter formation unex-
pectedly encountered a dust cloud of unknown size and density. The
helicopters broke out of the first area of suspended dust but, within
an hour, entered a second, larger and denser area. While attempting
to navigate through this second area with severely degraded visibility,
a second helicopter (#5) experienced a failure of several critical naviga-
tion and flight instruments. Due to progressively deteriorating flight
conditions that made safe flight extremely questionable, the helicopter
pilot determined that it would be unwise to continue. He aborted the
mission, reversed course, and recovered on NIMITZ. Eventually six of
the original eight helicopters arrived at the refueling site in intervals
between approximately 50 minutes and 85 minutes later than planned.
While en route, a third helicopter (#2) experienced a partial
hydraulic failure, but the crew elected to continue to the refueling site
believing repairs could be accomplished there. Upon landing, however,
the crew and the helicopter unit commander determined that the heli-
copter could not be repaired. A hydraulic pump had failed due to a
fluid leak, and no replacement pump was available. Even if a pump
had been immediately available, there was insufficient time to change
it, repair the cause of the leak, service the system, and complete the
next leg prior to daylight. The helicopter was unsafe to continue the
mission unrepaired.
Earlier, it had been determined that a minimum of six operational
helicopters would be required at the refueling site to continue the
mission. Since at this point there were only five operational, the on-
scene commander advised COMJTF by radio of the situation, and he
