International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
277
encies regaining the upper hand. This applies to Europe particularly
and is by no means restricted to the Federal Republic. It would foil our
jointly elaborated growth strategy and I fear it might give more
stimulus to protectionist tendencies. In such a process the European
snake3 would also be in danger—with all the risks this entails for the fu-
ture of the European Community. I am deeply convinced that the nec-
essary leading role of the United States and the strength of the Amer-
ican currency are inseparably linked with one another. I am confident,
Jimmy, that you share this view. Our common interest therefore makes
it necessary in public as well we should very seriously plead the cause
of a strong dollar. I therefore welcome what you said on this point yes-
terday. A high rate of employment and reasonable economic growth
are still priority objectives of my government’s economic policy. The
Federal Government has already drawn the necessary consequences
from this and embarked on a considerably more expansive course of
credit and financial policy. The combined deficits of the public budgets
for 1978 have therefore been put at a good 4 per cent of the GNP. We
hope that this policy will also help improve the international balance,
in the way you intend with your energy policy and proposed tax pro-
gramme. In keeping with this, further success on the price front should
continue to be our aim because it is precisely inflationary tendencies
which undermine confidence in the currency.
Secretary Blumenthal has informed me about your proposed eco-
nomic policy measures.4 I welcome them just as much as the fact that in
the meantime further contacts have taken place between our Ministers
of Finance and Central Bank Governors. I have encouraged the German
Central Bank President and Finance Minister Apel to keep on fostering
this fruitful co-operation.
With regard to the date for the next Economic Summit, it seems to
me at the moment, as I explained in my talks with Mr Brzezinski5 and
Secretary Blumenthal, that mid-July would be the best time. I am pre-
3 On March 11, 1973, six members of the EEC—Belgium, Denmark, the Federal Re-
public of Germany, France, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg—announced that after
March 16 the values of their currencies would jointly float vis-a`-vis the value of all other
currencies, while remaining relatively fixed vis-a`-vis one another. That is, their cur-
rencies would form a “snake,” whose value in relation to non-snake currencies would be
determined by market forces.
4 Blumenthal met with Schmidt in Bonn on November 2. A memorandum of con-
versation of the meeting is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff,
Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper,
1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 1, Memoranda of Conversation RNC—Aug.–Dec 1977.
5 Brzezinski met with Schmidt in Bonn on September 27. A memorandum of con-
versation of the meeting is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff,
Records of Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State, 1977–1980: Lot 84D241, Box 7, Western Eu-
rope. It is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western
Europe.
