328  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
which called for the creation of an economic warfare agency in the 
event of war or national emergency. The Secretary of State added that 
he did not think that the proposal to create such an emergency agency 
was wise. The Department of State and other agencies were already 
carrying out a considerable amount of activity related to economic 
warfare and would be able to carry on this activity in the event of war. 
While Secretary Dulles said he sought no decision on this matter at 
this time, he did wish to raise the question of the desirability of plan­
ning to create an emergency agency for the conduction of economic 
warfare.
In reply Governor Hoegh said that he and his people had come to 
much the same conclusion as the Secretary of State. Having reevaluated 
this proposal, he had come to feel that such an agency would not be 
necessary in the event of a general nuclear war.
Secretary Dulles left the meeting at 10 a.m. after which Governor 
Hoegh concluded his report on the status of the key elements of the 
civil defense program.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed the reports on the status of the Mobilization 
Program and the Civil Defense Program on June 30, 1958, prepared by 
the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization (transmitted as parts 4 and 
5 of NSC 5819), as summarized at the meeting by the Director, Office of 
Civil and Defense Mobilization.
b. Noted that the Secretary of State and the Director, Office of Civil 
and Defense Mobilization, were in agreement that the concept of an 
emergency organization for economic warfare will not be adopted at 
this time.
NOTE: The action in b above as approved by the President sub­
sequently transmitted to the Director, Office of Civil and Defense 
Mobilization.
3. U.S. POLICY TOWARD GERMANY
(NSC 5803; OCB Reports, dated September 3, 1958, on NSC 5803)
The National Security Council:
Noted the reference Reports on the subject by the Operations Coor­
dinating Board.
S. Everett Gleason
