Yugoslavia
763
that; the way to proceed would be to get both admitted to the UN and
begin to involve them in an international framework which might lead
to peace on the peninsula.
U.S.-Soviet Relations
You referred to the Charleston speech on U.S.-Soviet relations2
reiterating that those relations cover a wide front, comprising many
different negotiations in different phases. That is normal for countries
that are in many respects rivals but which recognize their global respon-
sibility to cooperate. You described the relations as “steady, stable and
evolving,” with SALT the only substantial disagreement. You agreed
with the Ambassador that a breakthrough in one set of negotiations—
for instance, CTB—might help across the board, but you also suggested
that the effect should not be exaggerated. Differences on other issues are
real, not atmospherics or a reflection of our approach to human rights.
You suggested to the Ambassador that it is important that the
Soviets understand that we want cooperation on a broad front. We do
not see separate issues as linked. At the same time, to create a false
sense of agreement would be to court the danger of backlash. We are
committed to, and speak about, detente, but it cannot be a selective
detente.
The Ambassador believed this Administration was more genuine
in its commitment to detente than its predecessor, but he wondered
how it could escape the current impasse. You said there was no reason
to be impatient. We want to move but will not make unilateral conces-
sions, and you suggested that Tito might convey that message to the
Soviets.
You indicated that Congressional and public opinion is solidly
behind the President and that, if anything, stagnation in U.S.-Soviet
relations works to the advantage of those who oppose detente. There
is no rush to move forward; quite the contrary, delay may make it
harder to do so; a SALT agreement along the lines we proposed four
months ago would have passed the Senate easily then, now it will
not be so simple. The more impediments the Soviets throw in the
relationship, the more anti-SALT sentiment grows in the United States.
More generally, the Soviets have been unwise in their SALT strategy;
in January 1976 they could have had an agreement they would now
regard as good, but not now.
We want a SALT agreement that is real and sustaining. If there is
no agreement by October, we will see how the parties behave once the
2 For the text of the President’s speech at the 31st Annual Meeting of the Southern
Legislative Conference on July 21, in Charleston, South Carolina, see Public Papers: Carter,
1977, Book II, pp. 1309–1315.
