Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX which were normally carried out by other branches of the government, but that the U.S. nonetheless wished to see them stopped. Dr. Brzezinski stressed, however, that these issues were relatively minor points. The really important point was that U.S.-Romanian relations remain good and that both governments should not let subjective irritants affect relations. Mr. Andrei replied that in the case of the agitation of the employees of the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest, he had purposely not raised the issue with the U.S. Ambassador because he did not want to cause an incident and unnecessarily disturb relations. Dr. Brzezinski then briefed Mr. Andrei on the recent SALT discussions with Mr. Gromyko, noting that the U.S. and the Soviet Union were very close to an agreement. The Soviets had made proposals and the U.S. had made counterproposals. While certain issues related to the Backfire and cruise missiles still remained unresolved, the two sides had significantly reduced differences and an agreement was close. Mr. Andrei then briefed Dr. Brzezinski on the recent visit of Chinese Party Chairman Hua Kuo-Feng to Romania. He stressed that the visit was part of a general opening up on the part of China, not just economically but politically, militarily and scientifically. A PRC diplomatic offensive would be coming up. Hua realizes that China is lagging behind and that it must modernize. During the course of the visit Hua constantly asked Andrei detailed technical questions. How was this made, how much did this cost, etc. In regard to the Soviet Union, Mr. Andrei noted that the PRC’s policy toward the USSR had not changed. Dr. Brzezinski remarked that Gromyko had been very concerned about the Chinese-Japanese Friendship Pact and had also been very concerned about Chinese contacts with Europe.8 Mr. Andrei replied that Romania had informed the Soviets about Hua’s visit; it was not discussed at the Crimea, however. The Soviet Union was particularly nervous because the visit had been preceded by the signing of the Chinese-Japanese Treaty. Mr. Andrei underscored the importance the Romanians attached to preserving their independence. They had not fought to exchange one master for another. Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Hua had said anything about U.S.- Chinese relations. Mr. Andrei said no, that the issue had not come up. If it had, the Romanians would have informed the United States. Relations with Albania, the non-aligned and Vietnam, inter alia, were discussed.
