Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 “I’m going to answer your question, but let me say something first because I’d like to sort of set this in a framework. “When our Administration came into office, we decided that we were not merely going to react to situations, but that we were going to shape an agenda of items which we considered to be the highest priority and would proceed to deal with those issues. “The first of those items was that dealing with the question of regional peace, which could affect, in the long run, world peace. And the Middle East was one of those obvious areas which involved regional peace. Another was, of course, Africa, where we’re also working. “Secondly, we agreed that we would work to achieve progress in the arms control area because of its importance not only to the big powers but to the world in general, and therefore, we agreed to attack both the problem of strategic arms and of conventional arms. “Thirdly, we decided that we must work with our colleagues to try and control the spread of nuclear weapons throughout the world, and we have been working to that end. “Fourthly, we decided it was of utmost importance to strengthen the alliance with our allies, and the most important example of that is NATO. We have been working in that area, as you well know. “Fifthly, we decided that it was important to promote cooperation rather than confrontation with the Third World. Much of what we have been doing at CIEC [Conference on International Economic Cooperation], in the OAS, in the meeting which I am going to be attending in the OECD [Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development] is related to this. This is the whole range of so-called North-South problems that are dealing with these terribly complicated economic relationships which arise out of our relationships with the Third World. “Next, we believe that we must seek normalization of relations with as many countries as possible, because without a dialogue—a diplomatic dialogue—there’s no way even to advance our own interests, let alone hear what the concerns of the others are. “And the last was, of course, the promotion of human rights. “Now I just wanted to give you this sort of agenda of items which we have been using and proceeding along during this first stage. “Now let me return, if I might, to the question of the Middle East. I think it’s too early yet to say what the foreign policy of Mr. Begin is going to be. He is coming to the United States, hopefully, at the end of the month of July. I think we must wait until he comes and we have a chance to hear firsthand what his foreign policy is, what he is prepared to do with respect to the negotiation of a peace in the Middle East, before we jump to any conclusions.
