1152  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
stated categorically that he had no confidence whatsoever in promises 
made by the present Government. He felt that a loan at this time to that 
Government would serve only to strengthen and perpetuate it, thereby 
rendering less likely any of the remedial measures which must be taken 
to extricate Uruguay from its difficulties. He conceded, however, that 
this was a political problem and that he would, in deference to Mr. 
Rubottom’s views, agree to the following, subject to the concurrence of 
his Directors:
1. Prompt announcement, if desired, of a line of exporter credit in 
the amount of $25 million, of which $15 million would be covered by 
the Export-Import Bank.
2. The prompt negotiation of $20 million balance-­of-­payments loan 
backed by the Uruguayan gold now in the United States.
3. Agreement by the Bank to consider, although without commit-
ment, further assistance to the Uruguayan Government on the basis of 
stabilization measures to be taken by it.
Mr. Waugh added that since the foregoing would be done in def-
erence to the recommendations of the Department of State on the basis 
of political considerations, he felt that it would be only right for the 
Department to submit a letter requesting such action. He felt that such 
a letter would be required by the Bank to meet the undoubtedly strong 
pressure and criticism that would inevitably arise from the meatpack-
ers and other American interests.
Mr. Rubottom responded that he thought a request for a letter was 
fair. He stated that he wanted to think about the whole matter, and that 
we would get in touch promptly with the Bank.
It was suggested that the stabilization measures to be undertaken 
by the Uruguayan Government might, if feasible, be worked out by 
that Government infernally with the IMF, although the latter organiza-
tion would not enter into a formal agreement.
Mr. Bernbaum then clarified various points raised about the 
Uruguayan attitude and the manner in which Ambassador Lacarte 
was reporting the problem. He stated that he had yesterday brought 
to Ambassador Lacarte’s attention the statement in Mr. Burgess’ letter 
to Mr. Waugh quoting Mr. Fullgraff as having stated that he could not 
understand why 100 percent gold backing was required by the Bank 
since that matter had never come up. Bernbaum stated that Ambassador 
Lacarte was amazed to hear this and stated that Fullgraff was a fool 
and that we should not pay any attention to him. As regards Mr. 
Waugh’s fears that Lacarte was not reporting accurately to Washington, 
Bernbaum stated that Lacarte had let him know that he was refraining 
from recording any negative news on the Bank’s attitude to Uruguay 
until clarification of the Bank’s attitude toward the possibility of con-
sidering a loan on the basis of stabilization measures to be undertaken
