640 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Here in Japan we are in the process of conserving energy; we often open our shirt necks because of the heat. In this room, we may permit ourselves to take our jackets off and work in shirt sleeves, with your concurrence. As Chancellor Schmidt said in the Bonn Summit, we are members of a mountain climbing party; we were just getting out of difficult economic troughs. But just as we were getting to the peaks, we encountered difficulties—a landslide in the form of the oil crisis. The circumstances today are reminiscent of Rambouillet, or in fact more serious than at Rambouillet. But I believe we are wiser today, because we have gained wisdom from past experience. We should be fully utilizing it, and must cooperate, to get out of our predicament. We face an immediate problem. We need to take fundamental long-range policy decisions, and we need to carry them out. Before the agenda begins officially, I should note one thing. There was in Tokyo on 26 June a meeting of Trade Union leaders. Their representatives sent a statement to me; that is now before each of you. The Trade Union representatives asked that the statement be included in next year’s agenda, if we meet next year. A few household points: First, the meeting, as in the past will be formed of the following: A President or Prime Minister plus a Foreign Minister and a Finance Minister. I hope that the Foreign Ministers can stay for continuity’s sake, although the Finance Ministers can be substituted for by another Economic Minister. Second, there will be simultaneous translation into English, French, German, Italian and Japanese. For technical reasons Japanese is translated into the other languages via English. Third, before you there is a button which you should push to be recognized. And there is a button for your personal representatives, who are in the other room. As to the Agenda, I would ask that each head of state or government make five minutes of comments to form the guidelines for the Summit discussion. Then we would take up the specific Agenda. Subjects will be macroeconomic issues, energy, LDCs, trade, monetary issues, and finally the Communique. While we are talking, the personal representatives may be expected to start work on energy. Who would like to lead off? CARTER: The eyes of the world are on this Summit for a number of major reasons—the first and most important being energy. On this subject I hope that we can be bold, substantive, specific and hopefully united when we come to the final Communique. I prefer that we indicate targets based on specific figures. We should commit ourselves to meet these targets on a short-range basis and commit to attempt to reach long-term targets, even though there may be somewhat more uncertainty. In addition, we have to address the spot market, measures to
