Non-Proliferation
1007
tonium storage regime, with some skepticism that a truly effective IPS
would be acceptable to the countries we worry about most. This skepti-
cism may be well-placed, but I believe we should work actively to try to
develop the best possible IPS.
V
The EURATOM countries (where we now have no consent rights)
are very loath to give us such controls. They resist proposals that they
set a “good example” to the rest of the world by limiting their domestic
programs for reprocessing and plutonium use. They see a right of con-
sent as an infringement of their national sovereignties, as giving us a
“supervisory” role over their programs, and as introducing an arbi-
trary and unpredictable element in their nuclear power planning. They
foresee our generic approach as requiring impossible precision in fore-
casting the plutonium needs of their breeder programs.
In the end we may be able to get the Europeans to grant formal
consent rights provided it is clear that they would be exercised in a very
general way. The UK, France, and the FRG, unlike the US, are com-
mitted to reprocessing and to developing options for breeders and
thermal recycle. They believe these programs are indispensable for
their energy security, and that their decisions on and pursuit of these
programs are national issues not subject to compromise with the US.
They believe we overemphasize the dangers of the civil nuclear fuel
cycle and that decisions they take with respect to their own programs
are not relevant to dealing with the problem countries.
VI
Japan will not much longer tolerate asymmetry between US–
EURATOM and US-Japan nuclear relations. Our case-by-case exercise
of consent rights in Japan is a constant source of friction. We are un-
likely to get control over use of US supplies in Europe comparable to
that which we have in Japan. If unable to get consent rights in Europe,
or able to get them only under an agreement providing for liberal ap-
plication, we will have to agree to the same with Japan. We probably
will have to accept Japan’s having a commercial scale reprocessing
plant, and agree to some generic approvals for reprocessing of Japanese
fuel in Europe and use in Japan of some of the separated plutonium.
VII
I believe we cannot accomplish the foregoing within the strict
framework of the April 1977 policy. For this and other reasons, the di-
rection of our non-proliferation effort should be reviewed. I think the
NNPA should be amended to restore a positive attitude toward inter-
