March 27–December 31, 1979 905 ever, we do want to alert the Department to the impact on this society and on U.S.-Israeli relations of the various options we may select. —As long as we do not give the GOI assurances that we will veto a Palestinian rights resolution, as Israelis insist we are committed to doing, the GOI will accuse us of being prepared to violate our solemn commitments as it becomes, in an ironic and cynical exchange of roles, the defender of the sanctity of Resolution 242. —Israeli reaction to a U.S. vote for or abstension on any repeat any Palestinian rights resolution will be strident, but so long as the U.S. stopped short of endorsing a Palestinian state explicitly or implicitly, we believe Israel would hold back from the most provocative actions which we expect would follow passage of a “maximal” resolution. However, even in the former instance, the damage to U.S. credibility would still be serious and we should not expect a quick return to business as usual. There is little we can do to soften the blow in Israel should a Palestinian rights resolution be adopted. Although the purpose of the exercise might be to broaden and quicken the peace process by bringing the PLO into it, few Israelis really want negotiations with the PLO under any circumstances. They would not be persuaded that we have enhanced the chances for a comprehensive peace. Our going along with a resolution which would be seen as “amending” 242 by specifying Palestinian rights—whether “national” or “legitimate”—an exercise which we have assiduously avoided until now, would galvanize a vocal national consensus which the GOI, carried along by its most hawkish elements, would manipulate to the hilt. Regardless of the policy we decide to follow, there are steps we should take to reduce Israeli suspicions over the period ahead as we grapple with the Palestinian rights resolution problem. It is in our interest to maintain a dialogue on this question with the Israelis as intensively as possible over the days ahead, in order to achieve the dual purpose of allaying as much as we can Israeli fears that we are up to a double game and pre-empting charges that we are violating our commitment to consult with them. Should we begin negotiations on the text of a draft resolution, we should provide drafts to the Israelis on a timely basis and brief them in as much detail as practical on the signals we are receiving and on the American position as it emerges. Such steps, however, will not prevent the storm of vituperation, possibly backed by provocative actions destructive of the peace process, which our support of a Palestinian rights resolution—or even lingering suspicion as to our intentions between now and August 24—would bring on. End summary. 3. Israeli suspicion and anxiety over U.S. Middle East policy and goals—ever-present beneath the surface of our bilateral relationship with Israel—has been mounting steadily in the wake of the UNEF/
