National Security Policy 593 including radars capable of more accurate height-­finding, are already in service and will probably be widely deployed during 1959–1963.22 163. For several years the Soviets have been developing comput­ ers and other components suitable for data-­handling use. The use of such equipment will have a marked effect in increasing traffic-­handling capabilities, reducing system reaction time, and improving coordina­ tion within the Soviet air defense system. For example, it is expected that data-­handling equipment will increase the traffic capacity of each Soviet radar reporting site to at least 20 simultaneous tracks. We believe that an air defense system with some semiautomatic features, including a data-­link system for vectoring interceptors, is being widely deployed in western USSR in association with early warning and GCI sites. This system is believed to be similar in concept to the US SAGE system, but less complex. It will probably come into use throughout the USSR and East Europe within a few years. The Soviets are also introducing a new IFF system which will probably be fully operational by 1960. 164. Air defense concentrations. The areas of highest concentration of Bloc air defense weapons and associated equipment include that por­ tion of European USSR from the Kola Peninsula to the Caspian Sea, East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the Maritime and Sakhalin areas of the Soviet Far East. High defense concentrations are also found at some specific locations outside these areas, such as Tashkent, Novosibirsk, and Khabarovsk. The approaches to Moscow are by far the most heavily defended of these areas, including (in addition to the surface-­to-­air missile complex mentioned above) about 1,100 day and 275 all-­weather fighters as well as about 700 antiaircraft guns. We believe the Moscow defenses are a unique case, dictated by the impor­ tance of that area to the USSR. 165. Passive defense. Large passive defense organizations contribute to the air defense readiness of both military personnel and the civilian population. Civil defense training is a normal part of the program of DOSAAF, the Soviet paramilitary mass organization whose recruitment has been stepped up markedly in recent years. The incorporation of air raid shelters into newly constructed buildings is a program of long standing in the USSR. This program probably now affords some degree of shelter for roughly one-­sixth of the urban population of the USSR, and this proportion will probably rise considerably during the period to 1963. Although most existing shelters were not designed for protec­ tion against blast from nuclear weapons, some newer building shelters are of heavier construction. It is probable that up-­to-­date protection is 22 Estimated performance characteristics of Soviet early warning and ground-­ controlled intercept radars are given in Annex, Table 10. [Footnote is in the original.]
