194
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“I would note that I’ve read the press in the last day or so that Mr.
Begin’s coalition has apparently endorsed a policy which says that they
are prepared to enter into peace negotiations without any precondi-
tions. We will look forward to seeing Mr. Begin when he comes and to
finding out specifically what flexibility there is.
“Mr. Clark: Mr. Secretary, the Vice President said flatly that we
will not use the threat of reducing military aid to Israel to get them to
give up occupied territories.
“Secretary Vance: That’s right.
“Mr. Clark: Does that mean that we would continue to sell arms to
Israel, and to Arab countries to the extent that they buy them from us,
regardless of whether there is any progress toward peace in the Middle
East?
“Secretary Vance: We have urged all of the parties, and I have
talked with the parties myself, about the need for restraint and reduc-
tion in arms sales in the area—and we will continue to do so. But let
there be no question: We have a deep commitment to Israel that we will
provide to Israel the arms which are necessary for its self-defense, and
we will abide by that without any question. And I don’t want any lack
of clarity on that point.
“Mr. Dunsmore: Well, let me put the question to you this way
then, sir: At the end of the 1973 war, the United States went on an alert
to prevent the Russians from intervening, which in effect was saying
we would be prepared to go to war. If there’s another war in the Middle
East, and it comes about, at least in part, because the Israelis have not
been prepared to make what we consider to be reasonable concessions,
would we go to war to save them?
“Secretary Vance: That is a question which is an iffy question,
which I am not going to answer.
“Let me say that we have told Israel that we stand behind her, that
we will do everything that’s necessary to preserve her security and in-
tegrity, should it be challenged. I think that sufficiently answers your
question.
“Mr. Dunsmore: It’s a cliche of the Middle East that it’s up to the
parties themselves to settle it, but left to their own devices they’ve had
four wars. Surely there must be some kind of friendly persuasion that
we are planning on both sides.
“Secretary Vance: We clearly feel that we have a role to play here
as a country which has good relationships with both sides—with both
Israel and her Arab neighbors. We believe that we can work with the
parties to try and help them find common ground. We are committed
to do everything within our power to bring this about.
