1162  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
the Mediterranean, also possess nuclear capabilities (8” howitzer and 
HONEST JOHN).
Nuclear delivery systems organic to deployed major U.S. Army 
forces contribute to the nuclear retaliatory capability. In Europe, Army 
currently maintains 2 REDSTONE missile groups, 8 CORPORAL mis­
sile battalions (2 bns in a medium missile command and 6 separate 
bns), 2 LACROSSE battalions, 5 HONEST JOHN rocket battalions, 5 
HONEST JOHN batteries, four 280 mm gun battalions (to be reduced to 
2 during FY 1961), nine 8-­inch howitzer battalions and five 8-­inch how­
itzer batteries. [text not declassified] New weapons design and missile 
check-­out procedures have appreciably reduced reaction time. Nuclear 
delivery units in the United States capable of augmenting forces over­
seas include one medium missile command (2 HONEST JOHN and one 
CORPORAL bns), one air transportable missile command (HONEST 
JOHN bn), one REDSTONE missile group, 5 LACROSSE battalions, 3 
CORPORAL battalions, 2 HONEST JOHN battalions and the nuclear 
delivery means organic to CONUS divisions. During FY 1961, 4 LITTLE 
JOHN battalions will be activated. Planned transition from the liquid-­
fueled REDSTONE and CORPORAL missiles to solid propellant and an 
all-­inertial guidance system for the PERSHING and SERGEANT sys­
tems will greatly improve mobility and reaction time. Current develop­
mental progress of the PERSHING missile indicates that it will have an 
operational capability in FY 1963.
The Soviet Bloc has the following general capabilities for defense against 
the foregoing U.S. nuclear retaliatory forces:
Present capabilities of the Soviet air defense system would be 
greatest against penetrations by subsonic bombers in daylight and 
clear weather at altitudes between about 3,000 and about 45,000 feet. 
Under such conditions, virtually all types of Bloc air defense weap­
ons could be brought to bear against attacking aircraft. Fighters would 
retain some effectiveness at altitudes in excess of 50,000 feet, but capa­
bilities of the fighter force would be reduced considerably during peri­
ods of darkness or poor visibility. In the increasingly widespread areas 
defended by surface-­to-­air missiles, air defense capabilities would be 
unimpaired by weather conditions and would extend to at least 60,000 
feet in altitude.
Despite improvements in the Soviet air defense system, it still has 
basic weaknesses in coping with a sophisticated air attack. At altitudes 
below about 3,000 feet, the capabilities of the system would be progres­
sively reduced; below about 1,000 feet, the system would lose most of its 
effectiveness. Against varied penetration tactics utilizing altitude stack­
ing, diversionary maneuvers, stand-­off weapons, decoys and electronic 
countermeasures, air defense capabilities would be significantly dimin­
ished. In addition, the Soviet defense problem would be complicated
