Czechoslovakia
295
based on his discussions in Washington. Therefore, Chnoupek said he
was not clear whether the Ambassador was talking officially or taking
soundings. Chnoupek said he also told Ambassador Byrne that the
new suggestions differ a great deal from what was agreed in the past.
The new ideas represent 50–60 of the principal whereas the previous
agreement was about 41. The latter was approximately the percentage
agreed upon in settlements with Bulgaria, Hungary and Poland. The
only higher percentage seems to be the one with Yugoslavia at 44.
Czechoslovakia would be an exception and it would not look well for
the government. It would mean a renegotiation, and Chnoupek said
he would have to go again to the government and the Parliament to
seek approval. He is very afraid that renegotiation would be very
difficult, if possible at all. According to his instructions from the govern-
ment, he has freedom of action in regard to time limits and frequency
of payments but not in the total sum. He concluded by saying he would
be glad to hear the US official stand and Czechoslovakia is interested
in normalizing and developing relations.
4. The Secretary said he will answer the specific question but also
say something on the broader perspective. We do wish to improve the
relations between our two countries. The Secretary said Chnoupek
could convey that as the conviction of President Carter and the entire
administration. He said there are principally two matters that have
brought about the present condition in bilateral relations. One is the
claims question and the return of the gold. The other arises out of and
is connected with Czechoslovak treatment of US journalists and the
Charter 77 movement. The Secretary said he would be less than frank
if he did not make this clear.
5. The Secretary said Ambassador Byrne is authorized to begin
discussions with Chnoupek to try to resolve the claims matter so that
relations can progress. He noted that the 1974 Agreement had been
rejected by Congress and that Congress must approve a new agreement
under our laws, or otherwise it will have no force and effect. Congress
has said that the total sum must be substantially raised or there will
not be an agreement. The Secretary realized that this made things very
difficult for Chnoupek but without this substantial increase it would
be impossible to get congressional approval. He said Ambassador
Byrne has been given authority to discuss these matters with Chnoupek
and that he has our full confidence and support in working out a
settlement, if that is possible. He is speaking on behalf of and with the
full backing of the government. The Secretary said he hoped discussions
can go forward because without progress our relations will be affected.
Secondly, the Secretary said we are familiar with the problems this has
raised. We hope the future will bring some changes in these matters
and will remove some of the obstacles. He noted the forthcoming
