February 1951–February 1952 Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, October 9, 1951. OPERATIONS IN IRAN 1. CIA is unable to affect the immediate political crisis in Iran, which can only be resolved by diplomatic means. Our primary mission has been to counter Tudeh Communist activities and awaken Iranian authorities to Communism’s dangers. Activities in these directions met with conspicuous operational success in August. In September, when the Tudeh was itself largely inactive, our agents concentrated upon planning expanded operations and upon the acquisition of intelligence on Tudeh plans and capabilities. Provided the immediate crisis is resolved, we can continue to harass and ultimately nullify Communist activities in Iran. Within the framework of our primary mission, our activities are: a. [5 lines not declassified] These officials are cooperating with our agents who, in turn, through penetration of the Tudeh, inform the police of Tudeh plans. We have succeeded in discrediting the Communist among the labor elements at the important Tehran tobacco factory, and have broken Tudeh’s hold on Isfahan labor. As was demonstrated by our operations during Ramadan, the Iranian clergy is a major anti- Communist instrument. Accordingly, religious leaders have been mobilized to direct feeling against the Tudeh during the holy month of Muharram (October). Moreover, a “black” propaganda book (purporting to be a Soviet attack against Islam) has been written, published, and is being disseminated. Steps were also taken to meet expected Tudeh demonstrations in October by counter-demonstrations. b. Our expanded psychological warfare program calls for expenditure of [less than 1 line not declassified] to purchase printing presses and set up a printing establishment [3 lines not declassified]. c. Progress was made in organizing stay-behind activities. Preliminary discussions took place with the British in the field in Escape and Evasion planning, demolition, and general stay-behind activities. Field surveys by air and road on E&E have been undertaken. We have been in contact with leaders of the influential Qashqai tribe of southwestern
