February 1951–February 1952
139
48.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, October 9, 1951.
OPERATIONS IN IRAN
1. CIA is unable to affect the immediate political crisis in Iran,
which can only be resolved by diplomatic means. Our primary mission
has been to counter Tudeh Communist activities and awaken Iranian
authorities to Communism’s dangers. Activities in these directions met
with conspicuous operational success in August. In September, when
the Tudeh was itself largely inactive, our agents concentrated upon
planning expanded operations and upon the acquisition of intelligence
on Tudeh plans and capabilities. Provided the immediate crisis is re-
solved, we can continue to harass and ultimately nullify Communist
activities in Iran. Within the framework of our primary mission, our ac-
tivities are:
a. [5 lines not declassified] These officials are cooperating with our
agents who, in turn, through penetration of the Tudeh, inform the po-
lice of Tudeh plans. We have succeeded in discrediting the Communist
among the labor elements at the important Tehran tobacco factory, and
have broken Tudeh’s hold on Isfahan labor. As was demonstrated by
our operations during Ramadan, the Iranian clergy is a major anti-
Communist instrument. Accordingly, religious leaders have been mo-
bilized to direct feeling against the Tudeh during the holy month of
Muharram (October). Moreover, a “black” propaganda book (pur-
porting to be a Soviet attack against Islam) has been written, published,
and is being disseminated. Steps were also taken to meet expected
Tudeh demonstrations in October by counter-demonstrations.
b. Our expanded psychological warfare program calls for expendi-
ture of [less than 1 line not declassified] to purchase printing presses and
set up a printing establishment [3 lines not declassified].
c. Progress was made in organizing stay-behind activities. Prelimi-
nary discussions took place with the British in the field in Escape and
Evasion planning, demolition, and general stay-behind activities. Field
surveys by air and road on E&E have been undertaken. We have been
in contact with leaders of the influential Qashqai tribe of southwestern
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 33R00601A, Box 17, Folder 4,
National Security Council 107 Series. Top Secret. Drafted by Roosevelt and concurred in
by [name not declassified] on behalf of Wisner. The memorandum is attached to a memo-
randum from Roosevelt to Wisner, October 9, that reads: “There is attached herewith for
the Director’s use in connection with the NSC meeting tomorrow on Iran a memorandum
setting forth the recent developments in OPC operations in Iran.”
