1026 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement PE–4. Memorandum of Conversation, by Sandy M. Pringle of the Office of South American Affairs1  Washington, April 14, 1958. SUBJECT Naval Vessels for Peru PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Berckemeyer, Embassy of Peru Miguel Grau – Minister Counselor, Embassy of Peru ARA – Mr. Rubottom OSA – Mr. Pringle Ambassador Berckemeyer said that he had been instructed by the Foreign Minister to take up the matter of naval vessels for Peru and to obtain the Department’s comments on certain specific questions. While the Ambassador did not so phrase them, they can best be stated as follows: Why are two submarines and two destroyers being earmarked for Chile under the pending naval ship loan bill when Peru is only to receive two destroyers? Why is the U.S. spending $10 million for maintenance work on Chile’s two cruisers in U.S. shipyards when it refuses to sell Peru a cruiser? Does the Department have any comments on rumors that Chile is obtaining an aircraft carrier in the U.S. or elsewhere? Was the UK’s withdrawal of its offer to sell Peru two destroyers the result of pressure from the U.S.?2 In reply, Mr. Rubottom said that he would first like to make a few very general remarks about U.S. military assistance. He explained that the furnishing of assistance to Latin America is based on military considerations and that the favoring of one nation over another is not involved in any way. He said that assistance is based on an estimate of the military threat to the hemisphere, the requirements for equipment to meet that threat, the availability of equipment, and the capability of recipient countries to use it. He said that the U.S. is attempting to develop the anti-­submarine warfare capability of the Latin American countries and that, with this in mind, it extended Peru a $16,600,000 credit for the purchase of two modern submarines.3 He pointed out 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 723.5621/4–1458. Confidential. Drafted April 16. 2 For documentation on the referenced question, see Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VI, American Republics: Multilateral; Mexico; Caribbean. 3 For documentation on the loan to Peru for purchase of two submarines, see ibid. The military assistance loan agreement of August 1, 1955, with Peru amounted to $515,663,744.
