Colombia  377
This Country Team recommendation is based on our considered 
view that the violence problem is essentially a national problem which 
has developed to the extent that a military action by the armed forces 
is required. Thus, this is a military rather than a police problem; and 
suppression of violence is primarily a military task in which police 
action should be the secondary role of maintaining order in pacified 
areas and of participating in direct anti-­guerrilla action only where 
bandit activity is sporadic. Another consideration is that the Defense 
Department proposal is more responsive to President Lleras’ request, 
both as regards equipment and as regards reorientation of our military 
assistance program in general. In none of the numerous conferences 
between President Lleras and U.S. officials was it ever suggested that 
he had in mind the use of the National Police in connection with the 
requested assistance. On the contrary, he initiated the formal request 
by calling in the chiefs of our three military missions, at which meeting 
Colombian military personnel were present but not representatives of 
the National Police (Despatch 864 of June 24, 1959). During this and 
many subsequent meetings on the subject, President Lleras has spoken 
only of military assistance and the need for removing the restrictions 
on the use of MAP for internal security. Not once has the question of 
utilizing the National Police as the primary medium for anti-­violence 
operations been raised.
The Embassy always has thought that any assistance should be 
handled through our established military missions and that a separate 
anti-­guerrilla mission would be questionable from a political as well as 
a practical standpoint. A police mission would identify us directly with 
the issue of internal order, whereas our efforts to the same end would 
be less obvious is undertaken through our present military assistance 
programs. Our MAP is being reoriented along the lines suggested by 
President Lleras with more emphasis being placed on anti-­guerrilla 
training and material. The armed forces, while being used to solve the 
violence problem, are, at the same time, being better prepared for their 
hemisphere defense mission by reason of their training and use in direct 
anti-­guerrilla action, which contributs to hemispheric defense.
The Country Team also sees other possible objections to the use 
of the National Police as the chosen medium. The political wisdom 
of assigning U.S. personnel to the National Police on a specific proj-
ect of violence suppression is very questionable, regardless of whether 
the National Police remains under military control or is transferred to 
civilian control. Another complicating, although not overriding, factor 
is the presence of a Chilean police mission which has been employed 
as an advisory group for a number of years. Also, the prestige of the 
National Police is relatively low; conversely, the military reputation in 
the eyes of the public is better and the military establishment by and
