3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 228 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Our countries are also discussing other specific questions related to arms limitation and disarmament. We count on achieving in the course of these negotiations practical results. I would also like to draw your attention, Mr. President, to the important proposals in the field of reducing the danger of war which were put forward by the Soviet Union. Among them are: concluding World Treaty on the non-use of force; achieving an agreement to the effect that the States-Participants of All-European Conference are not to be first to use against each other nuclear weapons; measures on consolidating military relaxation in Europe. The imperative need of solving these matters is obvious and we call upon the U.S. to discuss them. You are interested in our conception of carrying out the proposal on a simultaneous halt in the production of nuclear weapons by all states and a commitment of the nuclear powers to start the gradual reduction of stockpiles of such weapons up to their total destruction. In my view, now it is first of all important that the nuclear powers would express their positive attitude to this idea as a matter of principle. Of course, it is hard to name right away ready-made recipes of carrying it out into practice. But if there is consent of all nuclear powers then they all could be gathered together and think over as to specific means and ways of realization of this proposal. We would be ready to hold consultations on the question, you raised, concerning means of anti-satellite devices in space. Such discussion would include, of course, all the systems and means which possess such potential capability including manned space shuttles. In our view it is important to continue joint efforts of the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. for the resumption by the end of this year, as it was agreed between us, of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. We have been working in this direction and intend to continue to be in contact with the U.S. In settling practical issues it is necessary to have the legitimate rights and interests of all the parties involved into the conflict, without exclusion, ensured. Only such an approach can guarantee a just and lasting peace in that area. As for the so called question of “adverse” conditions for the U.S. Embassy’s personnel in Moscow the Soviet side has repeatedly given exhaustive explanation on this matter. In conclusion I wish to lay emphasis on the following: the change for the better in our relations serves in equal degree the interests of both countries, opens a possibility to move further along the way of relaxation of tensions, consolidation of peace and cooperation. It is important to regard with care to what has been achieved, be guided by long-term perspectives of Soviet-American relations, which can fully be and
