56  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
We also rejected the Soviet alternative of adopting the ambiguous 
formula, fearing that the Soviets—­as suggested above—­might seek to 
exploit the ambiguity to bring domestic pressure to bear on U.S. SDI 
activities. We instead insisted that any D&S agreement clearly provide 
for “broad” testing rights. Unable to get the Soviets to agree explicitly 
to the broad interpretation, we took initiatives in 1988 aimed at obtain-
ing at least their tacit approval:
— We proposed to free all space-­based sensors capable of perform-
ing ABM functions from the ABM Treaty’s restrictions.
— To reassure the Soviets that U.S. testing in space would not be so 
extensive as to constitute deployment, we provided a unilateral assur-
ance that we would test space-­based ABM weapons only from a limited 
number (15) of ABM test satellites.
The Soviets reacted negatively to both initiatives, arguing that they 
were designed to implement the broad interpretation.
Length of nonwithdrawal period. An issue never considered to be 
insurmountable is the length of the commitment not to withdraw from 
the ABM Treaty. The Soviets propose a 10-­year period that would begin 
whenever the D&S agreement enters into force. Our most recent posi-
tion is “ten years from Reykjavik” or 1996, but we have made clear that 
this question could more usefully be handled when the two sides are 
closer to agreement.
Duration/right to deploy. An issue that has assumed substantial 
political and symbolic importance is the question of applicable rights 
and obligations once the nonwithdrawal period has ended. The Soviets 
propose that the D&S agreement simply expire at the end of that period, 
restoring the right of either side to withdraw from the ABM Treaty by 
giving six months’ notice and declaring why it believes continued 
adherence would jeopardize its “supreme national interests.”
The U.S. has believed that, under an approach requiring formal 
withdrawal from the ABM Treaty, the decision to proceed with deploy-
ment after the nonwithdrawal period would entail substantial political 
costs. It has therefore favored a D&S agreement of unlimited duration 
under which each side, at the end of the nonwithdrawal period, would 
have an explicit “right to deploy” defenses beyond those permitted by 
the ABM Treaty. To exercise that right, it would have to give six months’ 
notice, but would not have to withdraw from the ABM Treaty or provide 
any justification based on jeopardy to its supreme interests. To guard 
against sudden Soviet deployment at the end of the nonwithdrawal 
period, both sides would remain bound by the ABM Treaty until either 
one decided to exercise the right to deploy. The Soviets strongly oppose 
a “right to deploy,” arguing that it would create too strong a presump-
tion in favor of deployment and termination of the ABM Treaty.
Verification and predictability measures. In response to Soviet concerns 
about the uncertainties and instabilities associated with movement
