660
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
pendent” in the first paragraph of the text.4 I resisted this change,
arguing that (1) it would weaken the initial impact of his statement;
(2) the statement had been cleared by you and I therefore could not
make such changes. He thereupon suggested calling you personally,
which he did. You know the results. (C)
After briefing the Secretary on the purposes of his trip and giving
him the general background to recent developments within the Warsaw
Pact, I attended several meetings at the West German MFA, which the
American Embassy had set up. The first was with Dr. Kuehn, Director
for Soviet Affairs in the Foreign Office. The discussion, conducted in
German, centered on Soviet-West German relations, their present state
and future development. While useful, the conversation provided no
new key insights but rather served to confirm already held impressions.
The same was true of my meeting with Dr. Joetze, Director for East-
West Affairs in the Foreign Office. That evening, I had dinner with
Dick Smyser, the DCM at the Embassy and a good friend of Bill Grif-
fith’s, who had served on the NSC twice under Kissinger. I departed
the following morning for Bucharest. (U)
Bucharest, December 8
After making his initial arrival statement, which was well received
by the Romanians, Secretary Blumenthal held a half-hour meeting with
Romanian Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei. This was more of a protocol
meeting than anything else and served essentially as a forum for Blu-
menthal to make some of the talking points, though in abbreviated
form. (My notes of the meeting are at Tab C.)5 (C)
The real substantive discussions took place in a private tête-à-tête
meeting between Andrei and Blumenthal during cocktails before din-
ner. The Secretary has prepared a report of this discussion for the
President, which you should see. The Secretary showed this report to
me, and with his permission, I have included the highlights here for
you (Tab D). (C)6
During the pre-dinner cocktails, while Andrei was talking to Blu-
menthal, Mitran, the former DCM in Washington and now Andrei’s
special assistant, pulled me aside for a private discussion. His main
4 In telegram 30118 from Moscow, December 7, Ambassador Malcolm Toon reported
urging Blumenthal to drop the words “Romania’s independence” from the opening
paragraph of his Bucharest statement, since that phrase might strike the Soviets as
“signaling US intent to split Romania away.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P850061–1892)
5 Tab C is attached but not printed. The Embassy in Bucharest reported the conversa-
tion to the Department of the Treasury in telegram 8829, December 12. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780511–0990)
6 Tab D is attached but not printed. See footnote 2 above.
