38  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Planning Board Comment: Paragraph 20 of NSC 5719/1 (approved 
on August 23, 1957), dealing with the strategic importance of Africa 
South of the Sahara, says:
“No immediate action appears called for. The area should be 
kept under periodic survey to determine any changes in our strategic 
requirements.”
There is no need at this time to revise this policy.
Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board 
recommends that the National Security Council agree that:
The United States should not, at this time, establish a line of “back 
bases” across the waist of Africa; but should, in accordance with NSC 
5719/1, keep the area under periodic survey to determine any changes 
in our strategic requirements.
5. Alternative Bases in the Far East.
Statement of the Issue (Report, pp. 27–28, 36): In view of the weak­
nesses in our present Far East defense perimeter and the increased threat 
inherent in Soviet missile achievements, alternatives to our present base 
system should be examined for the dual purpose of increasing disper­
sion and of establishing bases in the most politically reliable areas.
Such a program would be costly, but the alternative to a soundly-­
based defense perimeter in the West Pacific is a retreat to “Fortress 
America” which would be infinitely more costly in every respect. It is 
not a question of withdrawing entirely from any country. This would 
be considered by our friends as abandonment, and they would feel 
compelled to make concessions to the Communists even while pursu­
ing a policy of neutralism. The need is for alternate positions which will 
protect us by dispersion and afford insurance against a situation devel­
oping in the present host countries that would lead us to a decision to 
withdraw. There are a number of good possibilities—The Bonins, the 
Marianas, Ulithi, North Borneo, Brunei, and Australia.
Planning Board Comment: Because of the increasing political and 
military vulnerability of our existing bases, alternative bases should 
be considered even though sizeable expenditures would be involved 
and many of the alternative bases might contain weaknesses similar 
to those in our present Far East defense perimeter. The Department of 
Defense is currently giving consideration to such alternatives.
Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board 
recommends that the National Security Council agree that:
Because of weaknesses in our present Far East defense perimeter 
and the increased threat inherent in Soviet missile achievements, the 
Department of Defense should continue to study the desirability and 
feasibility of alternatives to our present bases in the area as a means 
of increasing dispersal and establishing bases in the most politically 
reliable areas.
