responsibility to the American Indian has been acknowledged by annual
increases in appropriations to fulfill its obligations to them and to hasten the
time when Federal supervision of their affairs may be properly and safely
terminated. The movement in Congress and in some of the State legislatures
for extending responsibility in Indian affairs to States should be
encouraged. A complete participation by the Indian in our economic life is
the end to be desired.
THE NEGRO
For 65 years now our negro population has been under the peculiar care and
solicitude of the National Government. The progress which they have made
in education and the professions, in wealth and in the arts of civilization,
affords one of the most remarkable incidents in this period of world history.
They have demonstrated their ability to partake of the advantages of our
institutions and to benefit by a free and more and more independent
existence. Whatever doubt there may have been of their capacity to assume
the status granted to them by the Constitution of this Union is being rapidly
dissipated. Their cooperation in the life of the Nation is constantly
enlarging.
Exploiting the Negro problem for political ends is being abandoned and
their protection is being increased by those States in which their percentage
of population is largest. Every encouragement should be extended for the
development of the race. The colored people have been the victims of the
crime of lynching, which has in late years somewhat decreased. Some parts
of the South already have wholesome laws for its restraint and punishment.
Their example might well be followed by other States, and by such
immediate remedial legislation as the Federal Government can extend under
the Constitution.
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Under the guidance of Governor General Stimson the economic and
political conditions of the Philippine Islands have been raised to a standard
never before surpassed. The cooperation between his administration and the
people of the islands is complete and harmonious. It would be an advantage
