Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
589
ular leaders, like Eisenhower or Truman or Nixon or Rockefeller and
others.
“When we have visited those countries, the response has been
overwhelmingly favorable and friendly among the people, even when I
drove through the streets of Rio de Janeiro in the midst of an argument
where human rights and nuclear power were raised.
“I think the people have responded well, even though the leaders
in some countries have been somewhat embarrassed.
“I think it’s also reminded the American people about our own
Nation’s principles. And sometimes the arguments with the totalitarian
regime that has several thousands of people imprisoned without trial
and without any charge, those arguments have made vivid in the
minds of Americans that we are indeed better, or different—I think
better—in our basic philosophy than those philosophies espoused in
some other countries.
“There has been a substantial shift toward democratization in
many of those nations, partially encouraged by our own standards on
human rights. And there have been literally tens of thousands of polit-
ical prisoners released from within those countries in the last year and a
half or so because of our human rights position.
“The last point that I would like to make in this answer is that it’s
raised the issue of human rights to a high degree of intensity. There are
very few leaders in the world, in the 150 countries that now exist, who
don’t every day or every week have to remind ourselves—including
me—to what degree are we violating basic human rights? To what de-
gree are we earning the condemnation of the rest of the world? To what
degree are we arousing the animosity or distrust or displeasure or dis-
appointment among our own people because we violate those rights?
“I’m very proud of what we have done. And I think in balance, this
posture on human rights has helped us considerably.
“If you would go back 3 years or so and look at the attitude, for in-
stance, in the General Assembly of the United Nations every fall when
it convened, where our Nation was the butt of every joke and the target
of every attack mounted by almost 100 nations on Earth, and compare
it with the difference now, the last 2 years, part of that improvement is
because we have espoused basic human rights.
“I think this is particularly true in Africa where black people now
feel they’ve got a friend in the United States; they can depend on us.
“So, to answer your question, I think we’ve got the right policy,
and I intend not only to maintain it but to elevate our commitment to
that principle.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pages 626–628)
