362 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX nation of Jews in the GDR; they were free to practice their religion. He commented on the post-war difficulty in developing the GDR economy and said the creation of the GDR was a form of compensation. Comment: I gained the impression that Honecker was prepared to continue the dialogue with the conference, but was concerned about limited GDR means to meet the conference request. 13. Consular Convention: I emphasized that the Consular Convention was of key importance. I wanted to underscore this issue. I told him we see the Consular Convention as basic for good relations between states. Conclusion of a Consular Convention would contribute to positive development of our relations. As I had indicated earlier we seek positive development; since the American public and the Congress attach great importance to consular protection, it was necessary to have a Consular Convention. I noted this matter had been discussed with the Foreign Minister and stressed the importance of putting this matter behind and providing a basis for regularizing our relations. One possible compromise solution to the nationality question had been presented to the Foreign Minister. Honecker said he supported the Foreign Minister’s comments and hoped for an early conclusion to a consular agreement: “We should devote our best efforts to finding a solution.” 14. Trade. Honecker raised the question of the trade imbalance between the US and the GDR. Imports from the US amounted to 1.4 billion mark; US imports from the GDR totaled only 50 million mark. Honecker referred to the “legislation” and expressed the hope that our economic counselors would find a way to expand trade. I noted the current growth in the expansion of trade between the US and the GDR. We appreciated the grain trade and would remain a reliable supplier. I referred to my talks in New York with American business firms, including banks. I informed him that the GDR enjoyed a good reputation in the American business community. Contacts between the GDR trade organizations and American firms were increasing. We encourage these developments as the best way to proceed at this time. I noted the GDR trade and economic councils were operational. I mentioned my talks with the Department of Commerce and our desire to continue private and official participation in the Leipzig Fair, and to send technical sales seminars to the GDR to discuss sales potentials. I also mentioned that we were prepared to review GDR requests for representation of other trade organizations in the United States, depending on the state of our relations. 15. Cultural. Honecker also took the initiative in expressing the desire for expansion of cultural exchanges with the United States. In this connection he noted that the GDR was sending the world-famous Dresden art exhibit to the United States at great expense to the GDR. I told him we favor expanded exchanges in academic, scientific, cultural
