Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 bear the highest average tax burden in the world—more than 60 percent of their income goes for taxes. And yet, at the same time, this valiant nation has managed to create a miracle in the desert. With ingenuity, hard work, and skill it has created a land that could be a model for economic development and for political liberty to be emulated throughout the Middle East. Democracy has thrived in Israel despite the kind of adversity that has crushed freedom in other lands. And yet, what of the future? Is it a future in which Israel’s three million people try, by force of arms alone, to hold out against the hostility and growing power of the Arab world? Or can a process of reconciliation be started—a process in which peace protects Israel’s security, a peace in which the urge for revenge and recrimination is replaced by mutual recognition and respect? America has a special responsibility and a special opportunity to help bring about this kind of peace. This comes about first of all because of our unique and profound relationship with the State of Israel since its creation more than a generation ago. Our sense of shared values and purposes means that, for Americans, the question of Israel’s survival is not a political question but rather stands as a moral imperative of our foreign policy. Key Elements for an Agreement And yet, our special relationship with Israel has not been directed against any other country. We have been able to enjoy the friendship of much of the Arab world, where we and our close allies have important interests. It is precisely because of our close ties with both Israel and her Arab neighbors that we are uniquely placed to promote the search for peace, to work for an improved understanding of each side’s legitimate concerns, and to help them work out what we hope will be a basis for negotiation leading to a final peace in the Middle East. When this Administration entered office on January 20, we found that the situation in the Middle East called for a new approach. The step-by-step diplomacy of our predecessors had defused the immediate tensions produced by the war in 1973. But it was also evident that it would be increasingly difficult to achieve small diplomatic concessions when the ultimate shape of a peace agreement remained obscure. At the same time, it was unlikely that an agreement on a lasting peace could be achieved at one stroke. U.N. Security Council Resolution 242, which is supported by all the parties, provides a basis for the negotiations which are required if
