522 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 170. Letter From the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Trade of the House Ways and Means Committee (Vanik) and the Ranking Minority Member of the Subcommittee (Steiger) to the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss)1 Washington, October 17, 1978 Dear Bob: All of our efforts to legislate an extension of the authority to waive the imposition of countervailing duties, as well as to enact other sorely needed trade legislation, the adjustment assistance bill, came to naught, as you know by now, in the waning hours of the 95th Congress. Since a number of us on the House Trade Subcommittee worked very hard to respond to the request of the President and to your own plea to extend the waiver,2 we want to share with you some thoughts on this problem in terms of the future legislative posture. All of us involved in this issue knew the extension of the waiver would be difficult. It proved impossible. Further, many of us feared that the textile question would be finally joined with the issue of extending the countervailing duty waiver. That prediction proved to be 100 percent correct.3 We mention this only because we believe there is a lesson in the last few weeks for all of us. We believe this lesson is that we should not attempt to extend the waiver unless it is done in the context of obtaining international agreement on a code of discipline over subsidies and countervailing duties which meets U.S. objectives, and, more importantly, in the context of domestic implementation of such an agreement. To attempt to extend the waiver in any other context will once again bring forth the individual commodity concerns that we were faced with in our attempts to enact the waiver extension in the last Congress. As you know, the votes in both Houses to withdraw textiles from the MTN were overwhelming. We believe that strength will be sufficient post elections in the new Congress to produce the same outcome for any new attempt to legislate a waiver extension. The only possible qualification on this assessment would be if our important textile offers were withdrawn administratively or if there were clarification of a “snapback” provision. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Subject Files, 1977–1979, Box 2, Countervailing Duties 1977. No classification marking. 2 See Document 166. 3 Before it adjourned on October 15, Congress passed legislation (H.R. 9937) rescinding the U.S. authority to negotiate on textiles in the MTN. (Dennis Farney,
