January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1269 text of the oral message from President Sadat in para 3 below, responding to President Carter’s letter (reftel B) which I delivered to Mubarak for Sadat on June 8. El-Baz commented that President Sadat’s reply contains nothing new but includes several points which GOE considers it important to have on the record. El-Baz said he thought the way was now clear for us to issue our announcement5 today about resuming the negotiations but that I should confirm this with Foreign Minister Ali in view of his comments to me the previous evening about reconsidering the timing of our announcement (reftel C). I have not yet been able to reach Ali this morning but will keep trying. 3. Begin text: June 9, 1980 Dear President Carter: Thank you very much for your message of June 8. As I told you in the message Vice President Mubarak conveyed to you last month,6 I am willing to do whatever you deem helpful despite our assessment of the current attitude of the Israeli Government. In this assessment, we are not resorting to passing any judgment on Israeli intentions. Rather, we are basing it on a careful analysis of their actions and official statements. There is every indication that they are determined not only to obstruct the process of reaching agreement, but even the creation of the atmosphere which is necessary for the continuation of the negotiations. However, on the basis of your appeal, we decided to accept your invitation to the Washington meeting for the purpose of removing the existing obstacles and verifying the presence of the essential requisites for pursuing the talks. I think that it is important to make this point clear in any statement or announcement regarding the meeting in Washington. On the other hand, I think that the timing of this meeting is equally important. As you certainly have noticed, I hastened to announce our acceptance of your proposal in order to strengthen your hand. You will always find us helpful and cooperative and we will do everything we can to make matters easier for you. With best wishes and regards, Mohammed Anwar El-Sadat End text. 5 At 11:58 a.m. on June 11, Powell announced to reporters in the White House Briefing Room that Egypt and Israel had accepted the invitation of the United States to send Burg and Ali to meet with Linowitz in Washington to prepare for the resumption of formal negotiations. The text of the announcement is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II, p. 1093. 6 Not found.
