Yugoslavia 991 from the US and also aware that this has not been publicly rejected in Washington, might also make a similar pitch. What we can do under existing legislation is sharply limited. What the Yugoslavs might ask of us could exceed those limits, but we should not be surprised should they approach us. Any Yugoslav request for direct financial assistance might be tied, directly or indirectly, to their military needs. For example, GOY hesitancy about FMS credits for military purchases might vanish. 8. The following is a list of US weapons, equipment and training that would most likely be found on a Yugoslav wish list. Rank order does not imply order of priority: A) AN/TPS–63 radars. An FMS contract was signed earlier this year for the purchase of eight AN/TPS–63 radars. Delivery is currently scheduled to commence in June 1982. The Yugoslavs could seek earlier delivery. B) F–5 aircraft. The Yugoslavs have expressed considerable interest in this aircraft. They would quite possibly ask the USAF to train pilots in the F–5, even though it is not yet in the YAF inventory. They might also propose to purchase a number of the planes. C) TOW/Dragon. The US Army is currently preparing FMS cases for small quantities of TOW/Dragons to use for training purposes. The GOY might ask for accelerated delivery of these anti-tank weapons and additional urgent training. D) Reconnaissance/EW equipment. Commercial contracts are currently being prepared for surveillance and countermeasures equipment. The Yugoslavs might seek accelerated delivery. E) Mark–46 torpedoes. LOA’s for the Mark–46 have been delivered. The Yugoslavs might seek to accelerate acquisition. F) Another priority would probably be AGM–65 A/B Maverick, 150 of which the GOY is seeking to buy. Congressional notification is being prepared. They might well seek to accelerate the acquisition process. 9. The GOY may also push us for some thing we have so far refused (Harpoon). We would, in the abstract, see no reason to reverse previous denials. 10. Deployment of units of the US Sixth Fleet for operations in the Adriatic and/or a highly visible ship visit should be considered as an option to demonstrate US strength and purpose. However, the GOY might find these in the “provocative” category and we should therefore not undertake such deployment without careful consideration of the pros and cons. The ship visit would require consultations; an operational deployment should at least be informally discussed with the Yugoslavs in advance unless there are overriding operational reasons not to do so.
