March–August 1953
605
4. To be acceptable to the Iranian public opinion and thus to the
Iranian government, such proposals should:
(a) Recognize nationalization.
(b) Provide that the Iranians should have complete control of all
property, installations and production in Iran.
(c) Allow the Iranian Government complete freedom of choice of
technical and managerial personnel.
(d) Beyond such specific sales contracts as may be worked out in
connection with a settlement, allow the Iranians complete freedom of
sales of oil and oil products.
(e) Dispose of the problem of compensation within the framework
of the Nine-Point Law and on a basis which would show that Iran is not
being saddled with excessive indebtedness to the AIOC.
5. No commercial concessions or special political privileges should
be asked of Iran.
6. While the US agrees with the UK that it would be desirable for
the amount of compensation to be determined by impartial interna-
tional arbitration or adjudication, other methods of determination (or
possibly even a moratorium) should not be excluded on principle.
7. Recognizing that the economic and political stability of Iran is to
a large degree dependent on the revival of its chief industry, both the
US and the UK will take appropriate steps to encourage and facilitate
the resumption of large-scale exports of Iranian oil.
224.
Notes on the Remarks of the Ambassador to Iran
(Henderson) to the National Security Council Planning
Board1
Washington, June 25, 1953.
In March 1952 we didn’t see how the Mossadegh Government
could last out the summer. It had great financial problems. It appar-
ently could not expand its currency and it was without the heavy rev-
enues from oil. As a matter of fact, the government did fall in July and
Qavam became Prime Minister. But the Shah did not back Qavam and
the mobs forced him out in two days. The Shah apparently withheld his
support because he hoped for a leader better from his point of view
than either Mossadegh or Qavam. Mossadegh came back to power and
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Special Staff File, Box 4. Top Secret; Security Informa-
tion. There is no drafting information on the notes.
