294 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 226. Telegram 770 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 23, 1955, 5 p.m. 770. From Johnson. 1. Believe today’s meeting very useful in bringing home to PRC depth our dissatisfaction on implementation agreed announcement and making it unmistakably clear we continue expect prompt action on remaining 19. 2. As of today Wang is somewhat in doubt as to what exactly we intend to do with respect item two. Last meeting I dealt with something they had raised under item two, today I refused to deal at all with item two, and my remarks have been sufficiently ambiguous that they are now not entirely clear as to whether our intent is flatly to refuse discuss item two until all remaining Americans are released or something short of that. However it cannot but be perfectly clear to them that we expect additional performance. I did not feel that I could today debate, how­ ever lightly, his reply to my statement at last meeting on higher level talks without weakening impression I was attempting create. 3. Do not believe I could state our position any more forcefully than I did today without going to next step of flatly refusing enter any substantive discussion item two until every American released. In pres­ ent atmosphere I would have to quickly reveal whether or not we pre­ pared maintain such position up to point of break. 4. Although he today avoided word “break” this was somewhat implied in his threat make public statement if we continue through next meeting our refusal discuss item two. Do not believe their impatience is feigned and it would not be possible keep talks going solely on today’s note useful and important though I feel it has been. 5. Question is what we do if by time of next meeting there has been no additional performance on their part. Believe that some sort addi­ tional reply to his statement today on higher level meeting and line in paras 6 and 8 Deptel 745 would with some difficulty carry me though next meeting or two but problem will be where we go from there. With our having already rejected one of his two items and we apparently hav­ ing only two items there is not going to be much scope for an agenda argument. It would, under these circumstances seem to me to be our best tactic to attempt to focus on a substantive exchange on “no force” for as long as we could keeping their item of trade embargo on ice for as long as we could. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2355. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.
