3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
206
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
that it did not. The Secretary reported that the preliminary response
from Egypt and Jordan had been positive and from Syria “reserved”—
a word suggested by Dobrynin. The Secretary said there were two main
questions: How the Palestinians were to be represented and how the
working groups were to be organized. Dobrynin asked what role the
Soviet Union would have in the six working groups listed in the
working paper. The Secretary said that he had recommended that the
two co-chairmen participate in each of the working groups and Do-
brynin seemed reassured on this point. The Secretary recalled that in
1974 both the US and the Soviet Union had participated in the military
working group and that we could build on this precedent. (The Secre-
tary noted that in 1975 the Soviets had not participated in the military
working group at their own choosing.)
The chairmanship of the conference was discussed;3 it was agreed
that it would be better to have the co-chairmen rotate in the chair than
to have the Secretary General preside.
Returning to the Israeli statement, Dobrynin asked whether it im-
plied that only West Bank Palestinians would be represented. The Sec-
retary replied that the question of Palestinian representation should be
solved in a practical way and should be developed with specific names.
We should work together with the parties to find names that would be
acceptable both to the Arabs and the Israelis.
The Secretary then raised the question of how to go about initi-
ating a public call for the convening of the conference. Provisionally, it
was agreed that it should be done the same way as last time, with iden-
tical letters from the co-chairmen to the Secretary General requesting
that he convene the conference, and that one possibility would be one
invitation to the Arab League for the Arab participants. The Secretary
noted that Lebanon had asked to participate and that the other parties
had expressed no objection to this.
The Secretary said that there could be no guarantees at this point
on the outcome of the conference on specific substantive matters such
as a Palestinian state. Dobrynin probed about the extent of the US de-
termination, despite acute domestic pressure, to see that the legitimate
interests of the Palestinians were met. The Secretary replied that this
was the American determination and he had, in his nationwide televi-
sion program the preceding day, repeated the US commitment to a Pal-
estinian homeland, but he said the first step is to get the people to the
table and other matters can follow. He thought that once the conference
began, world pressure would help to bring about a resolution of the
Palestinian problem. Dobrynin said the Soviet Union did not yet have a
3 Reference is to the proposed Geneva Conference on the Middle East.
