Special Session on Disarmament
1231
would be best that the United Kingdom continue to take the lead in
suggesting this specific language.
The negative security formulation we had been considering is:
“The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-
nuclear weapon state party to the NPT or any comparable internation-
ally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive devices, ex-
cept in the case of an attack on the United States, its territories or armed
forces, or its allies by such a state allied to a nuclear weapon state, or as-
sociated with a nuclear weapon state in carrying out or sustaining the
attack.”
Second, Ambassadors Young and Harriman have provided sug-
gested language for a US statement of policy concerning the conditions
under which we might eventually explore the possibility of a cutoff of
the production of fissionable material. They did this before your recent
decision providing guidance on how to handle cutoff at the SSOD.
Their language goes too far in implying that we could move automat-
ically after SALT II and CTB “to explore the possibilities for negotia-
tions” of additional measures, including a cutoff. But I believe your
guidance solves the problem.
499.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, June 12, 1978, 1:05–1:35 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Representatives of the U.S. Delegation
to the United Nations Special Session on Disarmament
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter Mondale
Cyrus Vance, the Secretary of State
Ambassador Andrew Young, U.S. Representative to the UN
Ambassador James Leonard, Jr., U.S. Deputy Representative to the UN
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Marjorie Benton, U.S. Delegation to the UN Special Session on Disarmament
Paul Newman, U.S. Delegation to the UN Special Session on Disarmament
Robert D. Putnam, National Security Council Staff Member
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, EXDIS Memcons, 1978. Secret; Exdis. The
meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.
