Romania
669
would be difficult to control. The Romanian disease might spread—
even dangerously—as an effect of measures to quarantine it. Less hypo-
thetically, there has been no indication of EE reluctance to continue,
or even to expand economic exchanges with Romania in post-Warsaw
Pact summit period of negotiations of trade protocols.
The other (non-EE) client states of the Soviet Union typically have
only token economic relations with Romania. Other states with consid-
erable Soviet influence most probably would not agree to cutting back
on mutually beneficial economic relations.
In economic terms, trade is the single area in which potentially
effective levels exist. Financial arrangements between Socialist coun-
tries appear to provide little room for leverage. This is so because
financial accounts are typically settled over a medium-term period of
not more than [five] years, and there is a good deal of attention to
balancing as one goes along. This is certainly so in Romania’s case.
The remaining area, economic cooperation, has been one of particular
sensitivity to Romanians for the last 20 years. For all practical purposes,
Romania has refused to undertake joint manufacturing ventures which
would make any part of their economy permanently dependent on
inputs from any other Socialist country. In some cases, they have
entered into such ventures, but only with agreement that the arrange-
ment be temporary, pending the development of Romania’s ability to
produce the item independently (articulated busses from Hungary,
etc.). If there is a single weakness in the Romanian economic scene
which is truly remarkable, it is this urge to autarchy. Romania’s true
enemies would egg them on in their mania of producing everything
from widgets to BAC 1–11s, RR motors, and kitchen utensils.
The ambivalent effect of economic boycotts are well known. In the
case of economic boycott of Romania, selective or total, there surely
would be strange political effects, too. In the short term, for instance,
the FRG would probably fill a large part of any economic gap. It is
close, it is highly responsive economically, and might harbor some
sort of sympathy. Would the Soviets favor renewal of greater German
economic/political influence in this part of the world? The Chinese
would feel compelled to put up more than posters on liberty wall.
China trade is big now, and presumably could be swelled, at least
temporarily, to fill unanticipated gaps in deliveries of, for example, coal.
4. Science and Technology
A. Training
The Romanians and the Soviets have a history of cooperation in
S&T area dating from end of WWII. Many thousands of Romanian
scientists and technicians were trained in the USSR and indeed, Roman-
ian industrial development owes much to Soviets in this regard. How-
ever, since the mid-60’s the Romanians have moved towards the West
