636
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
B. Efforts to Encourage Multilateral Restraint
(1) Unilateral Restraints. We believe our objective must be to reduce
the international traffic in arms, not simply to reduce the US role in that
traffic. As we gain credibility through improved policy and procedural
control over our own arms exports, we can begin to elicit the coopera-
tion of other nations. This could be a long-term process, because arms
exports have great commercial and political importance to our friends.
(2) Informal Multilateral Restraint. When we disapprove a proposed
sale because we wish to avoid introducing a new capability or level of
technology into a particular region, we can let other suppliers know the
reason for our decision and encourage comparable restraint on their
part (e.g., intermediate range missiles in the Middle East). In addition,
we can use available international fora (CCD, NATO, UN, OAS, etc.) to
urge restraint by other suppliers and by recipients. We can also try to
identify particular regions where opportunities exist for mutual re-
straint among arms importing countries and seek to encourage such re-
straint through diplomatic efforts with those countries. NATO stand-
ardization and offsetting procurements by the US from our European
allies may be useful incentives in discouraging sales efforts in other
regions.
(3) A Conference of Arms Suppliers. With the benefit of experience
gained from the Nuclear Suppliers’ Conference,5 we may be able to ini-
tiate a similar dialogue among suppliers of conventional arms. Al-
though arms suppliers are a more diverse group with more widely di-
vergent interests, we should make an effort to see what can be achieved
by a suppliers’ conference. As first steps, we are identifying the sales
practices of various suppliers and considering what issues could use-
fully be discussed by those participants whose attendance would be re-
quired. We shall also have to take into account the predictable resist-
ance from recipients and consider means of involving them in the
process.
(4) A Dialogue with the USSR. Requests by foreign countries for
sales from the US are often a response to military supply relations be-
tween the requesting country’s neighbor and the Soviet Union. The So-
viets have experienced difficulties in their arms sales activities which
are similar to some of our own problems and it would seem that bilat-
eral discussions could produce worthwhile results on a number of
issues (e.g., sales to African countries which might fuel an arms race or
5 The Nuclear Supplier Group, founded in 1974 after India’s successful nuclear test,
included the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, France, and Japan. It met several times from 1974–1977 to set
guidelines for the export of nuclear material to states which did not possess nuclear
weapons.
