March–August 1953
551
success not (repeat not) good and I see no (repeat no) immediate pros-
pect just now (repeat now) reversal these trends.
2. I recommend adoption housing program which might with ad-
vantage be strengthened to absorb some of funds not (repeat not) used
in village council program if decision made not (repeat not) adopt latter
or reduce its scope.
3. Despatch going forward next pouch treating in more detail
problems touched on herein and discussing in light recent develop-
ments certain other problems re aid. In this despatch conclusions
drawn that (A) aside from difficulties of political and security character
which any kind aid must encounter in deteriorating situation here,
technical assistance not (repeat not) accompanied by economic assist-
ance not (repeat not) likely achieve worthwhile results in country so
economically arid as Iran; and (B) if Congress approves for Iran tech-
nical assistance programs say in neighborhood 10 million dollars for
1954 without adding at least twice as much for supporting economic
aid, chances in Embassy’s opinion success such technical aid so slight
consideration should be given withdrawal TCI entirely.3
4. I am showing this telegram Warne, Director TCI for whose judg-
ment and courageous fighting spirit I have respect and have invited
him comment on it either by telegram or despatch.4
Henderson
3 In despatch 895 from Tehran, May 1, Henderson wrote that the continuation of
technical assistance was construed by Iranians as an indication of U.S. support in their oil
dispute with the British. Hence, “the time may come in the not too distant future when
conditions in Iran will have degenerated to such an extent that the continuance of the ex-
tension of limited amounts of technical and economic aid will no longer serve useful pur-
poses; when the continuance of the extension of such aid might be more disadvantageous
to the United States than its discontinuance . . . I do not believe that that time has as yet
come . . . The Department should know however that the possibility exists that it may
come.” (Ibid., 788.00/5–153)
4 In telegram 4253 from Tehran, April 30, Warne defended the Village Council
Project and advised against “any decision pull back piecemeal from our acknowledged
objectives, as decision not (repeat not) go forward on Village Council Project this late date
would seem start do.” (Ibid., 788.00/4–3053) The Department responded in telegram
2816, May 4, in which it instructed, “in view worldwide objectives TCA, Congressional
interest land reform, and probable adverse reaction by Mosadeq should TCI withdraw
this time from Project, go ahead with Village Council Project.” (Ibid.)
