Afghanistan We believe that each of these divergent viewpoints captures important aspects of reality, but that each also omits important considerations. If taken alone, each has potentially misleading policy implications. Like those who view the intervention as an aberration, we believe it was triggered by Afghan-specific events and did not in itself stem from or reflect a conviction that the time was ripe for a global offensive, let alone from a belief that it was a necessary (or even a very sensible) first step in the pursuit of warm water ports or control of Middle Eastern oil. Like the aberrationists, we also believe that the timing of the Soviet decision to intervene was critically affected by fear of an imminent, and possibly irreversible, disintegration of the established Kabul regime and its replacement by a regime which might even prove susceptible to hostile external influence. In addition, we share the aberrationists’ belief that the invasion of Afghanistan was defensive in the sense that it was motivated by fear that the loss of a country from within the Soviet sphere of influence would have an extremely adverse effect on Moscow’s credibility as a power determined to brook no challenge to the integrity of its empire or to the irreversibility of “socialist” gains. We are also inclined to agree with some of the arguments of those who see the invasion as an expression of a more fundamental shift in global Soviet policy. We believe it is probably the Soviet perception that their enhanced military posture, especially in the strategic area, has created a more permissive political environment for the conduct of foreign policy. It has lowered the perceived risk of Soviet exploitation of political and social instability in the Third World, and of a more assertive foreign policy that has included the use of military force, either directly or through proxies, in some Third World countries. Growing Soviet military aid efforts have served as the main conveyor of Soviet influence—in Angola, Ethiopia, Yemen, etc. The calculations that informed the invasion of Afghanistan, therefore, were not without precedent. Afghanistan involved the crossing of an important threshold, and was recognized as such by the Soviet leadership. But, as we have also pointed out, it was preceded by a gradual, decade-long escalation in Soviet political-military involvement in the Third World. The decision to solve the Afghanistan problem by an unprecedented massive military intervention in a “Third World” country is a culmination of this process. It reflects a confidence that the shift in the global military balance, as the Soviets perceive it, guaranteed the USSR immunity from Western military retaliation, and has created new possibilities to demonstrate the apparent inability of the West to deter Soviet self-assertiveness. The possibility that Afghanistan represents a qualitative turn in Soviet foreign policy in the region and toward the Third World is one to be taken seriously. The Soviets recognize that the issue
