December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 715 (The meeting breaks for lunch at 1:30 p.m. At 3:08 p.m. the meeting resumes.) President Carter: Secretary Vance will respond to some of the technical problems. Then I’ll summarize. Then I would like to meet with my people for an hour or so and then we can meet again at five o’clock. Secretary Vance: On Article 6, paragraphs 2 and 5, we have discussed these problems and have some suggestions. We should deal with this first. President Carter: I talked to Sadat at length. He didn’t understand your concern on the 1960 and 1966 treaties until recently. But he wants a new word for derogate. Secretary Vance: On the letter, there is no problem in the first one and one-half pages. There are problems concerning liaision in Gaza. It is important that there be a method to bring Gaza along. Prime Minister Begin: The first page is okay with us. Please add the words administrative council after self-governing authority. Also the Israeli version of the letter should say Judea and Samaria in a footnote when the West Bank and Gaza are referred to. Secretary Vance: We can use a footnote in the Israeli version. There is a problem on when the transitional period begins. Prime Minister Begin: The problem starts on page two. Here is the Gaza first idea, and here starts the problem. Secretary Vance: On page three at the top, there was apparently some misunderstanding of what the Cabinet approved. President Carter: We proposed the language. Ambassador Evron: You remarked that the term “as expeditiously as possible” should be used. Secretary Vance: We said that we would look at it. Mr. Avner: As expeditiously as possible was discussed. Secretary Vance: I said “or something like that”. We will look at this. I gave Foreign Minister Dayan a draft memorandum of agreement. Foreign Minister Dayan: Why say anything about the transitional period? Secretary Vance: When does it start? Prime Minister Begin: When the self-government is established in both areas as is written in Camp David. Secretary Vance: If you leave it that way, and it is established only in Gaza, it nonetheless would be operating. Prime Minister Begin: It is not written. Foreign Minister Dayan: Suppose that the autonomy begins in Judea and Samaria two months later. Then it makes no difference. But if it
