question of readjustment of treaty regulations should be included in the
anticipated negotiations, that otherwise neither he nor W. W. Yen would
consent to serve. I told Dr. Wang that I could not speak authoritatively for my
Government in respect of the question he raised having referred the note of
June 24th to it for instructions. However I expressed personal opinion that
any foreign government, no matter how sympathetically it might be inclined
toward the aspirations of the Chinese in regard to readjustment of treaty
relations, would need to feel certain that Chinese Government [was] capable
of assuming additional obligations and responsibilities which revision of
treaties would place upon it before foreign governments could consent to
such revision. I asked Dr. Wang whether in his opinion present Chinese
Government could satisfy this condition precedent. He replied emphatically
that it could; that the source of all trouble and difficulties were [was] the
special privileges and immunities of the treaties and once these were
removed peace and order would prevail in China and a stable, effective
government would ensue. I fear he is overoptimistic if sincere in these
expressions and is putting the cart before the horse.
5. Three Chinese delegates referred to above are apparently jockeying for
position vis-à-vis Foreign Office in an effort to escape responsibility for the
settling of Shanghai incident. From reliable reports it would seem that the
Chinese delegates have either resigned or told Foreign Office they will only
negotiate Shanghai incident as part of larger subject including revision of the
treaty. This makes it most difficult if not impossible for us to hasten
settlement of Shanghai incidents in which apparently Chinese Government
has lost interest in view of bigger question of treaty revision which it is now
pushing to the fore. Should negotiations for settlement of Shanghai incidents
not be begun early next week, through continued dilatory tactics of Chinese
Government, I believe Heads of Legation must seriously contemplate
informing Chinese Government that either latter shall cooperate immediately
to [the] end that negotiation be begun, otherwise Heads of Legation will
conclude that Chinese Government is willing to rely upon any settlement
which foreign authorities may regard as just. In this connection action taken
by Heads of Legation, reported in my number 257, July 2, 1 p.m.,6 is
pertinent.
I refer as last resort of settlement Shanghai incidents to Permanent Court of
International Justice in conjunction with League of Nations, discussed informally at
meeting of Heads of Legation. Would Department favor such action? See Department’s
46, March 1, 3 p.m., 1924, second paragraph.7
MAYER
