3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
899
the U.S. complex, other aspects of the December 4, 1972 Agreement on
Embassy Complexes would have to be addressed. End text.
5. Dobrynin said he would of course report the Secretary’s remarks
to Gromyko. Overall, however, his impression was that they, quite
frankly, were not very encouraging. He then commented briefly on the
individual issues raised as follows:
—Poland is an independent country and knows how to handle its
problems without outside interference.
—The U.S. knows the Soviet position on arms control very well:
the Soviets favor a continuation. But we have discussed Sverdlovsk
“hundreds of times” and he doesn’t see anything useful in discussing it
further. As for the September 14 Soviet nuclear test, he has no informa-
tion as yet.
—He would report what the Secretary had to say about PD–59.
—The Secretary’s remarks on CSCE were discouraging. The Ma-
drid Review Conference should have two purposes—performance re-
view and constructive steps for the future. The U.S. of course has the
right to discuss anything it wishes. But in planning to raise such issues
as the Shcharanskiy case, does the Administration understand that this
will have a very negative effect? This was the beginning of the Soviets’
trouble with this Administration from the very beginning. In short,
there is nothing positive in our remarks on CSCE—and even the allies
of the U.S. are telling the Soviets that the U.S. has “only negative” plans
for Madrid.
—As for the Embassy construction issue, Dobrynin would report
what the Secretary had to say. He could understand it was a problem
that might bother us.
6. Dobrynin then remarked that most of the questions the Secretary
had raised were not new; many of them had a “long beard.” This sur-
prised him; he had thought that, with the approach of elections, we
would have something on the positive side to say.
7. The Secretary responded that it was obvious that the state of
US-Soviet relations was such that the problems were difficult and sen-
sitivities were strong. In presenting these problems, as in his discussion
with Gromyko in New York, he was motivated not by a negative atti-
tude but by a desire to find a positive way of improving our relations.
He thought it necessary to keep working at resolving our differences.
He had particularly mentioned the problems in the arms control area
because they were all interrelated. He had told Gromyko of our plans
for moving toward SALT II ratification and considered it important to
mention as well the other [garble—related?] problems. While we plan to
move for ratification in any case, the issue would be decided by a
handful of votes and it was important to resolve as many problems as
possible beforehand.
