572 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The study also looked at a number of possible changes to the C3 system including deployment of mobile ground stations, improving the Crown helo and moving it closer to the White House, and rebasing NEACP further from the coast. [2 lines not declassified] (TS) The final brief concentrated on the connectivity of the airborne national command post aircraft to the SSBN force. It showed that successful receipt and transmission of an EAM through this portion of the C3 network is very uncertain. The brief also showed that a number of fairly straightforward and inexpensive improvements can be made that will significantly improve this situation. (TS) There was some discussion of the briefs but no specific conclusions were drawn. The discussion included the following points: General Jones pointed out the disparity in fatalities and silo destruction capabilities estimated for the US and the Soviet Union in the first two briefs. He also pointed out the large number of strategic reserves the Soviets have left over after they have fulfilled what we think might be their reasonable strategic attack objectives. He expressed concern that the importance of moving the NEACP aircraft inland from Andrews and making the suggested improvements for the Crown helicopter would not be fully appreciated. Finally, he noted that while the SALT II limits bound the Soviet threat, the difficulties illustrated in these briefs would still exist at force levels well below the SALT II limits. (TS) Secretary Duncan noted that General Jones’ last point illustrates the importance of achieving deep reductions in SALT III. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski illustrated the value of the three question framework he presented in the last meeting by commenting that (1) the briefs make the weaknesses in our ability to manage a nuclear war quite clear, (2) Soviet knowledge of this fact would weaken our position to bargain over our respective interests in a nuclear crisis, and (3) this in turn would lead to a weakening of deterrence. (TS) Secretary Vance asked a number of questions about the assumptions underlying the analysis presented in the four briefs. He questioned the expected destruction of the Crown helo in particular, and the implication that the current system would only allow about [1 line not declassified] (TS) George Seignious asked how the corresponding situation might look from the Soviets’ point of view. He was told that while this question had not been analyzed in any detail, Soviet geographical advantages and the attention they have paid to making their C3 hard and redundant should lead to a better result for them. (TS)
