1288  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
I must confess that the news stories from India certainly make my 
prediction that Nehru would not talk much about Communist China 
look entirely wrong. It now looks as if he might do much talking about 
it, and may be carrying some messages. Therefore, I presume that what 
happens at the next meeting will to a considerable degree depend on 
what is or is not said during the Washington visit.
Do you see any significance in Wang’s persistence on the January 
18 date? I do not have Chou’s schedule here and wonder if it could be 
related to the post-Washington meeting between Chou and Nehru and 
Chou’s return to Peiping.
I pressed for the January 17 date as Swissair is no longer flying to 
Prague on Saturdays and Sundays and I have to go back by Czech Air 
on those days for which I have no stomach. (They have had too many 
crashes with their old Soviet planes and the week preceding my last 
return by Czech Air, killed a whole plane full taking off from Zurich.) 
I agreed to Saturday with the thought I could lay-­over here Sunday and 
go back Swissair on Monday [text not declassified].
I am sorry I failed to reply to you about Helenka. However, as 
I had talked over with her the suggestion you made regarding leave 
without pay and as she was agreeable I had dismissed it from my 
mind as finished business. Nevertheless, I should have said some­
thing to you.
I pressume you have by now received my letter about extending 
Ekvall beyond December 30. (My letters to you seem to take an extraor­
dinary time in transit).
As a side light Wang was with me on the plane coming down 
Tuesday and while we were in the airport at Zurich I showed him two 
articles and pictures in the New York Times of Chou’s Indian visit. In a 
little while he came over and gave me the Prague English news bulletin 
of NCNA giving the account of Chou’s Calcutta interview. It was to that 
I was particularly referring this morning and he knew it as I had it on 
the table.
I didn’t feel as pleased with today’s meeting as I had with the 
last meeting in that I wasn’t able to keep it as exclusively on the ten 
Americans as the last meeting. However, I felt it was time to call him on 
their tactics with respect to the Chinese students and this inevitably led 
us somewhat down that road. However, all in all, I think I was success­
ful in continuing to keep him on the defensive.
I am very glad you accepted my suggestions on the contingency 
statements in the event of any releases. I just felt we were giving the 
Indians entirely too much credit.
I did not put too much stock in Menon’s statement as indicating 
knowledge by him of an early release, but would be inclined to give
