723.2515/1499
[Document 211]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs
(White)
[WASHINGTON,] May 8, 1925.
SEAPORT FOR BOLIVIA
The Bolivian Minister, Señor Freyre, called on Friday, May 8, to say that as I was
familiar with his endeavors not only as Bolivian Minister to Chile and as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Bolivia but also in his conversations a year ago with Secretary
Hughes to bring about a revision of the Chilean-Bolivian Treaty of 1904, by which
Bolivia would obtain a seaport,46 he had called to inquire whether the very last word
had been said by this Department in the matter. He remarked that considerable change
has taken place in the last year by the rendition of the Award in the Tacna-Arica case
and he wanted to know whether something could not be done in this matter.
I told Señor Freyre that I felt the situation was the same as it had been when he
conversed with Secretary Hughes a year ago; that the policy of this Government was
the same as then stated, namely, that it was always ready to be of service to the
countries of this hemisphere in composing their difficulties if requested to lend its good
offices by all those concerned. I pointed out that in this case Chile had not asked for
our good offices and that I might say as my purely personal opinion that I could not see
much likelihood that Chile would want to take up any further matters of this sort while
it is now so busily preparing for the coming plebiscite in Tacna- Arica.
Señor Freyre then said that there appeared to be two distinct phases of the matter: First.
Whether the United States would use its good offices under certain conditions even
should one of the parties not have asked for its intervention, and, second, whether or
not the present was an opportune moment to broach the question to Chile. He said that
the present was perhaps an inopportune moment. He then inquired whether this
Government would be prepared after the holding of the plebiscite of Tacna-Arica to use
its good offices to bring about a settlement of this matter.
I replied that I of course could not answer a hypothetical question and state just what
the attitude of the Department would be at some future occasion all the circumstances
of which could not be known at this time. When the moment arrives the Department
will have to make its decision in the light of the conditions as they then exist. The
Minister thanked me and withdrew.
