North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979 1031 At the November negotiating session,3 Group B put forward a comprehensive proposal that fully met our commitment to Asean Ministers last summer.4 The proposal provided for direct contributions to the first window and a limited second window based on voluntary contributions. Members of the Group of 77, while indicating in private some areas of flexibility, were not able to respond formally to the Group B proposal or to table a paper of their own. This immobility allowed them to protect their basic position while apparently pocketing the concessions we have already made. It also raises questions about how much substantive progress was really made. (Widjojo, the Asean spokesman on the Common Fund at the US-Asean Ministerial last August, has suggested the need for “greater flexibility” by the U.S., even though we have met all the conditions they expressed there.) We still must get from the G–77 solid agreements on: —the nature and function of the first window, to insure that it will not be another resource transfer mechanism; —the scope of the second window’s functions, to insure that it does not duplicate the activities of the IFI’s, and the voluntary character of contributions; —a clear separation between the first and second window; and —specific guidelines for voting and decision making so that country voting weights will accord with country financial interests in the Fund. As agreement in principle on these major items falls into place, we will be better positioned to negotiate on the dollar values associated with each window. The reports from the Jamaican Summit were positive, but somewhat unclear on important details.5 The Canadians, for example, indicated that there seemed to be movement by LDC representatives toward our position on the nature and function of the first window and some recognition of the need for separating the first and second window. Perez Guerrero, however, told Ambassador Luers in Venezuela that he thought a consensus emerged to transfer a portion of the funding from the first window to the second and that the U.S. would go 3 Negotiations on the Common Fund took place in Geneva November 14–30, 1978. Telegram 18440 from Geneva, December 1, 1978, summarized the status of the negotiations at the end of the session. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780496–0210) 4 See footnote 5, Document 314. 5 A undated memorandum summarizing the proceedings of the December 28–29 summit at Runaway Bay, Jamaica, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 16, President, Guadeloupe, 1 /4–6/79: NSC Briefing Book [III]. Erb and Hormats commented on the summit in a January 4 memorandum to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 16, President, Guadeloupe, 1/4–6/79: SITTO 1–34) See also footnote 3, Document 324.
