Dominican Republic  505
DR–21.	
Special National Intelligence Estimate1
 
Washington, April 26, 1960.
SNIE 86.2-60
THE OUTLOOK FOR THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
THE PROBLEM
To estimate political prospects in the Dominican Republic in the 
light of recent developments.
THE ESTIMATE
The Trujillo Regime
1. In our last estimate dealing with the Dominican Republic (SNIE 
80/1–59, 29 December 1959, paragraphs 7, 53–60) we stated that the 
­30-­year Trujillo dictatorship was in trouble, but concluded that it prob-
ably would remain in power through 1960. Since then anti-Trujillo 
sentiment has gathered momentum and the regime’s prospects have 
materially declined. We cannot predict the time or the circumstances 
in which the regime would be likely to come to an end, but this could 
happen before the end of the year.
2. A notable change in the country’s political atmosphere has 
developed since the wholesale arrests in January, in which members of 
almost every prominent Dominican family were seized, in many cases 
with great brutality, and subjected to heavy fines and jail sentences. 
Drastic action may in fact have been necessary to break what appears to 
have been an extensive revolutionary conspiracy; precise information as 
to how far plotting to overthrow Trujillo had proceeded is still lacking. 
However, the magnitude and severity of the government’s crackdown 
revealed the regime’s nervousness, made it more intolerable to leading 
elements in Dominican society, and alienated the Catholic Church. The 
latter is now Trujillo’s most outspoken opponent inside the country.
3. Continuing arrests and new trials of alleged plotters suggest that 
public unrest is spreading. Within the armed services, which remain 
the mainstay of the regime, a few new signs of rivalry and dissension 
have appeared; six army officers have been imprisoned and an air force 
officer is the latest in a series of defectors. The arrest of close relatives 
1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE files. Secret. According to a note on the 
cover sheet the following organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: 
the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the 
Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. The U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this 
estimate on April 26, 1960.
