160 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI not to be nuclear armed) on a wide variety of aircraft, thus increasing the threat to the United States. Others believe that the primary consideration is protecting U.S. programs, not constraining Soviet ones. While NTM can distinguish physical features of different cruise missiles, it is not an effective means of determining whether those cruise missiles carry nuclear or conventional warheads. There may be operational penalties from designing future conventional cruise missiles such that they are physically distinguishable. In addition, weapons carried internally in a bomber weapons bay cannot be seen by NTM. Finally, the U.S. may find the requirement to display systems to NTM onerous from a operational, security or logistics standpoint. Options—ALCM Distinguishability. The following options exist: — Option 1—Reconsider our basic position on ALCM distinguishability and agree to treat all cruise missiles over a specified range (1500 kilometers) as nuclear armed. — Option 2—Reaffirm our existing approach to ALCM distinguishability, accepting the drawbacks indicated above as the necessary price for avoiding constraints on conventional cruise missiles. — Option 3—Reconsider our existing approach. Undertake a study of alternatives. If (as is probable) this study is not complete when negotiations resume, inform the Soviets that we have the ALCM distinguishability issue under review. Tab B Paper Prepared by the Policy Coordinating Committee4 Washington, May 27, 1989 START 03F NSR 14 START Review Paper Three—Nondeployed Missiles Purpose. To review options for limiting nondeployed ballistic missiles under START. Background. In 1982, President Reagan decided to limit nondeployed ballistic missiles (NDM) in START, in order to deal with one of the critical flaws of the SALT II Treaty—­its failure to control missiles which could be used for refire, force reconstitution, and ballistic missile breakout. The decision also attempted to force the Soviets to destroy ballistic missiles taken out of operational service. Until 1988 the U.S. 4 Secret. All blank underscores are in the original.
