60ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1955ŌĆō1957, Volume III, Supplement
Chinese students in this country. These allegations as to restrictions on 
Chinese in this country were balderdash. It was only propaganda, since 
the Chinese students actually are free to move about in this country and 
to leave the U.S. if they wish. We do not want any Communist sympa┬Ł
thizers here as permanent residents. They are more than welcome to go 
to the mainland if they want to.
Ambassador Koo mentioned the Chinese Embassy statement of 
last week which pointed out that the great majority of Chinese stu┬Ł
dents in this country have been assisted and protected by the Chinese 
┬ŁGovernment and its Embassy and Consulates in this country and that 
the students are loyal to their Government and still look to if for rep┬Ł
resentation of their interests. They give their allegiance to the Chinese 
Government and not to the Chinese Communists. It is presumptuous 
deception for the Chinese Communists to pretend that Chinese in 
this country should look to the Communist regime for protection and 
representation.
Mr. Robertson said we had noted the Chinese Embassy statement 
and had sent it to Ambassador Johnson. He considered it a very good 
statement. He remarked that we know that the Chinese in this coun┬Ł
try, with very few exceptions, maintain their fidelity to the Chinese 
Government. We are aware that the Chinese Government has helped 
many of them with scholarships, travel arrangements and so on, and 
that practically all of them came to this country on Chinese Nationalist 
passports. Mr. Robertson remarked that there is no such thing as an exit 
visa in this country and Wang Ping-┬ŁnanŌĆÖs allegations at Geneva that 
ŌĆ£exit visasŌĆØ had been denied was nonsense.
Ambassador Koo said that he hoped the American Government 
would never admit even tacitly any degree of Communist jurisdiction 
over the general body of Chinese students and other nationals in this 
country.
Mr. Robertson said the Ambassador need have no fear on this score. 
The Communists would not be allowed to establish any contact except 
with those who of their own volition stated that they wanted to go back 
to the mainland.
Mr. Robertson mentioned that those few students who wanted to go 
back might have some difficulty in paying for their passage. The United 
States Government did not propose to pay their way back to Communist 
territory. However, we were not standing in the way. Anyone who wants 
to go to a Communist country can goŌĆö┬Łthe sooner the better.
Ambassador Koo mentioned that Mr. Robertson had informed 
Minister Tan on July 29 that some third party such as India or Great 
Britain might be designated to assist the Chinese students who want to 
return to the mainland.
