Afghanistan
289
seemed to be on good terms with the Soviets and he could point out
to them that they are about to lose a friend.
Aaron: What would we want to get them to do?
Brzezinski: We could talk to them along these lines, and convey to
them that there would be far-reaching implications for our relationship.
This could be similar to the problem that President Johnson faced as
a result of the invasion of Czechoslovakia. It completely ruled out for
a long period of time any progress in arms limitations. I am not sure
how we want to communicate this. Harold Brown is going to China
and we do not want to make a threat out of that to the Soviets but
they should have to think about the US-Chinese relationship.14
Vice President: What do we think that the Soviets have decided
to do?
Vance: I think they made a decision during the Pavlovsky visit that
they had to act or lose out in Afghanistan. They doubt the prospects
for SALT anyways; thus, they are willing to take larger risks.
Brzezinski: We also have to keep in mind the Soviet sponsorship
of aggression in Cambodia and perhaps Angola and now Afghani-
stan—and we may also encounter increasing bad Soviet behavior in
Iran. This is all going to result in us receiving intense domestic pressure
from both the right and the left. We have to get this across to the
Soviets most forcefully.
Vance: Your staff has a paper I’ve sent over on the subject.
Brzezinski: Maybe the Soviets haven’t thought all of this through.
There is an aging leadership there and they may not have drawn all
of the conclusions.
Newsom: Could we send somebody to Yugoslavia and Romania—
perhaps also to Poland—for “political discussions?”
Brzezinski: No, we should talk to the Soviets.
Vice President: Brezhnev has sent us a very sweet message on SALT
but a very bad one on Iran. Maybe they think we are so desperate for
SALT . . .
Brown: The Administration is going to go ahead on the SALT but
the Soviets may underestimate the sense of national revulsion.
Aaron: The President will have to decide whether to push SALT.
Maybe we should invoke Senator Byrd.
Brzezinski: Perhaps we should send a Hot Line message to Brezh-
nev. Maybe they would agree to pull out after overthrowing Amin. The
President is going to be very loath to give up on his non-proliferation
14 See Documents 149 and 150.
