Covert and Overt Operations Justice John Harmon* JCS John Pustay DCI Frank Carlucci ICA Charles Bray* Robert T. Curran* * Not present for final item. ** Present only for last two items. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. Travel to Iran. The Department of State proposed guidance for approval of certain categories of travel to Iran. It was agreed that this issue needed additional work before presenting it to the President. A working group of State, Justice, Treasury and Lloyd Cutler’s office will examine the issue.2 (U) 2. Iranian Students.3 The Department of State summarized the present situation. As of December, 1979, there were approximately 66,000+ Iranian students in the U.S. of which 56,000+ were registered. The 10,000+ who were not registered are in violation of the law; they are being pursued and will be deported. Of those registered, 6,700 were found to be out-of-status and deportation proceedings have been initiated. Approximately 300 have departed to date. Approximately 42,000 students are in status and in good standing, with visas entitling them to remain in the U.S. for the duration of their studies. They are not a problem. However, there are about 7,000 Iranian students who were granted visas with a specific departure date simply because that was the type of visa being granted at the time. These students now face deportation as their visas expire, terminating their course of study in the middle of a degree program or even in the midst of exams. These students are no different politically or otherwise than the 42,000 who can remain, but they are caught in a technicality. We have been receiving numerous calls from university presidents around the country 2 Subsequent to the meeting, the Department of State prepared a “Scorecard of U.S. Passports to Iran,” June 4, and, in consultation with the Department of Justice and Cutler, also prepared an action memorandum on travel to Iran, June 9. (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 13) On June 11, Muskie sent Cutler a proposed memorandum to the President, which suggested that the Department approve travel requests on a case-by-case basis and that the Treasury make voluntary its requirement for notification of travel by journalists. (Ibid.) 3 The discussion was based on a June 2 memorandum from Saunders, Owen, and Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs Barbara Watson to Newsom, and its attached paper, “Inter-Agency Assessment: Iranian Students in the United States.” (Ibid.)
