International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 439 out—France twice. As the respected German Handelsblatt wrote yesterday, “An old worn out dress has been ironed again.”3 IV. Recommended U.S. Reactions 1. At this stage, the Bremen agreement is very general; its implications for the U.S. and the world economy cannot be assessed until its further details are worked out. 2. Although there are some political disadvantages for the United States, we should not take a negative attitude on general principle, and indeed should support the broad objectives of European economic integrations, including monetary cooperation. 3. When this subject arises in meetings with your Summit counterparts, especially Schmidt, Giscard, and Callaghan, you should indicate: (i) we have historically supported moves toward European integration; (ii) we cannot render a final judgment on EMS until the specific features have been worked out; and (iii) we do have a major interest in seeing that certain broad principles are incorporated and certain dangers avoided. A. We have an obvious interest in what the system implies for the relationship of the dollar to the basket of European currencies in the system. The system should not be designed or operated in ways that reduce the flexibility of the dollar. B. Given the current depressed state of the European economy, we think that over the next several years it will be especially important that the system not exert a contractionary force. C. The specific technical choices made in the design of the system will inevitably have important repercussions for the dollar and for U.S. economic interests. For that reason, you should urge that the United States be kept closely informed at all stages of the technical discussions, so that we can make our views known before arrangements are frozen. 4. Finally, it is critical that discussion of the Monetary System not distract us from recognizing the central requirement in Europe today: a concerted policy to expand the European economy especially in the strong countries like Germany, Switzerland, and Benelux. It would be a tragedy if EMS removed attention from the necessary expansionary measures which must be taken. 3 Telegram 12607 from Bonn, July 10, reported on the Handelsblatt editorial with this statement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780282–0589)
