534  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
President Ponce commented that the economies of Latin America, 
which are based on production of raw materials, suffer greatly when 
prices of these materials go down. He reiterated his proposal that a 
special Inter-American conference be called to deal with this type of 
problem. He felt that such a conference should be in preparation for 
the 11th Inter-American Conference, so that subjects discussed at the 
latter would be clear and would have been given a lot of prior thought. 
He felt that Ministers of Economy should attend this preparatory con-
ference, that it should be held as soon as possible, and that it should 
discuss matters of the type that Vice President Nixon had observed on 
his trip so far.
Vice President Nixon endorsed President Ponce’s proposal, but 
stressed the desirability of the conference being on an informal basis - 
that it be neither too rigid nor too dramatic. He felt that it could be of 
considerable help in solving problems of the hemisphere.
President Ponce accepted Vice President Nixon’s suggestion con-
cerning the informal nature of the Conference, saying that what he had 
in mind was a “round table” type of meeting. He thought that such a 
conference should try to find long-range solutions for economic and 
social problems. For example, he thought that it might try to do some-
thing about helping to create a middle class in Ecuador, which the 
country badly needs and which would also benefit the U.S. by provid-
ing it with more customers.
Vice President Nixon reiterated the importance of solving Latin 
America’s economic problems, which in turn would make it easier to 
deal with political problems. He said the leaders in the hemisphere 
must redouble their efforts along these lines.
EC–6.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Ecuador (Ravndal) to 
the Department of State1
Quito, May 10, 1958.
616. Minister Economics2 presented Vice President Nixon memo3 
requesting:
1. Elimination requirement that American firms get first priority 
PL 480 funds thus releasing more money Ecuadorean enterprises;
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–NI/5–1058. Priority.
2 Federico Intriago Arrata.
3 Text enclosed with despatch 748 from Quito, May 20, 1958. (033.1100–NI/5–2058)
