Yugoslavia Josip Vrhovec; FEC Vice President Dr. Ivo Margan; and (former) Ambassador Dimce Belovski. Although besieged with the presence of almost 100 high level foreign delegations in Belgrade for the funeral, President Kolisevski alloted an hour to the meeting, which was marked by an extremely friendly and open atmosphere. This memorandum has been cleared by the Vice President’s staff. 3. Subjects covered, on the U.S. side: Great respect and admiration for President Tito and sorrow at his passing; confidence in Yugoslavia’s future; U.S. support for the independence, sovereignty and unity of Yugoslavia, and readiness to assist Yugoslavia if asked; U.S. concern over our hostages in Tehran; U.S. determination to curb anti-Yugoslav terrorism; and our wish to pursue detente but deep concern over the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. 4. Subjects covered by the Yugoslavs: Genuine appreciation for the expressions of concern from President Carter and the American people during President Tito’s illness; approval of the current excellent state of bilateral relations; a desire to accomplish more in the international struggle against terrorism; an assertion that the Tehran hostage situation will be raised by Foreign Secretary Vrhovec during a planned meeting in Belgrade with Iranian Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh;3 apprehension over the deteriorating international situation, especially in Soviet-U.S. relations; and the desire somehow to re-engage the Non- Aligned Movement in putting detente back on the rails. End summary. 5. President Kolisevski opened the meeting by saying that he had just read a message reporting what the President had said about President Tito prior to the Vice President’s departure from Washington.4 This is very much appreciated. The Vice President stated that he had been asked by President Carter to convey the deep regret and sorrow of the entire American people at the passing of President Tito, one of the great leaders of this generation and true hero. The Vice President said he had come to Belgrade to represent the President and the American people, to memorialize a great human being. This may be a time of sadness, but “the victory of Tito’s life stands as an example for us all.” 6. The Vice President observed that his personal sorrow is all the greater because of having met President Tito, first in 1977 when the Vice President was the first visitor of this administration to Yugoslavia. Also remembered vividly is his meeting in 1978 in Washington when President Tito last visited the U.S. 7. President Kolisevski wanted the Vice President to know how much the words of friendship and support by President Carter in the
