Afghanistan
729
the limited Soviet troop contingent would be withdrawn from the
territory of Afghanistan. The Soviet Union had stated that on the very
first day of its action, and the U.S. Government had the text of the
relevant Soviet statement. He would repeat that statement today and
add that there was no need for the Soviet Union to say anything else
in clarification. There had been no zigzags in Soviet policy. If anyone
on the Western side believed that the Soviet Union would comply with
the wishes expressed in several capitals, and withdraw its forces as a
precondition for a political settlement in Afghanistan, he would have
to tell the Secretary very frankly that those who had such expectations
were very poorly informed of the actual situation. They had their heads
in the clouds and were engaging in fantasy and unrealistic polemics.
Nevertheless, statements continue to be made, calling upon the
Soviet Union to withdraw its forces. That is totally ruled out. He would
repeat that as soon as aggression against Afghanistan from the territory
of Pakistan and to a lesser extent from that of Iran was halted, the
Soviet troop contingent would be withdrawn. He was availing himself
of the opportunity to clarify Soviet policy for the Secretary.
Gromyko said that the Secretary might want to ask the question
(and he had encountered such questions in his talks with others): was
it really true that there was a massive invasion into Afghanistan from
the territory of Pakistan or Iran for the purpose of fighting against the
present Afghan regime? He would ask the Secretary to look into this
matter more thoroughly. He would suggest that he ask President Carter
and Zia ul-Haq, President of Pakistan, that he ask if there are dozens
of camps on the territory of Pakistan where forces are being assembled,
trained and equipped, and whether incursions into the territory of
Afghanistan are taking place. Even President Carter had recently said
publicly: “Yes, we do assist those forces and will continue to assist
them.” He had called this assistance, but in fact it was a struggle against
the regime in Afghanistan. President Zia had confirmed this and said
that he was aware that this was taking place, but that he could do
nothing to stop it. It was strange, indeed, that the President of Pakistan
cannot stop all this, although it was taking place on the territory of
his country; that he was unable to put his house in order. Gromyko
wondered if the Soviet Union should offer its assistance to Zia to
accomplish that purpose. However, he had not heard Zia make such
a request of anyone. As for the domestic affairs of Afghanistan, one
thing had to be said firmly: questions of the internal leadership of
Afghanistan were internal affairs of that country and could only be
resolved by the Afghans themselves. No one had the right to interfere
in these matters. The President of Pakistan had said that he did not
wish to negotiate with the President of Afghanistan, Babrak Karmal.
Gromyko wondered whether Zia had asked himself the question of
