436
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ble, but highly dependent on factors outside GOH control. Deteriorat-
ing economic conditions might force Hungary to trim radically its
relatively liberal internal policies. Similar concern re dissidence in
Czechoslovakia is prevalent, but I doubt to same degree as concern re
Polish situation.
(D) Challenge to Soviet position in EE: It has long been recognized
as an integral part of USG EE policy that in context of gradually increas-
ing independence of these states, U.S. policy must be particularly cir-
cumspect in order that Moscow’s leadership does not become so
alarmed as to lead to a destabilization as happened in 1956. Thus, U.S.
policy must be cautious and conditioned by Budapest’s own estimate
of the outer limits of Soviet tolerance of its activities.
3. Issues, objectives and courses of action: As S/P suggests in its
trends paper, I assume that there will be substantial forward momen-
tum in U.S. relations with Soviet Union. If there is, we should be able
to take advantage of developing opportunities to resolve our three
main problems, all of which require Department decision: (a) Crown,
(b) USG property, and (c) MFN. Progress on these issues would have
favorable impact on general course of U.S.-Hungarian relations.
(A) Crown: For over a year now, Hungarians have made known
their growing expectation that Crown would soon be returned, temper-
ing their approaches with tacit understanding that 1976 was an election
year. I believe that USG should make a decision now to return the
Crown to Hungary and that we should convey this decision to Hungari-
ans in carefully conditioned language which would leave us an escape
route in event of breakdown in East-West detente or some other unex-
pected but equally untoward event. Retention of Crown is now more
of an obstacle than an asset in U.S.–GOH relations and threatens to
retard their further development.
(B) Property: Although GOH has indicated a willingness to under-
take serious discussions to resolve property problem,6 USG has not
been able to move forward with negotiation proposals because FBO
failed to respond favorably to repeated Embassy requests for an assess-
ment of property’s value. I believe it is essential to develop a coordi-
nated USG position, one clearly designed to produce concrete results
and based on a professional estimate of property values and many
options open to us for settling our present and future needs. I am
convinced that a favorable approach on Crown, as suggested above,
6 The U.S. Government owned several buildings in Budapest in excess of its needs
and sought to sell them to the Hungarian Government while building modern office
space for its staff. Washington also requested payment for property expropriated by the
Hungarian Government.
