492
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
might be out in a couple of weeks, but some slippages are beginning
to develop and it might stretch out. For the moment, he is assuming
we will get the hostages out. If we do, what should our relationship
with Iran be? He said in his own view he thought several things ought
to happen. First, we ought to begin with a lifting of the freeze on assets
and even that should begin in the overseas branches of American banks.
We would allow that to proceed and then perhaps have a joint US-
Iran commission unwind the remaining economic and assets problems.
Second, we might then think of sending some military spare parts to
them. Third, we would have to look at the whole economic relationship
beyond that. It is in our interest to see that their oil operations continue.
And, therefore, in a post-hostage situation, we probably ought to do
something to help them with the resumption of drilling. And we might
also wish to do something in technical assistance in agriculture. But,
he said, as far as he is concerned, he would recommend that we take
all our people out because he did not think that unless things changed
seriously in the country, it would be safe to keep them there.
Francois-Poncet said that he would like to mention to the Secretary
some aspects of his conversation with Ghotbzadeh.2 He said he had
given me the rundown on the conversation for use by my guest,3 but
that there were several other things which occurred which might be
of interest to the Secretary. Francois-Poncet said that he had begun
with Ghotbzadeh by making a very strong pitch on getting rid of the
hostages as a problem and freeing them in order that a more balanced
relationship could be built with all the countries of the West. He assured
Ghotbzadeh that until that happened, there would not be any relation-
ship. They then went on to discuss the situation in the surrounding
area and Ghotbzadeh said that he was very worried about what the
Soviets were up to. He said his two greatest fears were that with
Soviet help, the Tudeh Party was making headway and that the Soviets
intended to make Baluchistan into a separate state. He then went on
to say that Iran was determined to help get the Soviets out of Afghani-
stan and is already funding an effort to make Afghanistan a real hell
for the Soviets. He said that there could be no reprisal that will stop
Iran from doing this. On the other hand, they don’t exclude some
moves into the north by the Soviets. He apparently talked about pulling
back, fighting separately in the villages and in the end saying Iran will
be the same kind of hell for them that Afghanistan is.
2 Ghotbzadeh was in Paris February 15–19.
3 Presumably the “guest” is a reference to Vance.
