3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
871
its possession. The sides should be striving to protect the Convention,
he said, but instead the U.S. was discrediting it by raising Sverdlovsk.
This understandably caused indignation on the Soviet side. He won-
dered how the U.S. would have reacted if the Soviet Union had in-
voked the BW Convention and demanded information on the outbreak
of Legionnaire’s disease in the U.S.
6. Continuing, Korniyenko noted that the U.S. had proposed con-
sultations of the sort conducted under SALT. But in SALT, he said,
there was a special commission for discussing questions which might
arise (implying, without saying it, that there is no such body under the
BW Convention). Moreover, the U.S. underlined its desire for confiden-
tiality, yet at the same time was spreading information around the
world about the USSR’s suspected violation of the BW Convention. The
two sides began to discuss the issue, yet immediately the American
side began to spread stories that it was not convinced by the USSR’s
statements.
7. Summing up, Korniyenko said that, from the Soviet perspective,
it was clear that the U.S. had chosen to create a fuss over Sverdlovsk as
yet another way of increasing tensions and another attempt to damage
US-Soviet relations.
8. In response, Charge said he would attempt once more, briefly, to
clarify the U.S. position, since Korniyenko’s remarks indicated con-
tinued serious misunderstanding of the U.S. position. It was precisely
the great concern that was bound to arise and did arise in the U.S., in
Congress and elsewhere, when the reports became known about the
event in Sverdlovsk, that made it essential for the sides, if they wished
to “protect” the BW Convention, to deal with the questions that had
arisen concerning Sverdlovsk. Charge stressed that U.S. had not ac-
cused the Soviet Union of a violation. The U.S. was simply asking for
information pursuant to Article V of the BW Convention, and felt the
best way to exchange information would be through bilateral meetings
of experts. The U.S. cannot accept the explanations provided thus far by
the Soviet side, because the information available to us points to inhala-
tion anthrax rather than a form of the disease transmitted by contami-
nated meat. If the Soviet Union, as Korniyenko suggested, raised Le-
gionnaire’s disease with the U.S., the U.S. would have invited Soviet
experts to consult with U.S. disease control specialists.
9. Korniyenko replied that there would not have arisen any public
concern if the U.S. Government had not taken the initiative after the
first of the year to activate the issue in the press and in Congress. After
all, the subject was not unknown prior to the first of the year; the local
newspapers in Sverdlovsk had published warnings to the population
at the time. It seemed to Moscow that the American authorities had de-
cided in January to worsen the atmosphere between the U.S. and USSR
