Afghanistan
651
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State5
Washington, undated
ELEMENTS
1.
Prompt
withdrawal
of
all
Soviet
military
forces
from
Afghanistan.
2. An Afghan government acceptable to the Afghan people.
3. No interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by its neigh-
bors or any other state.6
4. Non-alignment in Afghanistan’s foreign policy and permanent
neutrality for Afghanistan, including the obligation to refrain from
entering into any military alliance, and to refrain from allowing any
state to have military forces or facilities in its territory except by agree-
ment of the guarantors.
5. Guarantees by Afghanistan’s neighbors and other interested
states of permanent neutrality for Afghanistan and of non-interference
in its internal affairs.
6. Arrangements to apply only to Afghanistan and not to affect
the sovereign rights of other countries.
(This is seen as a responsive or counter-punching point).
5 Secret; Sensitive. Lake and Tarnoff in their March 20 covering memorandum to
Vance noted that an earlier version of this paper, which was attached at Tab B to their
memorandum and seen by the President, omitted the clause at the end of item 4: “except
by agreement of the guarantors.” They explained “this was originally designed to permit
foreign advisors and peacekeeping forces, on a case-by-case basis, but only by collective
agreement. With the omission of the concept of ‘guarantors,’ L believes this clause serves
no purpose and that any deployment of peacekeeping forces could be dealt with through
over-riding provisions of the UN Charter.” An amended version of these elements was
sent in telegram 88719, April 4, to all NATO capitals and Tokyo. In relaying the elements,
the Department wanted to ensure that posts could “respond coherently” in the effort
to find an “acceptable political solution in Afghanistan.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D880029–1390)
6 If a question is raised as to the geographical scope of Afghanistan, we would refer
to the Durand Line as the international boundary. [Footnote is in the original.]
