LXXVI  Summaries of Compilations
Nicaragua
U.S. Relations With Nicaragua
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
U.S. relations with Nicaragua during the final years of the Eisenhower 
administration were untainted by major differences between the two 
states. While concern in both countries about invasions of Nicaragua and 
attempts to overthrow the Somoza government remained a constant, 
none of the several attempts succeeded or even raised the real possibility 
of revolution.
The most important event in relations between the United States and 
Nicaragua took place in 1958 when Milton Eisenhower visited Managua, 
July 21–24. Coming after Vice President Nixon’s stormy visit to Latin 
America, April 27–May 15, and in the face of concern that the President’s 
brother might encounter protests, the Embassy in Managua reported that 
it could protect Milton Eisenhower from similar indignities. (NI–7) The 
visit proved to be highly successful, as Milton Eisenhower discussed var-
ious issues with President Somoza and members of his government and 
met with leaders of the opposition political parties. (NI–8) The Embassy 
in Managua speculated that part of the reason for this success stemmed 
from Somoza’s genuine concern about accusations that he was merely 
another dictator. In a followup report in September, Ambassador Whelan 
concluded that everyone was satisfied with the visit which resulted in 
“much good” for the United States (NI–9)
By 1959, the U.S. Government had become sufficiently concerned 
about attempts to overthrow the Somoza government or assassinate its 
President that it asked the Embassy in Managua for an assessment of the 
climate for a deal between the President and the “responsible opposition.” 
(NI–15) While the Embassy’s response indicated that this was an unlikely 
prospect, the Department of State continued to urge the Government of 
Nicaragua to reach an agreement with opposition elements. The Embassy 
in turn stressed that the only respectable opposition represented only a 
very small part of the anti-­government parties. (NI–17)
At the end of 1960, the Government of Nicaragua began to share 
the concern of the United States, but its worries were about Communist-­
backed activities and intervention in its affairs sponsored by Cuba. This 
led to a request for U.S. assistance. On November 17, James Hagerty, 
President Eisenhower’s press secretary, announced on behalf of the 
President that air and surface units of the U.S. Navy had assumed posi-
tions off the coast of Nicaragua where they could assist the local gov-
ernment against such intervention. (NI–26)
