Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 insulate economic development from politics. The less developed countries will react negatively. For example, countries that despise the regime in Chile nonetheless opposed our efforts to use the Inter- American Development Bank to bring pressure on the Chilean government. Finally there is a serious conflict of values. Do we deprive people of jobs and economic progress because their governments suppress human rights?10 We need time to sort these issues out. I will be sending you a PRM for your signature next week on the overall subject of human rights.11 I believe Administration witnesses should be instructed to inform the Congress that you have directed an urgent study of actions we can take in the field of human rights and ask for time before having to take a position on how and whether various assistance instruments might be employed by this Administration. On a separate point, your desire for a modest increase in US economic assistance is running into problems on the Hill. You may want to use your Cabinet and Leadership meetings next week to emphasize your support of this program. Frank Moore supports this idea. 4. Reactions Human Rights. Bukovsky’s courtesy call at the White House received front-page and prominent inside-page coverage overseas.12 Accounts in West European newspapers carefully detailed that photographs were permitted only with Mr. Mondale and that you limited your time to the Soviet dissident to ten minutes. In Paris, Le Figaro referred to the “skillful protocol adopted” which, it said, was “obviously intended to humor Moscow.” France-Soir quoted the President as telling Bukovsky that he would defend human rights “not only in the USSR but in the whole world.” The Times of London reported that “the impact of the occasion was indisputably diluted, doubtless by direct Presidential order.” Coverage in the Italian press appeared to be somewhat more dramatic than elsewhere but did not vary much in substance from treatment in other European countries. Notwithstanding the Bukovsky visit, the foreign press played the human rights issue as definitely broadened in focus beyond the Soviet Union. It is not clear where this feeling comes from, since, in fact nearly 10 The President wrote in the left-hand margin above this paragraph: “We should try to address in UN speech—see campaign speeches” and drew an arrow from this statement to the paragraph.
