January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1225 them. We would not say that we are putting things off, and if we can produce for the Palestinians an SGA and the withdrawal of the military government and the civilian administration, with some other issues left over, then there will be a respectable package. The President said he thinks that we should keep the Gaza-first idea alive. In private discussions, we should say that we think it should be kept alive. But it is also clear that early public revelation would lead to the conclusion that we are abandoning free elections, as we discussed when Begin was here. Ambassador Linowitz asked when he should surface the idea. The President said before the end of the 10-day trip. Ambassador Linowitz said he was afraid the others would grab at it, and not negotiate seriously on the rest. The President said that it should be surfaced at the end of the 10 days, before Ambassador Linowitz leaves to come home. There is no secret that the idea has been discussed. Ambassador Linowitz said that, however, we have not said how we feel about the idea. It is Sadat’s position, and is attractive. Weizman, Peres, and Sharon (?) like it. The President said that Dayan does, too. The Ambassador agreed. He thought he would go there for 10 days, then come home and report, and then go out again. The President said he wanted to leave a thought in Ambassador Linowitz’s mind. If it would not work out completely on the West Bank—and the President was sure this was the case—therefore we could start now on the circumstances under which we should go to Gaza-first. If we delay that to the second round of negotiations, it would not be possible for the governments to consider it seriously in the time remaining. Ambassador Linowitz said that we will discuss it, and he will do it. The President said that, on the authority for the SGA, he understands that the only difference is on the definition of security. Ambassador Linowitz said no. The President said he wasn’t talking about a constitution, or the number of people to be on the SGA. He means that the only issue of significance is security. Is it deciding on the role of the police, antiterrorism, and the army? Or is it just internal defense? Or is it internal defense and anti-terrorism? Ambassador Linowitz said that also there is the question of what is wholly within the SGA’s authority. First, there are questions like international communication and financial issues; there are four or five issues to be resolved, to get from 18 to 22 or so. Second, on the question
