196 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 70. Memorandum from the Secretary of State’s Special Adviser on Soviet Affairs (Shulman) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, October 3, 1979 SUBJECT Afghanistan: Intelligence and Policy Our confrontation with the Soviets over Cuba arose because of the premature release of intelligence into a highly charged, domestic political atmosphere. While Afghanistan is not Cuba, both countries receive substantial Soviet military assistance. In Afghanistan, even more than in Cuba, Soviet policy is dictated by security concerns and, therefore, is less susceptible to arguments that it should be altered for the good of US-Soviet relations. Of immediate importance, however, is the fact that in both cases the findings of the Intelligence Community can have a serious effect upon our relations with the Soviets. The events of the last two weeks provide a graphic illustration. On September 16–17, Amin’s takeover in Kabul coincided with intelligence reports that a Soviet airborne division designated for service in Afghanistan was in heightened readiness.2 The intelligence implied a threat of Soviet intervention and created a perceived need for a US response. In rapid order, we launched a campaign of high level press backgrounders, spokesman’s statements and diplomatic demarches which noted “increased Soviet military activity north of the Oxus” and repeated US opposition to Soviet intervention.3 Although the Intelligence Community admitted it had no direct evidence linking the unit’s activity with the Afghan power struggle, we acted because we could not take a chance that the Soviets might move. Since the airborne unit was not deployed and now has apparently stood down, it might be argued that our action may have done some 1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262, Box 2, 1979 ES Sensitive, Oct 1 thru 16. Secret; Nodis. 2 See Document 67. 3 See, for example, Harold Saunders’s September 29 statement before the Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the House Foreign Affairs Committee on the situation in Afghanistan in the Department of State Bulletin, October 1979, pp. 53–54. See also the Department of State Bulletin, December 1979, p. 43, which reprinted a Department statement to the news media, October 29, that “we are opposed to intervention by any country in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.” The reference to a diplomatic démarche is likely to instructions in telegram 250400 to multiple posts, September 23, to inform host governments of “disturbing signs of increased Soviet military activity north of the USSR-Afghanistan border.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790435–0449)
