Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1085
 Last week in Geneva, Amb. Bartholomew gave you a proposal 
designed cut through our differences and settle this. Your need for 
encapsulation of RV telemetry on existing and future missiles, and our 
need for encryption of payloads on former and retired types are both 
accommodated in a fair and balanced way.
 This is a political solution to an issue that has dragged on for over 
a year. You can do what you need, we do what we need, and it is equal 
for the two sides.
 Can we put this behind us on this basis?
40% rule for counting RVs on future types
The 40% rule attributes a minimum number of RVs to future mis-
sile types, so that at least 40% of the throw weight of future missile 
types is RV weight. The basic rule was agreed in Houston, but several 
differences remain.
Soviet position:
— The rule does not apply to missiles of a fundamentally new 
design.
— The rule does not apply to single-RV missiles.
New US position presented in Geneva:
— We gave them a package that would split our differences over 
treatment of fundamentally new designs, impose a quota of 2 on such 
new designs over the next 15 years, and apply the rule to single-RV 
missiles.
Points to make:
 One of the most important results of Houston was agreement on 
the 40% rule for attributing warheads to new types of missiles.
 In Geneva last week Amb. Bartholomew made a package pro-
posal to resolve all of our remaining differences concerning the 40% 
rule, including the treatment of unconventional designs.
 The package would apply the 40% rule to single RV missiles. The 
language we agreed to in Houston would not make any distinction 
between single-RV and MIRV missiles. We should stick to the Houston 
solution.
 Can we settle this on the basis of the package we presented in 
Geneva?
Heavy bombers and ALCMs
 Last week in Geneva the number of heavy bomber and ALCM 
issues was reduced from over 50 to a dozen. We need to settle them all 
right now if the treaty is to be ready to sign this month. The US experts 
have what they need to wrap these up; if yours have the flexibility they 
need we will be able to put these important issues behind us.
