September 1953–December 1954
857
350.
Letter From the First Secretary of Embassy in Iran
(Melbourne) to the Officer in Charge of Iranian Affairs,
Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of
Near Eastern, South Asian and African Affairs (Stutesman)1
Tehran, November 30, 1953.
Dear John:
The ideas that you clearly expressed in your letter of November 6
have, as you may imagine, been upon our minds as well.2 It is indeed a
knotty question as to how far our responsibility goes in Iranian internal
affairs and the extent to which we should interfere in them. While it is
true we have become involved in Iranian internal affairs to a great ex-
tent and cannot pull out of them entirely, it does seem that we should
resolve not to get into them any deeper and to withdraw at least par-
tially from what we may be doing on a tactical basis.
The peculiar environment of Iran and its propensity for sudden
changes would appear to justify as the most feasible general policy one
of exerting maximum pressures on vital issues and not in individual
tactical moves and intrigues which might destroy our usefulness and
waste our influence. To illustrate this, we do not think that we should
try to prescribe who should be in the Prime Minister’s Cabinet, since
we could not expect to understand the full ramifications of such ap-
pointments and the pressures upon a Prime Minister inducing him to
make them. However, if we felt required to do so, we could point out to
a Prime Minister (and that only so long as our Military, FOA and other
aid are being received) that he needed some men of stature and experi-
ence to give tone and capacity to his Cabinet, which under particular
circumstances it might not have. The important thing seems to us to be
that with the leverage we have through our aid we can employ a loose
rein on particulars and a tight one on basic policies.
Any attempt to build American directed organizations, no matter
how indirect the direction, within state institutions and outside, is
bound to be discovered and consequently suspected. Roger, for ex-
ample, can give you the details as to the difficulties we ran into with the
Shah through our support of the Workers’ Party and then of Maleki’s
Third Force because they were publicly anti-communist. It became
known to the Shah that we were giving the support, even at a time
when these organizations were critical of him. This served to encourage
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/11–3053. Top
Secret; Security Information.
2 Document 345.
