Human Rights
115
posal which seems to me a good one, that there be a second month-long
meeting every year of the UN Human Rights Commission, and that the
second meeting be held in New York. This would partially implement
two of the President’s proposals, and appears to be a good compromise
position that might gain acceptance. However there has been little inte-
gration of human rights objectives with other kinds of objectives for
this meeting.
9. International Financial Institutions—This has recently blossomed
into the issue of greatest concern. Basically what happened was that in
the House, the Administration, understandably unwilling to respond
to its first Congressional test by opposing a human rights initiative,
took a wishy-washy position. During the course of both Committee
markup and Floor debate, the Administration never expressed its op-
position to the Harkin language although it did support a rather convo-
luted compromise amendment which Chairman Reuss introduced and
pushed through Committee. The House took the very unusual step of
dropping the Committee’s proposed amendment and adopting substi-
tute language (Badillo-Harkin) by voice vote.
During the past week, a series of interagency meetings have been
held to develop a strategy in order to avoid a repetition of the House
defeat in the Senate. Senator Humphrey is a much more enthusiastic
supporter of the more flexible language than was Reuss. However, the
Administration has weakened its position by a series of changes in po-
sition of which Humphrey’s staff (which favors the stricter language) is
fully aware. The amendment was unanimously adopted in Committee,
but there is consensus among all departmental Congressional liaison
offices and friendly Hill staff, that success in the Senate will depend on
a vigorous Administration lobbying effort and clear opposition—such
as was expressed by the President in last week’s press conference—to
the Harkin approach.15 So far, no Administration representative has
made a compelling case, mustering the real arguments, in opposition to
the Harkin amendment. One problem has been that Derian really be-
lieves in the Harkin approach. However I think that’s now resolved.
If the Humphrey language succeeds on the Senate Floor, the cru-
cial fight will be in Conference. The key determinant will be who gets
appointed as House Conferees. My suggestion to Christopher, which
he likes, is that the Administration should make every effort to try to
get Congressman Fraser appointed. He is the most widely known and
meetings. Efforts are underway to try to consolidate those gains and to identify and
lineup possible supporters. This effort—to preserve what we just won—may undermine
efforts to move ahead on the proposals the President made in his UN speech.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield
Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 2–4/77)
15 See footnote 3, Document 37.
