162
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ment, production, stockpiling, acquisition or retention of CW agents
and munitions.” The Soviets “asked several questions for clarification,
but made no substantive comments.” (Telegram 5643 from the Mission
at Geneva, July 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770246–0173)
Fisher turned to the issue of verification in the third session. “Be-
cause of the deficiencies of non-intrusive methods” of verification, the
United States wanted a system that provided for “on-site” confirmation
that stockpiles had been destroyed and that facilities were not being
used for prohibited activities; for “fact-finding investigation” of sus-
pected treaty violations; and for the monitoring of the “production and
use of super-toxic chemicals for peaceful purposes.” Again, Likhatchev
made no substantive comments, but said he would pose questions at
the next session. (Telegram 5644 from the Mission at Geneva, July 11;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770246–0155)
In a brief opening statement at the fourth session, Likhatchev said
that the Soviet Union wanted “the prohibition of incapacitating chem-
ical warfare agents,” and asked whether the United States “now
wanted to expand” the scope of an agreement “to include incapaci-
tants.” Fisher replied that the United States “desires a comprehensive
treaty, which would not be limited to ‘the most dangerous, lethal
means of chemical warfare’.” (Telegram 5722 from the Mission at Ge-
neva, July 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770249–0022)
In their penultimate session, after another discussion about which
chemical incapacitants would be covered under a convention, Likhat-
chev turned to the issue of verification. The Soviet Union, he said, fa-
vored a system “based on national control (i.e. ‘self-policing’). This
could be supplemented by: “(A) information exchange among parties
on questions related to compliance, (B) cooperation and consultation
among states in situation where doubt about compliance exists, and ex-
amination by the UN Security Council of complaints of treaty viola-
tion.” He argued that the Soviet Union “believed that the very fact of a
state’s participation in a convention is sufficient guarantee that the state
will ensure compliance,” and “that the system of control should not vi-
olate the sovereign rights of states or lead to disclosure of military or
commercial secrets.” In a “preliminary response,” Fisher said that in-
ternational control would “check national control as both must have
the ability to satisfy ourselves that the agreement is being followed.”
(Telegram 5834 from the Mission at Geneva, July 15; National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770252–0767)
In their final meeting on July 18, the two sides repeated their posi-
tions on which chemical agents would be covered under an agreement
and on verification. The U.S. Delegation proposed that the talks resume
