3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
656
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
the Soviet Union might take which would not involve a back-down on
its part, and would not strain Soviet-Cuban relations, but which we
could note as relieving our concerns.
Dobrynin said he did not know what the Soviet reaction would be,
but that he would be glad to find out when the Secretary was ready to
have the matter transmitted officially.5
5 Vance transmitted these suggestions officially in his September 20 meeting with
Dobrynin, according to a summary of the meeting prepared by Vance. (Department of
State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Af-
fairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 10, Vance–Dobrynin,
9/20/79)
225.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of
Defense Brown, and the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
U.S. Strategy to Cuba
In our concern with the issue of Soviet combat forces in Cuba we
should not lose sight of the longer-term issue of U.S. strategy toward
Cuba itself. After Cy’s trip to Ecuador,2 before we confirmed the pres-
ence of the Soviet brigade, and more recently we have discussed U.S.
strategy to Cuba. We agreed that we ought to continue to seek to con-
tain Cuba as a source of violent revolutionary change. Specifically, we
agreed that our policy should be directed at the following four
objectives:
—To reduce and eventually remove Cuban military forces sta-
tioned abroad. (S)
—To undercut Cuba’s drive for Third World leadership. (S)
—To obtain Cuban restraint on the Puerto Rican issue. (S)
—To inhibit the Soviet buildup of Cuba’s armed force. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 61, Cuba: Soviet Brigade Additional Documents: 9/26/79–10/4/79.
Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Brackets are in the original.
2 Vance traveled to Ecuador August 9–12 for the inauguration of Ecuadorian Presi-
dent Jaime Roldo´s Aguilera.
