Human Rights
53
opment assistance is not given to any government engaged in a con-
sistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights unless it will directly benefit the needy people of the country.
Under Section 116(B), the Senate Foreign Relations Committee or the
House International Relations Committee may require information
from the AID Administrator demonstrating that assistance to a country
will directly benefit the needy people in that country.
7. To assist the AID Administrator in complying with these re-
quirements, the Department is seeking information on human rights
practices from posts in countries which receive development assist-
ance, but not security assistance (for which reports have already been
prepared). The studies based on this information will be used inter-
nally by the Department in providing guidance to AID.
Hartman
18.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 21, 1977
The President’s recent actions in the field of human rights, in par-
ticular the letter to Andrei Sakharov,2 have to be seen in the broader
context of President Carter’s well-known intention to try to make for-
eign policy reflect this nation’s commitment to the personal freedoms
that are the lifebeat of our form of government.
It should be clear that our purpose in making these statements is
not to embarrass any particular government or to espouse any indi-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Mathews Subject File, Box 7, Human Rights: 2–3/77. No classification marking. Brzez-
inski initialed and placed a check mark at the top of the page, indicating that he had seen
the memorandum.
2 Reference is to an exchange of letters between Sakharov and Carter. Sakharov’s
January 21 letter to the President and Carter’s February 5 response are scheduled for pub-
lication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VI, Soviet Union. They were published in
The New York Times on January 29 and February 18, 1977, respectively.
