1956 739 be useful in that it would demonstrate to world that two of us, China and US, determined settle disputes peacefully without resort ­hostilities; such declaration not only conforms to interests both peoples but also meets aspirations of people world. 45. Wang said we however faced with tremendous difficulties on our way to making such declaration. This is fact we have both recog­ nized. Might be asked, wherein lie our difficulties? 46. Wang said now difficulty we facing is that of US persistence insisting inclusion clause US called right self-­defense in Taiwan area in agreed announcement. His views regard this matter set forth over and over again and he not able enumerate how often he had set forth such views. Might be asked if we should not try overcome this difficulty. On their part, they always maintained position we should overcome this difficulty we facing and make progress in talks. We should not give up efforts advance talks in face difficulty we facing. Question remains is how shall we overcome this difficulty? 47. Wang said in his opinion, two essential points will help us in our efforts. First, each of us should show spirit conciliation; that is, make joint efforts. Without spirit mutual conclusion and mutual concil­ iation, no agreement can be reached. 48. Wang said I would recall that Oct 27 original draft their side contained three paras, first two quoting clauses UN Charter and last clause dealing with FonMin conference by two countries. Afterwards, I had advanced objections to certain respects this draft. After I expressed objections, their side made tremendous efforts and concessions and finally put forward amended draft of Dec. 1, which amended some of wording their original draft. This effort was made to meet my points. However, all US proposals—whether our proposal Oct 8, or draft Nov 10, or Jan 2 draft amendments—have persisted in inclusion so-­called self-­defense clause. 49. Wang said by comparing our respective drafts, can be seen which side making concessions and which side not making conces­ sions. That why he said we should make mutual concessions. If only one side required make concessions, we cannot make progress talks. 50. Wang said second point he wanted make, in order overcome our difficulty, was that both sides should first try find those points in common and thereby then overcome points of difference. It true on this matter that there some points common both sides and some points dif­ ference between us. 51. Wang said for instance, desirability making declaration renun­ ciation force is point common both us. Then both agreed that in making such declaration no prerequisite should be advanced for either side. Then it agreed we should not confuse step of making declaration with substance our disputes. We also agreed that making of such declaration
