368 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX demonstrated capacity to react to challenges with a shrewd mixture of toughness and flexibility makes it unlikely that the GDR will be unable to handle domestic problems in the future. Domestic tensions in the German Democratic Republic gradually subsided last year. The confrontations of 1976—with church authorities, critical intellectuals, the increasing number of GDR citizens submitting requests to emigrate to the West—were mitigated. The tactics used by the Honecker regime to suppress or disperse its critics at times aroused international censure (in October 1977, Amnesty International issued a report sharply critical of the GDR2). On the whole, however, the East German leadership could feel at year’s end that its international image had not suffered irremediable damage and that its relations with the West had remained on a more or less even keel. The basic question posed by the events of the past two years is: did 1977 see merely a temporary halting of a tendency toward increasing domestic instability, or did the reduction in tensions reflect the continuation of a long-term trend toward a more stable East Germany? While domestic instability in any of the East European Warsaw Pact states could hamper prospects for continued East-West detente, nowhere would the threat of serious international repercussions be greater than in the case of the GDR. The carefully crafted accommodations regarding Berlin and inter-German relations that made possible the Helsinki accords and have reduced international tensions in Central Europe to their lowest level since the early 1930s would be unlikely to survive a major upheaval in East Germany. Changing Perceptions of GDR Stability Several months after the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961, the consensus of Western observers was that the strength of the latent anti-regime forces in East Germany was on the increase. Nevertheless, the decade that followed turned out to be one of relative economic, political, and social stability in the GDR. By 1970—the last full year of Walter Ulbricht’s rule—US observers noted, in contrast to the earlier view, that the average East German seemed to have become resigned to the system imposed on him and had developed a certain sense of pride in the economic development of East Germany. The impression of a growing and more broadly based stability— one resting on more than an efficient security apparatus and the ultimate threat of Soviet intervention—was further strengthened following 2 In its 1977 report (accessed online), Amnesty International alleged that there were several thousand political prisoners in East Germany in the 1976–1977 period covered by the report, many of whom were being released to West Germany in exchange for goods.
