916 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI U.S. national security interests. DOD and IC positions remain far apart and agreement in your meeting is unlikely. Accordingly, the primary objective is to gain a common understanding of the issue and reach a consensus that there is a suitable basis for decision by the President. The Intelligence Community proposal described below has been flatly rejected by the Pentagon at the working level, but nevertheless may be the best vehicle for framing the issues and leading the discussion. Background The U.S. first proposed a ban on data denial in the political context of SS–25 flight-­testing, which we charged was a violation of SALT II throw-­weight provisions. We also charged that Soviet telemetry encryption prevented us from monitoring SS–25 flight tests accurately, in violation of the limited ban on telemetry encryption that impeded verification of the treaty limits. The two sides have now agreed in START to the U.S.-­proposed ban on data denial by “encryption, encapsulation, jamming, or any other means.” The current U.S. position on data denial would have the effect of permitting us to continue denying Soviet access to U.S. telemetry data (through complex coding) while gaining U.S. access to Soviet telemetry (by banning encryption). The Soviets reject this asymmetry and have proposed either to exchange data in sufficient detail to permit a full understanding of telemetry by the other side, or not to exchange any data. They have indicated that they must be free to adopt U.S. practices—[less than 2 lines not declassified] There are two interrelated issues: — how to define treaty commitments to ensure that each side can receive the other’s telemetry transmissions (the “power levels” issue), — what obligations should apply to explaining or interpreting the telemetry that is received (the “data exchange” issue). Power Levels Both sides currently can read each other’s telemetry. The Soviets, however, insist on the right to adopt “U.S. practices.” [2½ lines not declassified] Raising the U.S. power level could cost $700 million–$1.7 billion and take five years to achieve, but the result would not significantly improve the already good Soviet ability to receive U.S. telemetry. [less than 2 lines not declassified] The IC would like to freeze both sides to their current practices, a proposal the Soviets have refused. A fallback is to freeze current practices for existing types and to define transmission practices that would apply equally to both sides for future types of missiles. This approach has merit and should be tried out on the Soviets.
