682  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
II limits prior to 1985, plus our responses other than expanding shelter 
numbers.
Keeny: We still have to examine the likelihood that the location 
uncertainty will collapse.
Brown: This is less critical because we can reshuffle or dash.
Keeny: But surely maintaining location uncertainty is still critical. 
We might not know that we should move or dash.
Brown: Our move/dash capability denies him any basis for confi-
dence that he could ever use his ability to locate the missiles were he 
ever to acquire such an ability.
Brzezinski: Would we dash in all cases of tactical warning of an 
incoming attack?
Brown: We could require dash on tactical warning if the number of 
incoming weapons indicated that the attacker thought he had broken 
the location uncertainty. We’ve provided for including mass simulators, 
but I believe we need only deploy them if we see convincing evidence 
that he can threaten to break location uncertainty.
Turner: Maintaining location uncertainty is a genuine concern. 
Sensor technology is improving, cooperative measures to assure ver-
ifiability will tend to compromise location uncertainty. The Soviets 
will certainly work on the problem. Would you build the system this 
way if there was a reasonable probability they could break the location 
deception?
Brown: This is a matter of juggling doubts and uncertainties on 
both sides. Our side will have doubts about survivability. Their side 
will have doubts about their capacity to attack the system. On balance 
these doubts will come out favoring not going to war, i.e., favoring 
deterrence. That is why we selected this approach.
Brzezinski: What is the speed of dashing?
Perry: If dashing were fully adequate for survivability, we wouldn’t 
have to hide. The combination of hiding and dashing is adequate.
Brown: Let’s conclude. Have we had enough discussion to make a 
recommendation to the President right after Labor Day? What issues 
remain?
White: We have to examine costs further: cost uncertainties, the 
impact of IOC on cost profiles, and the impact of M–X spending pro-
files on other DOD spending priorities.
Brown: We’re hurting when the annual outlay for M–X hits $2B.
Jayne: The year of FOC is crucial.
Brown: 1983–85 will be the expensive years.
