Eastern Europe Region Stephen to Hungary, negotiation of a U.S.-Hungarian Trade Agreement, including MFN, and welcoming Ceausescu here for a State visit. With the Ceausescu visit and ratification of the Hungarian Trade Agreement the specific policy initiatives in PD–21 have been completed and we now seem to be entering a period marked by a less active policy for Eastern Europe. State Department East Europeanists are pushing to negotiate a Claims/Gold agreement with Czechoslovakia and may want to consider discussions on MFN with Bulgaria. There is some interest in maintaining the momentum that we have built up to deal with other outstanding issues toward the East European countries. The difficulty, however, is that those countries with whom we could achieve progress in our bilateral relations—Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and the GDR—have not exhibited the international independence or the internal liberalization that would justify such actions. With Poland, Romania, and Hungary we have now about reached the limit of what we can or would want to do. We should continue to work with Poland on the debt problem, but beyond granting the Poles an additional large CCC credit this year (and in future years) there is little more that we can do. We are similarly limited with Romania and Hungary. High level visits represent the most we can do in continuing to emphasize our interest in the region. A Gierek visit possibly in 1979 was mentioned during the President’s Warsaw stop, and the Romanians are anxious to host the President in Bucharest. The Hungarians would like to see Kadar in Washington, but such a visit would create problems with Hungarian-Americans who are still smarting from the return of the Crown. An invitation for a Kadar visit would best be issued after 1980, with an official visit by Secretary Vance to Budapest and possibly one by the Vice President as interim measures. 2. Your Role in Policy Formulation. You have clearly played the dominant role in formulating our policy towards Eastern Europe. Your background, expertise, and interest have given you a much stronger and more authoritative voice in this area. Furthermore, Eastern Europe is not a major focus of policy concern, thus other policy players are not willing to spend their political capital to challenge you in that area. You have been largely responsible for conceptually framing the approach to Eastern Europe, but you have also been active in initiating and implementing specific actions (return of the Crown and Polish CCC credits). Your role as the strongest advocate for increasing from $300 to $500 million the total amount of CCC credit for Poland last December, however, resulted in a certain degree of criticism. Because of your Polish background, there was some muted feeling that you were playing favorites. In the context of the President’s visit and the importance of Poland, this was unjust. It would be useful in the future, however, to appear less of an advocate on controversial matters which
