16 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III tutions of the industrialized democracies. With these initial consultations, momentum has been established. The following paragraphs outline findings in each of the major subject areas discussed during the visit. The different points of emphasis in my conversations with Chancellor Schmidt, Andreotti, Callaghan, Giscard d’Estaing, Fukuda and others are summarized and policy recommendations are included. II. Findings3 —The Summit: A tentative consensus is emerging on a mid-May date for the summit in London, following the NATO Ministerial Meeting.4 A consensus is also emerging that it would be acceptable if the summit were to include political as well as economic issues, although both the French and the Japanese are extremely sensitive as to how this is handled. I recommend that you now communicate to Giscard the following proposals on the Summit. They are based on my conversations with other principal Summit attendees and reflect the area of consensus I found.5 Location and Timing: The meetings should be held in London in May following the NATO Ministerial meeting with a gap of two or three days. London is acceptable to everyone including the Japanese if we press them slightly. The timing I have recommended is acceptable to everyone, although it creates a few problems for the Japanese who would like to wait until the Diet is over on May 28, but who will be willing to go along. Participation: The participants should be France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada, Japan, and a representative of the EC as determined by the European Community. —As agreed on February 2, I called Prime Minister Trudeau and had the State Department contact Ambassador Togo. Thus, we have given the Canadian and Japanese governments your considered views on summit site and timing. 3 Most of the findings in this memorandum were previously submitted to Carter (in an abbreviated, usually verbatim, form) in the February 2 memorandum from Mondale entitled “Recommended Actions Stemming from My Visit to Europe and Japan.” Carter’s decisions on Mondale’s recommendations are recorded on that February 2 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 31, Vice President, Europe and Japan, 1/23/77–2/1/77: 1/14–28/77) 4 A NATO Ministerial meeting took place in London May 10–11. 5 On Mondale’s February 2 memorandum (see footnote 3 above), Carter wrote “Have State do so” in the margin adjacent to this recommendation. Telegram 32620 to Paris, February 12, transmitted Carter’s views on the Summit to be conveyed to Giscard. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770050–0593) Carter also approved the recommendations below on location and timing, participation, agenda, and a four-power side meeting.
