Afghanistan achieve its objectives in its recent large counterinsurgency operations, and it now appears to be struggling to maintain the status quo. Were DRA forces to experience a significant setback, such as the fall of Feyzabad (capital of Badakhshan Province), this could well trigger large-scale desertions and unit defections, not only in the north, but elsewhere. The Soviets are most certainly aware of the poor state and low morale of Afghan troops. Actual troop strength in many units appears to be below that of three months ago. Thus, I believe the recent action to augment the airlift of cargo and personnel to Afghanistan is a reflection of their concern about this worsened situation. B. A/DCM and POL/ECON section chief (Freres) comment: I agree that the Soviets are probably worried about the Amin regime’s ability to cope with the insurgency, notwithstanding all of the Soviet logistic and advisory support given heretofore. I do not believe, though, that the buildup of Soviet forces in Afghanistan reflects a Soviet estimate that the Amin regime is about to fall, nor do any of those commenting here believe that the regime’s collapse is imminent. Rather, in my view, the Soviets’ objective is primarily to safeguard its interests in Afghanistan by enabling themselves to intervene promptly and physically with troops should they perceive that this is required. Secondarily, the Soviets may be looking beyond Afghan borders for targets of opportunity, such as in Iranian and Pakistani Baluchistan. If so, it would seem prudent for them to strengthen their position in Afghanistan now. C. POL/ECON section (Taylor) comment: In the short run, the recent upsurge of direct Soviet involvement could be designed to insure the survival of the regime in Kabul and other key areas until the arrival of winter. Cold weather and heavy snows will presumably dampen military activities in general, and could provide a respite for the regime to prepare for next spring’s campaign. A crucial unknown factor, however, will be the magnitude of Soviet “emergency support” necessary to buy the DRA some breathing space. D. Chargé’s comment: I don’t fully share the Agency senior officer’s and DATT’s conclusion that the current buildup of Soviet forces reflects a recent deterioration in the position of the DRA military and Government. I appreciate, however, that this is the most plausible reason for the buildup. I also appreciate that there has recently been some evacuation of Soviet dependents from Kabul, and that Soviet UN personnel have evinced nervousness about their dependents. On the other hand, the insurgents have in recent weeks not scored any dramatic success in the field except in the sense that they have held DRA forces at bay in several areas, turned back DRA forces near Bamian and relieving columns approaching Feyzabad (Badakhshan) and Taqab (Parwan), and reestablished their previous countryside dominance in Paktia. But the overall situation does not seem much different from
