Afghanistan
257
RECOMMENDATION
That you convene an SCC to deal with Afghanistan and with US
policy toward Pakistan in the light of events in Afghanistan.3
Unless you indicate otherwise, I would plan to work with Thornton,
Henze, Sick and Gregg on this overall subject.
3 Brzezinski and Aaron did not indicate their approval or disapproval on the memo-
randum. Brement’s desire to convene an SCC meeting was echoed in a memorandum
from Claytor to Brzezinski, December 21. Claytor questioned whether the current level
of U.S. support was sufficient in light of increased Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
Citing a need to “keep the Afghan insurgency going,” Claytor argued that the United
States should “frustrate the Soviets” and demonstrate “U.S. resolve to Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, and others in the area.” Claytor called for an SCC meeting because “the situation
calls for more than just throwing more money at the problem.” (Memorandum from
Claytor to Brzezinski, December 21; National Security Council, Carter Administration
Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 11 Sep 1979–22 Jul 1980) The SCC convened
a meeting on Afghanistan on December 26; see Document 95.
92.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
Washington, December 24, 1979
SITUATION REPORTS
AFGHANISTAN-USSR
[7 lines not declassified] In Afghanistan, a new rash of desertions and
the need to reinforce several endangered provincial capitals have further
strained the Afghan Army’s ability to handle the insurgency. [classification
marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]
[2 paragraphs (23 lines) not declassified]
[3 lines not declassified] A TU–134 aircraft that is equipped with a
satellite communications capability and is normally associated with
high-level Soviet military officials was seen at Balkhash on Friday with
some 30 IL–76 jet transports that were apparently in an alert posture.2
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified].
2 Friday was December 21.
