September 1953–December 1954
775
325.
Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
No. 187
Tehran, September 26, 1953.
SUBJECT
Aspects of the Political Environment of the Zahedi Government
Summary
There has been a tendency to regard the Mosadeq Government in
retrospect as a noble but unsuccessful experiment, and to credit Mo-
sadeq himself with high motives which were thwarted by unworthy
advisers and the former Prime Minister’s own faults of character. It is
necessary to convict Mosadeq and his advisers of their crimes as soon
as possible; delay makes this already thorny problem increasingly diffi-
cult. The Zahedi Government has not succeeded in posing as the inher-
itor of the nationalist movement, but has successfully represented itself
as the guardian of the constitution and the monarchy and therefore as
the champion of order and stability; its popularity rests in part on the
belief that it can achieve and maintain profitable relationships with the
West, particularly the United States. Iranians welcome American sup-
port of the new Government, and advise us that in their eyes the United
States has now, by supporting the Zahedi Government, recognized its
responsibilities in Iran; they desire internal political support as well as
economic aid from the United States. Iranians also hope to improve
their relationships with the nations of the free world, including Britain.
Public opinion now seems favorably inclined toward some kind of rea-
sonable settlement of the oil question; however, there will be an oppor-
tunity for unscrupulous demagoguery to complicate matters before the
problem is finally resolved. Political courage and skill will be required
to reconstitute a full-fledged Majlis following Mosadeq’s attempt to de-
stroy this institution. Continued good relations between the Govern-
ment and the Court are vital to the stability of Iran; the relationship will
continue to be subject to disruptive influences.
The Mosadeq Era in Retrospect
The Iranian people’s retrospective assessment of the historical sig-
nificance of the Mosadeq era is one of the major factors defining the
freedom of action of the present and any future governments of Iran.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/9–2653. Confi-
dential; Security Information. Received October 2. Drafted by John Howison, Second Sec-
retary of Embassy. A handwritten note on the despatch indicates it was read and ap-
proved by Henderson.
