1084 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX [Omitted here is discussion of regional issues unrelated to the Arab-Israeli dispute.] [Prince Saud:] One area on which there is no consensus with the United States is the problem of Israel. That problem has made the both of us unable to make the kind of response to the Soviets that we would like. We have tried not to make this a fundamental contradiction in cooperation with the United States but it does come into effect with regards to the Soviets. Of course we want U.S. help. We see no U.S. threat to our independence. We have no fear of the United States which would act as a constraint on our actions. Our past strategy was based on alliance between Saudi Arabia and Egypt that worked for a decade. The Soviets lost ground in this area for the first time. They lost their positions in Egypt, Iraq, and Syria, which was capable of continuing to maintain its independence. However, the split between Egypt and Saudi Arabia has broken that without providing us with any alternative strategy to replace it. We have not been able to persuade Egypt and they have not been able to persuade us. We hope that the U.S. will be contributing to remove the reasons for this split. The Middle East problem is central at all levels. These thoughts reflect the situation as it is here. It is something that we live with. It is never far away from us. It is the way we face challenges to our independence and our way of life. Now we must devolve a way to meet these challenges. Dr. Brzezinski said this raised the truly fundamental questions and very difficult questions that you and we face. In the talk with Prince Fahd yesterday we were very much in agreement about the nature and the scope of the threat. It is very real and there is very little time left. With regard to U.S. strategy the President’s State of the Union message2 represented a point of departure. It was a very important statement and in many respects it was a historical affirmation of the new realities we face. After World War II we established a permanent presence in Western Europe and linked our security with theirs. This was followed by treaties in the Far East. We now appreciate that events in this region also affect these other regions and the United States, so at present we have three strategic zones: Western Europe, the Far East, and the Middle East. The conditions in these three areas are very different. It would be a mistake to try to deal with this region as if we were re-
