1084
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
[Omitted here is discussion of regional issues unrelated to the
Arab-Israeli dispute.]
[Prince Saud:] One area on which there is no consensus with the
United States is the problem of Israel. That problem has made the both
of us unable to make the kind of response to the Soviets that we would
like. We have tried not to make this a fundamental contradiction in co-
operation with the United States but it does come into effect with re-
gards to the Soviets. Of course we want U.S. help. We see no U.S. threat
to our independence. We have no fear of the United States which
would act as a constraint on our actions. Our past strategy was based
on alliance between Saudi Arabia and Egypt that worked for a decade.
The Soviets lost ground in this area for the first time. They lost their po-
sitions in Egypt, Iraq, and Syria, which was capable of continuing to
maintain its independence. However, the split between Egypt and
Saudi Arabia has broken that without providing us with any alterna-
tive strategy to replace it. We have not been able to persuade Egypt and
they have not been able to persuade us. We hope that the U.S. will be
contributing to remove the reasons for this split. The Middle East
problem is central at all levels. These thoughts reflect the situation as it
is here. It is something that we live with. It is never far away from us. It
is the way we face challenges to our independence and our way of life.
Now we must devolve a way to meet these challenges.
Dr. Brzezinski said this raised the truly fundamental questions and
very difficult questions that you and we face. In the talk with Prince
Fahd yesterday we were very much in agreement about the nature and
the scope of the threat. It is very real and there is very little time left.
With regard to U.S. strategy the President’s State of the Union message2
represented a point of departure. It was a very important statement and
in many respects it was a historical affirmation of the new realities we
face. After World War II we established a permanent presence in
Western Europe and linked our security with theirs. This was followed
by treaties in the Far East. We now appreciate that events in this region
also affect these other regions and the United States, so at present we
have three strategic zones: Western Europe, the Far East, and the
Middle East. The conditions in these three areas are very different. It
would be a mistake to try to deal with this region as if we were re-
2 During his January 23, 1980, address before a joint session of Congress, Carter de-
clared that the United States would use military force if necessary to defand its national
interests in the Persian Gulf region: “Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by
any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault
on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled
by any means necessary, including military force.” The text of Carter’s address is in
“Transcript of President’s State of the Union Address to Joint Session of Congress,” The
New York Times, January 24, 1980, p. A12. See also Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. I,
Foundations of Foreign Policy.
