Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
685
achieve this goal. We hope to do so without bloodshed and without any
further danger to the lives of our 50 fellow Americans. In these efforts,
we continue to have the strong support of the world community. The
unity and the common sense of the American people under such trying
circumstances are essential to the success of our efforts.
Recently, there has been another very serious development which
threatens the maintenance of the peace in Southwest Asia. Massive So-
viet military forces have invaded the small, nonaligned, sovereign na-
tion of Afghanistan, which had hitherto not been an occupied satellite
of the Soviet Union.
Fifty thousand heavily armed Soviet troops have crossed the bor-
der and are now dispersed throughout Afghanistan, attempting to con-
quer the fiercely independent Muslim people of that country.
The Soviets claim, falsely, that they were invited into Afghanistan
to help protect that country from some unnamed outside threat. But the
President, who had been the leader of Afghanistan before the Soviet in-
vasion, was assassinated—along with several members of his family—
after the Soviets gained control of the capital city of Kabul. Only several
days later was the new puppet leader even brought into Afghanistan
by the Soviets.
This invasion is an extremely serious threat to peace because of the
threat of further Soviet expansion into neighboring countries in South-
west Asia and also because such an aggressive military policy is unset-
tling to other peoples throughout the world.
This is a callous violation of international law and the United Na-
tions Charter. It is a deliberate effort of a powerful atheistic govern-
ment to subjugate an independent Islamic people.
We must recognize the strategic importance of Afghanistan to sta-
bility and peace. A Soviet-occupied Afghanistan threatens both Iran
and Pakistan and is a steppingstone to possible control over much of
the world’s oil supplies.
The United States wants all nations in the region to be free and to
be independent. If the Soviets are encouraged in this invasion by even-
tual success, and if they maintain their dominance over Afghanistan
and then extend their control to adjacent countries, the stable, strategic,
and peaceful balance of the entire world will be changed. This would
threaten the security of all nations including, of course, the United
States, our allies, and our friends.
Therefore, the world simply cannot stand by and permit the Soviet
Union to commit this act with impunity. Fifty nations have petitioned
the United Nations Security Council to condemn the Soviet Union and
to demand the immediate withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Afghan-
istan. We realize that under the United Nations Charter the Soviet
