228 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV (TS) The Soviet laser weapons program enjoys a high priority. Several HEL ranges and test sites have been identified in the USSR, and the size and nature of these facilities indicate an annual HEL investment which is considerably higher than our own. We feel that the current Soviet laser technology level is comparable to ours. While we may tend to lead in pointing and tracking capability, the Soviets have probably achieved higher power levels. We believe the Soviets have underway a number of prototype development projects designed to assess the viability of laser weapons. Table 1 summarizes our assessment of US and Soviet laser weapon capabilities in an anti-­satellite (ASAT) role. In this context, “capability” implies operational deployment in sufficient numbers to provide a meaningful effect. The US capabilities are potential capabilities—­they are not capabilities which exist or are planned for implementation, but reflect what could be achieved in an orderly program without fiscal constraints. Similarly, the estimated Soviet capabilities reflect what could be achieved. (S) Three types of capabilities are listed: “jam sensor”, “kill sensor”, and “kill structure”. “Jam sensor”, implies introducing false targets or obliterating some portion of the image. “Kill sensor”, implies permanent damage to the sensor or sensing medium. These capabilities generally require the laser to be in or near the optical field of view. Finally, “kill structure” involves damage to softer structural elements such as solar arrays. The power required to kill structure is about seven orders of magnitude higher than the power required to jam sensors. (TS) Within one year, both the US and the Soviets could jam satellite sensors (film or detector arrays) at essentially all altitudes and kill sensors in satellites at low altitudes. The US airborne laser provides a near term advantage in reducing the reaction time from command to kill. But the Soviets may have a near term advantage in the ability to effect structural damage. (TS) By the early 1990s, the US and the Soviet Union could have the capability to jam and kill sensors on high altitude satellites. Structural kills would be limited to medium altitude unless space-­borne laser weapons were deployed. While a space deployment is possible by the early 1990s, it would be a substantial technological undertaking with considerable development risk. (S) The entries in Table 1 indicating effective altitudes were developed using simple assumptions about spectral sensitivity and damage levels. A case by case analysis could easily result in an order of magnitude variation in effective range. (TS) US and Soviet laser weapon capabilities in missions other than ASAT are summarized in Table 2. Both US and Soviet HEL programs will be demonstrating lethality and capability from now through
