228  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
(TS) The Soviet laser weapons program enjoys a high priority. Sev-
eral HEL ranges and test sites have been identified in the USSR, and the 
size and nature of these facilities indicate an annual HEL investment 
which is considerably higher than our own. We feel that the current 
Soviet laser technology level is comparable to ours. While we may tend 
to lead in pointing and tracking capability, the Soviets have probably 
achieved higher power levels. We believe the Soviets have underway 
a number of prototype development projects designed to assess the 
viability of laser weapons. Table 1 summarizes our assessment of US 
and Soviet laser weapon capabilities in an anti-­satellite (ASAT) role. In 
this context, “capability” implies operational deployment in sufficient 
numbers to provide a meaningful effect. The US capabilities are poten-
tial capabilities—­they are not capabilities which exist or are planned for 
implementation, but reflect what could be achieved in an orderly pro-
gram without fiscal constraints. Similarly, the estimated Soviet capabil-
ities reflect what could be achieved.
(S) Three types of capabilities are listed: “jam sensor”, “kill sen-
sor”, and “kill structure”. “Jam sensor”, implies introducing false tar-
gets or obliterating some portion of the image. “Kill sensor”, implies 
permanent damage to the sensor or sensing medium. These capabil-
ities generally require the laser to be in or near the optical field of 
view. Finally, “kill structure” involves damage to softer structural 
elements such as solar arrays. The power required to kill structure is 
about seven orders of magnitude higher than the power required to 
jam sensors.
(TS) Within one year, both the US and the Soviets could jam satel-
lite sensors (film or detector arrays) at essentially all altitudes and kill 
sensors in satellites at low altitudes. The US airborne laser provides a 
near term advantage in reducing the reaction time from command to 
kill. But the Soviets may have a near term advantage in the ability to 
effect structural damage.
(TS) By the early 1990s, the US and the Soviet Union could have the 
capability to jam and kill sensors on high altitude satellites. Structural 
kills would be limited to medium altitude unless space-­borne laser 
weapons were deployed. While a space deployment is possible by the 
early 1990s, it would be a substantial technological undertaking with 
considerable development risk.
(S) The entries in Table 1 indicating effective altitudes were devel-
oped using simple assumptions about spectral sensitivity and damage 
levels. A case by case analysis could easily result in an order of magni-
tude variation in effective range.
(TS) US and Soviet laser weapon capabilities in missions other 
than ASAT are summarized in Table 2. Both US and Soviet HEL pro-
grams will be demonstrating lethality and capability from now through
