920  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
And even if the U.S. does not have full access to Soviet ballistic 
missile telemetry, it will have considerable knowledge about the size 
and scope of the Soviet ballistic missile threat. Telemetry is one source 
(albeit a very important one) of information; it is not the only source.
In weighing the above considerations, there is a strong case for 
concluding that the U.S. has more to lose than gain by allowing full 
access to ballistic missile telemetry.
[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
In advising ratification of the INF Treaty, the Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee 
singled out militarily significant cheating as a central verification stan-
dard. The Final Report of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee con-
cluded: “The START verification regime should be designed to detect 
militarily significant cheating in time for the United States to respond 
effectively.”
Full access to Soviet telemetry will provide a comprehensive under-
standing of the internal functioning of the missile system. The question 
is whether that full understanding is necessary to detect militarily sig-
nificant cheating in time for the United States to respond effectively. In 
assessing the military sufficiency of the emerging START treaty, the JCS 
have concluded that post-START Soviet forces would be able to meet 
Soviet targeting goals within the constraints of the treaty. [3½ lines not 
declassified] There is a web of verification provisions in addition to the 
ban on telemetry encryption which decreases the risk that the Soviets 
could exploit ballistic missile testing in a way which would fundamen-
tally weaken deterrence.
Does Full Access to Ballistic Missile Telemetry Set a Good Precedent for 
START II?
The debate over full access to ballistic missile telemetry largely 
involves the question of what kinds of cooperative practices will be 
mandated by the Treaty. Until early this year, the Soviets demanded 
that telemetry encryption be banned for cruise as well as ballistic mis-
sile tests. The U.S. determined that unencrypted cruise missile teleme-
try was not in the U.S. interest, and successfully resisted this ban.
[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
