First Responses geous analyses of his representatives in Washington and New York, and the flood of messages from previously sympathetic or uncommitted observers throughout the world should at least have given him grounds for concern that the revolution is being seriously damaged. (S) Of more immediate importance—and more difficult for us to influence—is his concern about his own power position. As you know, I am convinced that he is exploiting this situation (as he exploited the Kurdish situation) to consolidate his direct control. In each case, he has used a popular cause to rally public opinion against a well-identified enemy, thereby taking their minds off the failures of his own rule. He has also used these occasions to accomplish specific political objectives. In the Kurdish case, he appointed himself commander in chief of the armed forces, closed down a troublesome press, and banned opposition political activity which was beginning to develop some clout. In the present case he has disposed of the Bazargan government, which had become a thorn in his side. (S) Just before going to Algiers, Bazargan had submitted to Khomeini a petition signed by most of the members of his government calling for the disestablishment of the Islamic Council of Experts on the grounds that they had exceeded their mandate in revising the constitution. Khomeini must also have known that Yazdi, Bazargan and others were meeting with U.S. [less than 1 line not declassified]—which he would interpret as nothing more than plotting against him. Although Bazargan was quite open in admitting his powerlessness, he also refused to shirk his responsibility to inform Khomeini of what was going wrong and the disagreeable steps necessary to correct it. Was he the bearer of bad tidings one time too many? (S) Every policy option available to us should be examined first in light of whether it will contribute to persuading Khomeini that his own power position is being undermined by his present course of action. We have very little to work with, especially since Khomeini will be making his judgment in terms of the facts on the ground rather than words. Some thoughts: —[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] —[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] —I have suggested to State that they take advantage of the telex link to Bruce Laingen (directly through the Iranian Foreign Minister) to give periodic updates on events as we see them. We could slip in a few facts to give the Iranians pause, e.g. the USG is being flooded with popular calls to take drastic action but the President is resisting. This telex link is probably the most authoritative way we have of communicating with the Iranians and we should try to use it imaginatively. (S)
