62 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Shevardnadze said he had no fundamental differences with the Secretary’s review of general principles. The Soviets also desired to strengthen stability and assure security, both national and global. They wanted security to rest on progressively lower levels of forces. He also welcomed the Secretary’s remark that the sides should base their approach on the highest statements of their leaders, the Washington Summit Joint Statement (WSJS)3 and the Moscow Summit statement4 reaffirming the WSJS. The Soviets subscribed to another of the Secretary’s ideas: it was only natural that, in the course of the talks, changes would be introduced. As for resumption dates, Shevardnadze recalled that at their Vienna meeting,5 he had suggested another date, but the U.S. had not been in a position to agree for obvious reasons. The Soviets were now prepared to resume by the end of May, but in light of the Secretary’s comments he would like to accept June 12. The Secretary said that one problem stemmed from the fact that, as he had mentioned earlier, the U.S. had a government of shared power. Ambassador Burt was still in the process of being confirmed by the U.S. Senate. We should shoot for June 12 and, if Ambassador were not confirmed by that date, someone else would be at the table for the U.S. Shevardnadze said he understood and would keep this arrangement in mind. What was most important was that we come up with new ideas for discussion at future Ministerials that could perhaps be agreed at an eventual Summit. The Soviets hoped that the U.S. strategic review would soon be completed and that NST, once resumed, would proceed at a faster pace and produce concrete results. The key for the Soviets was the attainment of concrete results. As for the U.S. idea of a break after six weeks, this was all right, although the delegations had already had an extended break. He would only add that the Soviets regretted that considerable time had been lost. In the meanwhile, new weapons had been developed and accumulated—­a trend which caused concern and alarm, he assumed, on the U.S. side as well. Shevardnadze, to conclude, suggested that the Ministers announce that agreement had been reached to resume NST in the second ten-­day period in June. The Secretary asked whether this meant between June 10 and 20? Shevardnadze confirmed this, noting that the Secretary had mentioned June 12 as a possibility. 3 Reference is to the Joint Statement on the Soviet-United States Summit Meeting, December 10, 1987 (Public Papers: Reagan, 1987, Book II, pp. 1491–1497) 4 Reference is to the Joint Statement Following the Soviet-United States Summit Meeting in Moscow, June 1, 1988 (Public Papers: Reagan, 1988, Book I, pp. 698–706) 5 See Document 7.
