VIII Preface from publication of about 5 percent of the documentation selected for publication by the editors; 6 documents were denied in full. Documen­ tation withheld from the volume consists largely of certain still classi­ fied information pertaining to intelligence and nuclear weapons. The declassified documentation provides an accurate account of the major foreign policy issues and the major policies undertaken by the U.S. Government on national security policy and arms control during this period. The Information Response Branch of the Office of IRM Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, con­ ducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information, which was superseded by Executive Order 12958 on April 20, 1995, and applicable laws. Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which rea­ sonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations; 2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, proj­ ects, or plans relating to the national security; 3) foreign government information; 4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelli­ gence sources or methods; 5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States; 6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security; 7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities; 8) cryptology; or 9) a confidential source. The principle guiding declassification review is to release all infor­ mation, subject only to the current requirements of national security and law. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate for­ eign governments regarding specific documents of those governments. Acknowledgments The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the National Archives and Records Administration and at the Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, in particular David Haight, who provided
