National Security Policy 47 OBJECTIVES 3. The United States should be prepared at all times to counter an attack on the North American Continent in such a way as to deter Soviet attack or, if an attack occurs, to insure our survival as a free nation. a. Such preparation requires that the United States achieve and maintain, in collaboration with Canada and other Free World nations, a continental defense readiness and capability which will protect and permit the launching of our nuclear retaliatory forces, even in the event of surprise attack. b. Such preparation should: (1) Provide warning to alert the nation to impending attack. (2) Counter enemy subversive and clandestine efforts. (3) Prevent the threat of nuclear destruction from unduly restricting U.S. freedom of action or weakening national morale. (4) Maintain adaptability to make timely changes as technology permits and as the nature of the threat changes. (5) Provide appropriate measures of protection for the civil population. c. Such preparation should include appropriately organizing, protecting and placing in a condition of readiness the resources of the country essential to national survival. TIME-PHASING 4. The time-­phasing of U.S. “continental defense” measures should take into account the threat posed by the present nuclear megaton attack capability of the USSR and by anticipated future improvements in Soviet weapons and delivery capabilities, particularly the achieve­ ment of a significant ICBM capability.2 Effective continental defense requires that the United States should be constantly on guard against “technological surprise” and should continually strive for technologi­ cal superiority. INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION AND COORDINATION 5. Continental defense requires close collaboration with certain allies; in particular, Canadian agreement and participation remain essential to effective continental defense. Efforts should also be contin­ ued to achieve more effective collaboration with Mexico and Iceland. 2 SNIE 11–10–57, “The Soviet ICBM Program”, December 17, 1957, estimates that the USSR will probably have an operational capability with up to 10 prototype ICBM’s, capable of carrying high-­yield nuclear warheads, during the period mid-1958 to mid- 1959; and could have 100 operational ICBM’s about one year after its first operational capability date (i.e., mid-1959 to mid-1960), and 500 ICBM’s about two, or at most three, years after first operational capability date (i.e., mid-1960 to mid-1962). It is estimated that the first 100 to 200 Soviet ICBM’s would have a fifty per cent system reliability and that succeeding weapons would have a system reliability up to seventy per cent. [Footnote is in the original.]
