462  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
55. Most of the increase in defense expenditures will be caused by 
increasing allocations to aircraft, guided missiles, military research and 
development, and nuclear weapons. These programs together proba­
bly account for more than 35 percent of total expenditures at present. 
By 1962 they are expected to require about 50 percent more resources 
and to account for nearly 45 percent of total defense programs.
56. Soviet defense expenditures in recent years, when converted 
into dollar values, appear to be of roughly the same magnitude as US 
defense expenditures. Thus the Soviet defense effort, which consumes 
about one-­seventh of the USSR’s much smaller GNP, produces military 
goods and services with a dollar value roughly the same as the US. This 
is owing primarily to the facts that in the USSR military end-­items are 
less expensive, relative to consumption items, than they are in the US, 
and that the average level of real pay and subsistence provided Soviet 
military personnel is much lower than in the US.
Industrial Prospects
57. The Soviet leadership remains committed to rapid industrial 
growth, with the eventual aim of overtaking US industry in per capita 
production. The now defunct Sixth Five-Year Plan, however, already 
contemplated a lower increase—65 percent—­than the 85 percent 
claimed during the Fifth. Even this target now is apparently judged too 
high. As for overtaking the US, total Soviet output is increasing faster 
than US production but is still less than half that of American industry 
(see Figure 1).
58. Cumulative failures in completing new installations for several 
basic industries reached a point in 1956 which produced serious imbal­
ances in the Soviet economy and necessitated a reduction of goals in the 
1957 plan. Figure 2 indicates that these difficulties were not overcome 
during 1957. During 1957, moreover, the building of new capacity for 
coal, iron ore, rolled steel, and electric power almost certainly contin­
ued to lag behind plan. Accelerated production gains would have been 
necessary during the next three years if the original 1960 targets for 
these commodities, vital to the growth of other industrial sectors, were 
to be met.
59. The Soviet leaders hope that the slower growth of the indus­
trial labor force will be offset to some degree by increased production 
per worker. One of the most important programs for raising produc­
tivity is the modernization and re-­equipment of industrial plants. This 
program, of which automation is the ultimate expression, has lagged 
behind schedule, however, and seems unlikely to catch up. Industry as 
a whole probably will have to bear the brunt of increased investment 
in the consumption sectors and also the reduction in total investment 
at which Soviet sources have hinted in discussion of plan revisions.
