Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Vance and Brown wondered if this does not so clearly imply our previous ties to the Shah that it will provoke Khomeini’s public rejection and fail to achieve the political effect in the region for which it is intended. Dr. Brzezinski observed that we must simply accept the cost of a possible Khomeini statement because our vital interests in the area are so great. Secretaries Vance and Brown suggested omitting reference to “30 years.” They accepted Dr. Brzezinski’s alternative language “as we have been” so that a sentence in the speech might read: “The U.S. remains committed to an independent Iran today as it has been in the past.” Agreed action: The record of the meeting should solicit the President’s reaction to this proposal.5 [Omitted here is a discussion on regional military bases and Yemen.] Afghanistan Insurgency Secretary Vance reported that Agha Shahi calls the insurgency in Afghanistan “a dangerous lightning rod” and, therefore, a very difficult decision for General Zia. Dr. Brzezinski commented that a massive insurgency at present is probably not in our best interest. Rather a lowlevel and enduring insurgency is essential to keep the Islamic states mobilized against the Soviets in Afghanistan. Secretary Brown added that Agha Shahi’s comments were probably not meant to indicate that Zia will be backing out, but rather to keep the option open for the future. Afghanistan Refugees State reported that it is possible for the United States to provide bilateral aid for refugees in Afghanistan as well as aid through the UNHCR. Agreed action: State was tasked to prepare a plan for providing at least a small part of their refugee aid through bilateral channels and present it at the next SCC on refugee support.6 Dr. Brzezinski observed that the large degree of consensus on all agenda issues today may negate the need for an NSC meeting with the President on the same topics. All agreed and Secretary Vance added that the next issue we need to discuss directly with the President 5 Neither the “Approve” nor the “Disapprove” option was checked, but to the left of the option lines, Carter wrote: “Covered on Meet the Press.” 6 Not further identified.
