International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 511 165. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, September 27, 1978, 11:30 a.m. PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Olivier Long, Director General, GATT Dr. Gardner Patterson, Deputy Director General, GATT Under Secretary Richard Cooper, E Mr. Ernest Johnston, E David R. Moran, EB/OT/GCP—Notetaker SUBJECT MTN The following is a non-verbatim summary of the discussion. Following pleasantries, Mr. Patterson noted that the issue of the CVD waiver extension2 may be just what is needed in terms of establishing a credible date for the conclusion of the MTN but that the EC was most upset at developments. Cooper: Of course, there is no way of getting an extension of the waiver without agreement on the codes. I would be interested in your interpretation of why the EC considers this such an intense issue. It certainly is not a new problem and they are not being taken by surprise. That is why we pushed for agreement by July 15th, to give the Congress time to consider the matter. Long: As I see it, there are three factors. First, the EC has always considered it a purely US issue. Second, the US did not make clear to the EC the link between the July 15 deadline and this issue. Third, the community has taken the position that it will not negotiate under threat. Cooper: At least on the second point the EC was well informed. I told Haverkamp myself and I know Strauss has made it clear. Long: Perhaps, but it didn’t register. Never once did I hear anyone from the EC make the connection. Cooper: Well, you have talked to Ambassador Strauss so you know our plans about going to the Congress. I admit they are risky. Long: If you want to reach agreement by December, you need movement from the UK and France. I would be interested to know if 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 3, Memorandum of Conversation, July–December 1978. No classification marking. Drafted by David Moran on September 28 and cleared by Ernest Johnston, Cooper’s Executive Assistant. The meeting took place in Cooper’s office. 2 See Documents 150 and 152.
