Afghanistan
387
Jody Powell said that it depends on how we come out on the tough
issues of grain and the Olympics. The issues that had been decided
thus far will sound “mighty iffy.” He then reviewed the sum of them.
He said that restricting further and case-by-case limitations does not
sound like much. He personally was inclined to have the President
play a role and go to the people on this issue. He thought that the
decision to provide additional assistance to Pakistan and lift the Sym-
ington Amendment would be a high profile item and would be an
opportunity for newspapers to focus on it today. He did not know
how much we could do in substance but he thought we should try to
make a statement by tomorrow morning.
The Vice President agreed that the list was not too impressive. He
said the addition of our decisions on Pakistan would help. He said
that the grain embargo would be a major step but he hoped that we
would not do it. Jody Powell noted that we would have to tighten up
other trade or the farmers will say that big business benefits and then
we will have trouble politically.
The Vice President said that trying to curtail food is a loaded
dynamite. If the longshoremen go on strike, the Republicans will say
we are so pro-union that we will hurt the farmers in the midwest just
to go along with the unions.
Mr. Jordan asked whether the government would have to buy the
grain if we impose an embargo. The President replied that Stu Eizenstat
was trying to find out the answer to that question. Lloyd Cutler said
we might want a legislative package to ease the burden on the farmers.
In this connection, the Vice President said that if the grain is in storage
it is the same as if it is on the market as far as the effect on price is
concerned.
Dr. Brzezinski said that if we go forward with the grain embargo,
we should try to make it a bipartisan effort and get others to endorse it.
The Vice President thought the idea of the longshoremen taking
foreign policy into their own hands was outrageous. If we can talk
them out of it before they start it might work. But later there will be
ego involved in the embargo.
Secretary Brown said it was a question of sacrifice. We could intro-
duce the sacrifices elsewhere. Such as gas rationing or a plan for resum-
ing the draft, which the Secretary favors. The Vice President said that
we had decided not to do things that hurt us. He said that selling the
grain was in our interest. It requires the Soviet Union to spend hard
currency. It helps the dollar in our balance of payments.
Secretary Brown said that if we cannot do things that hurt us, we
cannot get our allies to do things that hurt them. Stu Eizenstat then
joined the meeting and explained what our obligations were under the
