1228  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
he assumed it would be impractical to attempt to arrange such an 
informal visit. Ambassador Sparks continued by explaining the proce-
dure for invitations to pay official visits to the United States and that 
normally two Chiefs of State of Latin America are invited each year 
for state visits. He said that President Frondizi from Argentina will be 
paying a state visit to Washington in January of 1959, and President 
Lemus of Salvador in March. With this background of explanation the 
Ambassador asked Betancourt what his thoughts on the matter were. 
President-­elect Betancourt replied by making it quite clear that aside 
from the fact that he could not possibly plan a trip outside Venezuela 
before his inauguration, he did not feel an informal visit to the United 
States would be appropriate. He said that he believed the most appro-
priate procedure to follow would be for an invitation to be issued to 
him to visit the United States after his inauguration but without speci-
fying any particular date. Betancourt remarked that he felt the United 
States erred in not having invited Figueres of Costa Rica6 to visit the 
United States during the five-­year period of Figueres’ Presidency. 
He said that Figueres is a good friend of the United States and that 
he had demonstrated this in La Paz, Bolivia, when he answered an 
unfriendly speech made by the Mayor of La Paz during the official 
visit of Figueres to that country prior to his inauguration. Betancourt 
then turned the conversation more directly to the election and the pres-
ent political situation.
In discussing the defeat of Larrazábal, Betancourt demonstrated 
very little respect for him as a politician although he said that he 
likes Larrazábal personally. He said that with the elections over, 
Larrazábal has no further stomach for politics. Betancourt said that 
he intends to appoint Larrazábal as Ambassador to Chile, although 
Betancourt said he had not exerted any pressure on Larrazábal to 
accept the assignment. Betancourt, almost negating his denial that 
any pressure had been exerted on Larrazábal, said that although 
Larrazábal has no further interest in politics, as a military man in 
the recent election and as a popular figure in Venezuela, he might 
even against his will become a symbol in the country for those who 
might want to use him. To demonstrate the naïveté of Larrazábal, 
Betancourt said that Larrazábal in conversation with him, had asked 
why he had been so badly defeated and why he had not even carried 
the town where he was born. Betancourt’s reply to Larrazábal had 
been that AD had been actively organized in Larrazábal’s home town 
for the past 20 years.
6 Jose Figueres, President of Costa Rica, 1953-1958.
