870 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV improvements (operations, maintenance and training) and strategic force investment (principally MX) with relatively less emphasis on general purpose force modernization (development and deployment of new equipment). The following assumptions underlie Defense 1982–86 force improvement plans: • Improvements in U.S. force capabilities are needed because of: (a) continued growth of Soviet military power including force projection capabilities; (b) increasing problems faced by the U.S. and its Allies in maintaining secure access to oil and other resources; and (c) likely continuation of an unstable international environment with the potential for sudden crises and conflicts. • The U.S. can proceed at a steady pace because (a) the risks associated with the current balance are tolerable; (b) the Soviets are not likely to accelerate their rate of force improvements; (c) a major conflict, either strategic or conventional NATO, is unlikely; and (d) planned force enhancements are adequate to respond to the more likely occurrence of non-NATO contingencies. • Our allies will continue to improve their own forces but will not assume a substantially larger share of overall defense responsibilities than they now have. • Given political and organizational constraints, large efficiencies in the management of defense programs are not likely to be realized. You will be making budget decisions this fall that will have a major influence on our future defense capabilities. Overall budget limitations will make it difficult to increase spending beyond your current commitment of more than 4% real growth. Since March strong pressures for much larger increases than those planned have arisen: • Higher than expected inflation in major system costs plus pay and benefit increases for military and civilian personnel. • An increased emphasis on near-­term readiness and rapid deployment force build-­up. • Unforeseen cost increases above inflation for naval, NATO and strategic force initiatives you previously approved. Possible reductions to stay within your 1982 guidance level for real growth include: • Slowing the pace of readiness increases. • Slowing the rate of some modernization programs and major procurements. • A rigorous “budget scrub” to identify programs which cannot be achieved at previously planned rates or whose benefits have not been clearly established.
