Romania 557 187. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, November 23, 1977, 9:30–10 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Meeting with the Romanian Foreign Minister PARTICIPANTS The President The Vice President Mr. Philip Habib, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Mr. William B. Quandt, NSC Staff The Honorable George Macovescu, Foreign Minister of Romania His Excellency Nicolae M. Nicolae, Ambassador from Romania Foreign Minister: President Ceausescu sends his best regards. President Carter: I am very proud of our friendship with him. Foreign Minister: I have a message for you from my President. (The Foreign Minister hands the President a letter.)2 President Carter: It’s a pleasure to have you here. You have made a long trip. We are looking forward to next spring when we hope to have President Ceausescu with us. Dr. Brzezinski: We hope to find a time in the late spring for his visit. President Carter: It will be a pleasure to have him here. We have a strong friendship with your country and we are proud of our good relations. Foreign Minister: We feel that our relations have developed well, and President Ceausescu wants to extend this. He considered this to be a good time to send me here with some ideas on the Middle East, especially after the visit of President Sadat to Jerusalem. In the last three months, President Ceausescu has met with Prime Minister Begin and then with President Sadat. He talked at length with both of them. You have also talked to them. I would like to tell you about our interest 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons: President: 11–12/77. Top Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. Brzezinski forwarded a copy of the memorandum to Vance on November 28. A summary of the meeting was also transmitted in telegram 283125 to Bucharest, Tel Aviv, Cairo, and Damascus, November 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840072–0448) 2 Ceausescu sent Carter a letter designating Macovescu as a special envoy on “some considerations on the situation in the Middle East and on the continued development of Romanian-American relations.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceausescu, 2/77–12/78)
