Honduras  817
In addition to its participation in the Pan American Highway 
project, for which it has received an Eximbank loan for $1.7 million, 
Honduras has obtained approval for a total of loans from IBRD for 
road construction and maintenance of $13.7 million, all obtained since 
December 1955. The DLF, in 1959, approved a loan of $5.0 million to 
cover local currency costs on IBRD-­financed projects and is consid-
ering new requests for the same purposes amounting to $9.0 million. 
The recently created Engineering Construction Unit, an ICA-­financed 
project, will receive a total of $1.0 million in grant aid, which will be 
matched by an equivalent amount in local currency, to be contrib-
uted by the GOH. Continuing projects financed with $3.0 million of 
Smather’s Loan funds (the major portion of which has already been 
used) consist of a road building program in the Guayape Valley and 
a program to provide public water supplies to villages. This latter is 
mentioned under the remarks on the Health Program.
Technical assistance has been provided by the U.S. Bureau of Public 
Roads and by private U.S. construction companies, as well as by ICA 
technicians in these projects.
It is apparent that Honduras is in great need of roads and that 
these projects will be of direct and immediate benefit to the national 
economy. It is my opinion, however, that to insure an efficient and 
completely satisfactory performance in the construction of roads to be 
financed with U.S. financial assistance, it would be advisable to nego-
tiate the work by contract to reliable engineering firms, thus avoiding 
numerous serious drawbacks, which have been evident in the perfor-
mance of the Ministry of Public Works of the GOH.
The FY 1961 Mutual Security Program does not contemplate addi-
tional funding for the Engineering Construction Unit, except for a 
limited amount of Technical Cooperation funds to backstop U.S. partic-
ipation in the operational phase of this project. Even this participation 
by the USOM could be eliminated, or greatly reduced, at this stage, 
if adequate technical support were provided by the Department of 
Defense.
With respect to the ECU operation, I have certain reservations, 
although I agree with the basic objective. Undoubtedly, the purpose of 
utilizing military personnel to perform useful civilian work is appealing 
and, if successful, could have favorable effects on the internal political 
climate, as well as on the economy. My reservations may be expressed 
as follows:
A full and satisfactory operation of the ECU unit might reduce the 
military potential of the Armed Forces below the point of safety at a 
time when it is evident that the influence of the military is essential 
to insure the security of the present constitutional regime. The main-
tenance and operational expenses of heavy machinery are a burden
