156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII support to the dissidents appears to be tailing off. The DCI stated that a modest amount of aid can be funneled directly to Afghanistan dissident leaders in Pakistan. (TS) Discussion ensued as to how the money would be handed out and spent. CIA responded that the money would be doled out incrementally and that accountings would be sought and impact and feedback would be looked for. All the goods (food, medical supplies, and clothing) are to be purchased in Pakistan. (S) Turning to CIA option 1, the DCI stated that the [less than 1 line not declassified] has had an existing radio that sends a strong signal into Afghanistan.2 The CIA probe had reached the conclusions that Afghanistan language broadcasts to the largely illiterate insurgents would provide a rallying point now lacking. The broadcasts would soon be attributed to [less than 1 line not declassified] and would appear to be commercially purchased time on the [less than 1 line not declassified] broadcast. Broadcast tapes would be made in the United States and shipped to [less than 1 line not declassified] for playing. The [less than 1 line not declassified] have not yet been sounded out as to their willingness to participate in this effort. (S) Following discussion a consensus emerged to take the following steps: 1 To approve Option 2, spending at first the [amount not declassified] now in the CIA budget [less than 1 line not declassified] as necessary.3 It was agreed that the Pakistan government would be informed of our support to the Afghan dissidents but that the CIA operation would be conducted unilaterally. (S) 2 Attached but not printed at Tab B is a memorandum from Gregg to Brzezinski, June 25. Option 1, entitled “Psychological Operations,” called first for approval to “establish an international ‘Voice of Free Afghanistan’ radio capability for the insurgents from a third country,” noting that Afghan insurgents needed “regular and dependable” radio access to the general population, which was 90 percent illiterate. The erection of a transmitter facility was estimated to take 18 to 24 months at a cost of [amount not declassified] per annum, and with adequate deniability for the United States. Second, Option 1 called for approval to “assist the insurgents to expand and distribute their recorded and printed propaganda,” at a cost of [amount not declassified] and with minimal risk of linking the program to the United States. 3 Attached but not printed at Tab C. Option 2, entitled “Material Support,” called for “cash payments to the insurgents,” arguing that cash support might not be as efficient as food and material distribution, “but it should enable them to survive the approaching winter and maintain the momentum of their struggle.” The paper further noted that the funds would be used by rebels to ensure tribal loyalties, and that “accountability may be difficult, but it is judged that most of the funds will be expended for needed supplies.” At a projected cost of [amount not declassified], the option predicted moderate risk of linking cash payments to the United States, given that it was likely the Pakistanis would learn of the program. Pakistan might “overlook” the program, given the “variety of individuals and countries who have been approached for funds by the insurgents and who might locally be the source of financial support.” Finally, the paper surmised an element of deniability because all non-lethal goods “could be rationalized on humanitarian grounds.”
