North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 795 grams. Attached are some illustrative tables, but the program mix is very flexible (Tab 2).9 Alternatively, you could announce a pledge to seek a substantial increase in future aid levels, but with no quantitative target. Specific levels would continue to be decided on the basis of annual budget submissions. If you agree to increasing aid levels, then the issue is how we express our pledge. Factors favoring an announcement to double our appropriations: —It could help to stimulate similar efforts of West Germany, Japan and other donors. —It could provide a firmer basis for engaging the recipient countries in the policy and institutional reforms required for more effective use of development assistance. —It would enable us to demonstrate a sustained commitment to development and thus might help deter the annual piecemeal Congressional cuts in our requests by placing them in a more appropriate multi-year context. —It would provide a constructive US stance in the North-South dialogue in this critical first year of your Administration. Factors favoring a non-quantitative announcement: —The announcement of specific increases over coming years could offend Congress through the implied pre-commitment of its action, and this could endanger aid increases we are seeking now for FY 1978. —We would be committing ourselves to specific levels before completing an overall review of our foreign assistance programs. —It would not accord with the stated intent to conduct zero based budgetary reviews of all programs. —A failure of Congress in future years to go along with quantitative targets would damage our relations with LDCs and other OECD countries. Recommendation: The EPG unanimously recommends that you approve in principle a public pledge by the U.S. this Spring to seek major increases in foreign assistance.10 If you approve there are two options: Option 1: Announce this Spring an Administration intention to seek a five-year doubling of U.S. foreign aid appropriations from the 1977 base. (State, AID, NSC, HUD, and Labor support this option.) 9 Attached but not printed is an undated table entitled “A Doubling of U.S. Foreign Aid Appropriations FY-77–FY-82: An Illustrative Breakdown by Program.” 10 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
