1090 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement include road construction, housing construction, and attention to land tenure problems. 28. In the short run, Beltrán enjoys certain advantages. Although collection of back taxes will irritate some propertied interests, the general objectives of Beltrán’s program are clearly to the benefit of the elite group. An increase in exchange reserves (from $20 million to $33 ­million as of mid-September 1959) and a strengthening of the sol (from 31 to 28 per dollar) since Beltrán’s appointment reflect the confidence of business groups in his program and some improvement in trade prospects. Furthermore, wage increases decreed in May and extended to government workers since Beltrán came into office have quieted labor demands. The inflationary pressure stimulated by these wage increases, the removal of subsidies, and petroleum price increases will probably be offset to some extent by better crop prospects and expected increases in food production. In general the outlook for export of Peru’s minerals has improved. 29. Beltrán’s program is, however, currently hampered by the need to find financing for budget deficits estimated to equal as much as $40 million in 1959 and at least $20 million in 1960. Various proposed budget management devices may reduce the 1959 deficit by $5–10 ­million, but retrenchment efforts may be limited by the following political and economic factors: over half the government’s budget represents wages and salaries and further cuts in the already reduced development program would mean abandonment of plans for expansion of production in the coastal areas, an important element in current as well as future employment. Moreover, gains derived from the drive on delinquent taxes and other one-­time reforms available in 1959 will not be available in 1960. Committed to avoid further Central Bank borrowing in order to regain IMF and U.S. standby support, Beltrán is urgently looking for foreign assistance to achieve his objectives. 30. While no firm bill of financial needs has been formulated, Beltrán is seeking currently to renegotiate certain outstanding obligations as well as to secure new sources of funds. Among the measures mentioned are: (a) the use of frozen counterpart soles accruing from the sale of dollars drawn against the EXIMBANK credit to finance the government budget deficit; (b) the use of sol deposits voluntarily set aside by the Peruvian Government against the maturity (in 1961) of payments due on CCC rice purchases; and (c) the use of required sol deposits against the already postponed principal payments on purchases of submarines in the U.S. Beltrán has also proposed a customs and tax bond issue of 600 million soles in 1960 and has received a $20 million loan offer in the form of advance tax payments from the International Petroleum Company—­an offer Beltrán hopes to accept if he can avoid giving the impression that the loan is tied to recent petroleum price
