Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1155
469.
Telegram From the Embassy in Argentina to the Department
of State1
Buenos Aires, August 18, 1980, 1732Z
6609. Subject: (S) Possible Argentine Ratification of Tlatelolco.
1. S—Entire text.
2. During an informal conversation with a member of President
Videla’s staff, I asked about recent Argentine press reports that the
GOA is studying the ratification of Tlatelolco. The official said that the
study was in fact completed and was now in the Presidency. We dis-
cussed at some length the specifics of the bureaucratic process the
study had run through. With some apparent hesitation at his indiscre-
tion, the official ventured the assessment that Videla would decide to
proceed with the ratification. Ratification could not, of course, take
place if perceived by the Argentine public as occurring in response to
US pressure. For this reason, the step had not been seriously considered
while Argentina was still negotiating the reactor/heavy water plant
purchases with the FRG and GOS. One of the suggestions as to what a
possible high-level Argentine emissary to Washington might do had
been to let him carry the news of an affirmative decision.
3. Comment: The source was not clear about the timing of the deci-
sion and its announcement. Presumably, if taken at all, President
Videla would wish to do this before leaving office. (It is also interesting
to note that the study is ready for decision just before President
Videla’s visit to Brazil.) The discussion also left unclear what pressures
opponents of an affirmative decision might still bring to bear in these
final stages of the review process, which falls into the period in which
the three armed forces must make a final determination of the next
President. A number of variables evidently will go into this final deci-
sion, among them (to an unknown degree) the evolution of US-
Argentine relations over the next six months, both tone and substance.
As to the existance of the study, I have no doubt. This is the second time
the study has been mentioned in confidence by a high Argentine offi-
cial, several months apart and under different circumstances. I see no
reason to question their veracity at this juncture.
Ruser
1 Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarma-
ment Agency, Office of the Director, Lot 81D155, Box 9, Treaty of Tlateloloco—1979–1980.
Secret; Immediate; Nodis.
