The commanding officer of a warship who may have detained a vessel flying a foreign flag shall in all cases make a report thereon to his Government, stating the grounds on which he acted. An extract from this report, together with a copy of the process-verbal drawn up by the Officer, warrant officer, petty or non-commissioned officer sent on board the vessel detained shall be sent as soon as possible, to the Central International Office and at the same time to the Government whose flag the detained vessel was flying. ARTICLE 23 If the authority entrusted with the enquiry decides that the detention and diversion of the vessel or the measures imposed upon her were irregular, he shall fix the amount of the compensation due. If the capturing officer or the authorities to whom he is subject, do not accept the decision or contest the amount of the compensation awarded, the dispute shall be submitted to a Court of Arbitration consisting of one arbitrator appointed by the Government whose flag the vessel was flying, one appointed by the Government of the capturing officer, and an umpire chosen by the two arbitrators thus appointed. The two arbitrators shall be chosen, as far as possible, from among the diplomatic, consular or judicial officers of the H. C. P. These appointments must be made with the least possible delay, and natives in the pay of the H. C. P. shall in no case be appointed. Any compensation awarded shall be paid to the person concerned within six months at most from the date of the award. The decision shall be communicated to the Central International Office. CHAPTER VI.—General Provisions ARTICLE 24 The H. C. P. who exercise authority over territories within the prohibited areas and zones specified in Article 9, agree to take, so far as each may be concerned, the measures required for the enforcement of the present Convention, and in particular for the prosecution and repression of offences against the provisions contained therein and to appoint the necessary territorial and consular officers or special representatives competent for this purpose.
