450 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the hands of well-meaning (but possibly naive) intermediaries. They would have committed themselves to no specific concessions, but we would be assured at least of direct control of our own side of the talks. With that modification, I think we should proceed as soon as practicable to open the dialogue. 170. Letter From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to Christian Bourguet and Hector Villalon1 Washington, January 30, 1980 Dear Mr. Bourguet and Mr. Villalon: First, let me say that I have both enjoyed and benefitted from the meetings that we have had over the past two weeks in London and Washington. Because they were informal and conducted privately, these meetings were helpful to me in understanding the situation that presently exists in Iran. As friends and supporters of the Revolutionary Movement in Iran, you have been forceful and effective in outlining to me the concerns and grievances of the Iranian people. Based on your presentation and these discussions, I have come to understand the depth of the concerns of the Iranian people. At the same time, you have been both patient and attentive as we presented the views of our own country. I am sure you now understand that we look forward to the day when we can have a relationship with the government and people of Iran based on equality and mutual respect. When you return to Iran, I hope that you will convey to President- Elect Bani-Sadr and Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh that our government is prepared to work with the government of Iran to resolve the present crisis quickly on an honorable basis and is prepared to proceed toward its resolution through a series of reciprocal steps. I believe you to be men of great integrity and intellect whose only interest in this matter is to see the present problems between Iran and the United States peacefully resolved. On behalf of our government, I 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 1/80. No classification marking.
