500.A15 a 1/85
[Document 19]
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)
[WASHINGTON,] March 5, 1927.
The British and Japanese Ambassadors called separately at my request and I
said to them, after discussing the matter with the President, that in spite of
the refusal of France and Italy to take part in the proposed naval limitation
discussions at Geneva we hoped that these conversations could at least be
held by Great Britain, Japan and the United States and I inquired whether
this procedure was satisfactory to their respective Governments. Both
Ambassadors intimated that in their private opinion such procedure would
be agreeable to their Governments, but that they would telegraph to
ascertain and would let me know in due course. I said that we proposed to
reply to the French and Italian notes expressing regrets that they had found
it impossible to participate and expressing also the hope that they might
find it possible at least to be represented by observers at the proposed
conference. Both Ambassadors thought well of this procedure. Mr.
Matsudaira asked me whether we had any reason to believe that either
France or Italy would reconsider its refusal. I said that we have no official
grounds for such a belief, but as the subject was one of vital importance I
hoped that those two Powers would at least find it desirable to send
observers to follow the discussions.
In informal conversation I spoke of Italy’s desire for some concrete
assurances in advance of the conference that Franco-Italian parity would be
maintained and that also that some of the smaller naval Powers, such as
Jugoslavia, Greece, et cetera, would be included in the conference. I said it
was obviously impossible for us to say in advance that we would support
any particular thesis in the conference and that our whole purpose has been
to leave the matter absolutely open and unprejudiced for free and friendly
discussion at the conference table. As regards the smaller Powers it seems
to me that if the larger Powers should agree to limitation, the international
fear which was the basis of all naval building would be obviated and that
