964
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
In addition, you might make the following points as an indication
of our desire to be helpful:
1. The U.S. Executive Director of the IMF supported Yugoslavia’s
request to the IMF (on June 6) for second and third tranche drawings
totalling $440 million over an 18-month period.
2. The U.S. Department of Agriculture made CCC credits available
for Yugoslav imports of wheat in 1980 and is prepared to extend the
terms of repayment from the present one year to three years if Yugo-
slavia wishes. Further, USDA is prepared to provide additional CCC
credit guarantees in 1981.
3. The U.S. Social Security Administration will change its payments
to annuitants residing in Yugoslavia from dinars to dollars. (C)
International Issues
—U.S.-Soviet Relations/Afghanistan: The Yugoslavs are deeply con-
cerned by the deterioration in the international situation, particularly
the downturn in U.S.-Soviet relations and the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, which has direct implications for their own security. At
the same time they worry about the capacity of the U.S. to provide
coherent and effective leadership in the troubling times ahead. In your
discussion of international topics, therefore, I suggest you devote con-
siderable time to stressing the strategic threat posed by Soviet actions
in Afghanistan and your determination to make the Soviets pay a
high price for their aggression. You may also wish to encourage the
leadership to use their influence in the Non-aligned Movement to
obtain a public condemnation of the invasion. (S)
—Arms Control and Detente: The Yugoslavs maintain a strong
interest in arms control and a relaxation of international tensions,
which they see as enhancing their own security. At the same time,
they are concerned that increased tensions among the superpowers
will lead to greater Soviet pressure on Yugoslavia. It will be useful
therefore to stress your continued commitment to detente—but a
detente based on reciprocity and mutual restraint—and to make clear
that despite the setback in U.S.-Soviet relations, the U.S. intends to
continue to pursue those elements of detente which it considers to
be in its own interest, such as SALT, MBFR, CSCE and TNF arms
control negotiations. (S)
While it is unlikely that we can convince the Yugoslavs to publicly
support our TNF decision, it is important that they understand the
rationale behind it and how it bears on their own security. I suggest
you make the following points in particular:
—Our December decision was a response to a significant imbalance
of nuclear forces accentuated recently by the Soviet TNF build-up.
—Our objective is the restoration of a stable balance of long range
theater nuclear forces not an acceleration of the arms race.
