Human Rights Declaration. If we support conditioning progress on human rights to furthering the NIEO, we shall fuel this campaign. (4) The proposition, in preambular paragraph 9 and operative paragraph 1 (E), that refusal to recognize a State’s full sovereignty over its wealth and natural resources constitutes a “mass and flagrant violation of human rights” undercuts the U.S. position on the relevance of international law to expropriation of foreign property and runs counter to existing U.S. legislation which invokes penalties whenever international law standards are not met upon an expropriation. The U.S. voted against the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties6 particularly because we could not support the G–77’s view of permanent sovereignty over natural resources. Support for the Iranian resolution would brand our own position on this fundamental North/South issue as being a human rights violation. To say that international law can be read into the language of the resolution is to ignore the explicit rejection of such a reading over the past years by the G–77, as well as their rejection of a proposed amendment to the resolution along these lines. (The tenth preambular paragraph speaks of the “continuing existence of an unjust international economic order.” This characterization goes far beyond what the U.S. has previously agreed to and would also have adverse implications for North/South negotiations.) (5) The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by the UN with the abstention of the Soviet bloc. A consensus adoption of the Iranian resolution would allow its proponents to argue that the resolution has greater international support than the Universal Declaration and should govern interpretation of it. Option 2—Accept the resolution by consensus, with a statement clarifying our position on troublesome aspects of the resolution. Those supporting this option believe that the Iranian resolution is much improved over the original text and contains good language in support of individual human rights. Operative paragraph 1 (A), which is a perfectly acceptable statement of the U.S. position, provides: “All human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent; equal attention and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion and protection of both civil and political, and economic, social and cultural rights.” Operative paragraph 1 (C) states that all human rights and fundamental freedoms of the human person and of peoples are inalienable; and paragraph 1 (D) speaks of the “need for promotion of the full dignity of the human person.” In addition, an earlier reference to the reso- 6 The UN General Assembly adopted the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
