222
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
This danger is particularly great in the Horn, where there has been
an escalation of arms transfers from the outside. The current difficulties
in Ethiopia, and the tensions among nations in the area, present com-
plex diplomatic challenges. We seek friendship with all the gov-
ernments of that region. We have established an embassy in the new
nation of Djibouti. Its peaceful accession to independence marks a step
toward stability in what remains a troubled area.
We will consider sympathetically appeals for assistance from
states which are threatened by a buildup of foreign military equipment
and advisers on their borders, in the Horn and elsewhere in Africa. But
we hope such local arms races and the consequent dangers of deep-
ening outside involvement can be limited.
In accordance with the policy recently announced by the Presi-
dent, arms transfers to Africa will be an exceptional tool of our policy
and will be used only after the most careful consideration.6
We hope that all the major powers will join us in supporting Af-
rican nationalism, rather than fragmenting it, and in concentrating on
economic assistance rather than arms.
Our approach is to build positive relations with the Africans pri-
marily through support for their political independence and economic
development and through the strengthening of our economic, cultural,
and social ties. Our new and positive relationships with nations like Ni-
geria encourage us in this course. Our efforts to build such relations
may not seize the headlines. But this quiet strategy will produce
long-term benefits.
Our relations will be closest with those nations whose views and
actions are most congruent with ours. We will never forget or take old
friends for granted. Their continuing friendship is a fundamental con-
cern; they can rely on our support. When the territorial integrity of a
friendly state is threatened, we will continue to respond to requests for
appropriate assistance.
We do not insist that there is only one road to economic progress
or one way of expressing the political will of a people. In so diverse a
continent, we must be prepared to work with peoples and govern-
ments of distinctive and differing beliefs.
American representatives in Africa met last May to compare notes
and discuss new policy ideas.7 They agreed that almost everywhere in
6 See footnote 5, Document 40.
7 Presumable reference to a May 10 meeting in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, of 33 U.S. dip-
lomats from African posts in order to discuss U.S. policies toward Africa. Young also at-
tended the meeting. (Michael T. Kaufman, “Young, Opening African Trip, Meets in Ivory
Coast With 33 U.S. Envoys,” The New York Times, May 11, 1977, p. 2)
