1957 1297 visit when it has been termed contrary to official policy. Furthermore we do not believe any additional information would result from action on our part. The questions which might logically be asked are obvious and will occur to Worthy without any prompting from us. It now seems as if we may put out a strong statement immediately on our handling of Chinese prisoners and students, in order to correct the harmful misrepresentations which Chou En-­lai is making in the course of his current tour. 773. Telegram 736 to Geneva1 Washington, January 15, 1957, 7:58 p.m. 736. For Johnson. Guidance for January 19 meeting. 1. Express deep disappointment and concern of American people that new year has begun with terms of Agreed Announcement still unfulfilled by Chinese Communists. Many months have passed since last American released. It now appears Chinese Communists taking no repeat no measures permit Americans expeditiously return US as promised in Agreed Announcement, but instead compelling each pris­ oner serve out term of sentence prior release. Such action is flagrant vio­ lation of Agreed Announcement and contrary Wang’s assurances that prompt action could be expected. It also in sharp contrast to US action regarding Chinese prisoners in US. Only Chinese prisoner choosing go mainland China released after serving only two and one-­half years of seven to twenty year sentence. US has extended benefits of Agreed Announcement to all Chinese in US including common criminals in prison such as narcotics offenders and murderers. US even invited Indian Embassy interview all such prisoners. Chinese Communist refusal permit interviews cannot obscure fact US has done more than required by Agreed Announcement regarding Chinese in US, while Chinese Communists have failed carry out their commitment regard­ ing Americans. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–1557. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy, Sebald, and Phleger in draft.
