3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
896
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
304.
Message From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter1
Washington, October 5, 1980, 1511Z
WH07366. Forwarded per request of Secretary Muskie. Please de-
liver as soon as possible. Subject: Muskie-Dobrynin Meeting: Follow-
up to Gromyko Bilateral.
1. (S-entire text).
2. Begin summary. Secretary Muskie met with Ambassador Do-
brynin October 4 to take up several issues which time had prevented
his raising with Gromyko in New York:2 Poland, the Sverdlovsk an-
thrax outbreak, the September 14 Soviet high-yield test, prospects for
Madrid, including human rights issues, and a problem affecting contin-
uation of construction of the new Moscow Embassy complex. He also
responded to a question which Gromyko had raised during the New
York bilateral on PD–59.3 In response, Dobrynin complained that most
of what the Secretary had to say was negative, that there was nothing
very positive about it. On the specific issues raised, Dobrynin said the
Poles knew how to handle their problems without outside interference;
there was no utility in continuing to discuss Sverdlovsk; he had no in-
formation as yet on the September 14 test; our plans for discussing
human rights issues at Madrid would have a very negative effect; and
he could understand that the construction problem was one that might
bother us. The Secretary pointed out that the fact that we continued to
set forth our views frankly, in an effort to lessen the differences be-
tween us, should not be regarded as “negative.” He also stressed the
importance of resolving issues which would facilitate our efforts to
achieve ratification of SALT II. End summary.
3. The Secretary told Dobrynin he thought his talk with Gromyko
in New York on September 25 had been very useful and that he had ap-
preciated Gromyko’s frankness and relaxed tone. Despite the fact that
the meeting had been extended beyond the agreed time, however,
there were several subjects we had not had time to cover. He thought
the best way to treat these was to set out our position on each of them in
a non-paper, briefly and without any polemics, which Dobrynin could
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 5, USSR (General): 9/77–12/80. Secret;
Sensitive; Eyes Only; Nodis. Handwritten time of receipt reads “11:55 am, 05 Oct 1980
EST.” Sent from the White House Situation Room. The initial “C” written in the upper
right-hand corner indicates that Carter saw the cable. Carter spent October 4 and 5 in a
fishing cabin in Spruce Creek, Pennsylvania. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials,
President’s Daily Diary)
2 See Document 302.
3 See footnote 5, Document 302.
