National Security Policy  111
5. Competition Between Free World and Soviet Systems.
a. The economic strength of the USSR will continue to grow at a 
faster rate than that of the U.S., and the Soviet regime will continue 
to have the capability to direct its economic strength in support of its 
internal and external policies which seek world leadership. (15).
b. Weaknesses in the Free World economy have emerged, includ­
ing slower economic growth, slower expansion of world trade, infla­
tionary pressures, and the U.S. economic recession. However, over the 
longer run, prospects for economic growth are favorable in many Free 
World areas. (61).
c. An intensive, world-­wide competition between the Soviet Bloc 
and the U.S. will continue for some years to come during which the 
Soviet Bloc will undertake vigorous economic and political offen­
sives. (73).
d. The general course of events in the East-West contest will depend 
more than anything else on the manner in which the West mobilizes 
and employs its political, economic, and military resources. (74).
31.	
Memorandum of Discussion at the 359th NSC Meeting1
Washington, March 20, 1958
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 359th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, 
March 20, 1958
Present at the 359th Council meeting were the President of the 
United States, presiding; the Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; 
and the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization. Also present were the 
Secretary of the Treasury; the Attorney General; the Director, Bureau 
of the Budget; the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; the Federal 
Civil Defense Administrator (participating in Items l–4); the Chairman, 
Council of Economic Advisers (participating in Items 1 and 2); the 
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; The 
Assistant to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President; the 
Acting Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Director, International 
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Measures To Carry Out the Concept of Shelter; Agenda 
item 2: Soviet Civil Defense and Air-Raid Shelter Construction. Top Secret; Eyes Only. 
Extracts—4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Drafted on March 21.
