International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 137 1. Such large imbalances may “weaken” the dollar. While a fall in the exchange rate in the dollar strengthens U.S. competitiveness and thus reduces excessive trade and current account deficits, this downward movement of the exchange rate is disturbing to some. 2. It gives ammunition to protectionists and special interest groups. 3. To some observers such a large deficit just plain looks bad. This view of trade deficits is deeply ingrained in the conventional wisdom. The purely economic effects—on U.S. output and employment—appear to be negligible and thus not worrisome, at least in the short run. C. What Should We Do? 1. We should indicate concern and watchful alertness, avoiding any appearance of complacency or inaction. At the same time, we should take every public opportunity to put the situation into proper perspective. 2. We should stress export promotion and financing even though this is unlikely to have significant effects. We should look into possibilities for stimulating exports of agricultural products. 3. We should encourage the strong countries to take action to reduce their current account surpluses, by appropriate exchange rate policies and domestic economic expansion—as was agreed at the Summit. In this respect, recent statements by Prime Minister Fukuda have been encouraging2—but this will not have a big impact on our deficit in the short run. Also we should seek to promote sustainable expansion in the LDCs to maintain or increase their import capacity. There are several things we should not do: 1. We should not implement protectionist measures. 2. We should not attempt to artificially depreciate the exchange rate, in violation of international agreements we have taken the lead in negotiating. This probably would not work in any case since others would merely follow suit. In the final analysis, the basis of our trade “problem” is energy. There is a world oil trade deficit that must be shared until it is eliminated. An effective U.S. energy policy is the key to reducing this deficit, 2 Not further identified. In telegram 9730 from Tokyo, June 29, the Embassy noted, among other indications, Japanese press reports on “Fukuda’s consultations with his economic ministers on how to achieve Japan’s GNP growth goals and how to cope with persistent criticism from abroad of Japan’s trade and current account surpluses,” and suggested that “a consensus for a more responsible Japanese trade policy appears to be firming up.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770231–1232)
