764  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The President said that the crux of the matter was that we just 
could not deploy ground forces all over the world. Main reliance would 
have to be placed on nuclear weapons and mobile forces.
The Secretary pointed out the possibility that sometime in the 
future we might have to introduce forces into Africa, at which time we 
would not want to use nuclear weapons. He also cited the Lebanon 
example, where the military had wanted to go ashore with nuclear 
weapons, but the State Department urged against it.
The President referred to Khrushchev’s statement to Harriman 
recently that if the Chinese tried to take Formosa the Russians would 
assist them, and that the Russians had already made rockets available 
to the Chinese which could strike Formosa.
The President speculated that the Soviets are wrestling with the 
same problem that we are considering this morning.
Returning to the question of when nuclear weapons should be 
resorted to, the President expressed some puzzlement. He said certainly 
they should not be resorted to carelessly, but if substantial American 
troops were involved they should have nuclear weapons handy.
Secretary McElroy then pointed out that General Twining agreed 
with him (McElroy) that the present policy should be retained. Unless 
we could use nuclear weapons, we could not participate in limited wars.
The President recalled that during the last war American troops 
had had available, if necessary, mustard gas, but that it had never been 
used. He wondered at what point in the spectrum between harass­
ment and limited war we should resort to nuclear weapons. Secretary 
McElroy then said there were significant budget considerations in the 
proposed policy changes.
The President then referred to the impossibility of our stationing 
garrisons all over the world. The President said that Secretary McElroy’s 
point of view was our present policy and it was being implemented. He 
recalled that when we reduced our forces in Korea, we beefed up the 
remaining forces with nuclear capability.
Admiral Radford then said that the State Department wanted the 
military to fight with conventional weapons until it was decided to go 
to nuclear weapons. “We are past that point”, he said. In 1953, we took a 
crucial decision to convert our present forces to nuclear weapons capa­
bility. The fact that they are nuclear capable permits us to use small 
scale units to do a job which otherwise could only be done with much 
larger forces.
There was then a discussion about the question of delegation of 
authority to employ nuclear weapons. The President expressed some con­
cern about the possibility of poor judgment by some local commander.
Secretary Herter referred to the possibility of using tactical weap­
ons in excess of 1 megaton, as reported at last Tuesday’s briefing by
