Yugoslavia —We are pleased to see the developing relationship between Peking and Belgrade. We think this is an important relationship and one that deserves to be broadened. —We are committed to the process of normalization and would consider it useful if Tito could convey the earnestness of our intent to Peking. —We consider the improvement of our relations with Peking to be a matter of historic and strategic importance. —We believe that mutual efforts are necessary to create the environment in which the normalization process can be completed. Such mutual efforts include not only an expansion of the commercial and economic relations with Peking in order to foster political attitudes in this country that would favor normalization, but a broadening and deepening of our consultations with Peking about world affairs as well. —To this end, perhaps Tito could indicate to the Chinese that we do not wish to use our relationship with Peking to get at the Russians. We do not seek to manipulate the Sino-Soviet dispute to our advantage. Rather, we believe that an improved relationship with Peking is simply in the American interest. —But to convince our domestic skeptics that an improved relationship with Peking is in our interest, perhaps Tito would be willing to indicate to the Chinese that it would be helpful to us were the Chinese to discuss with us rather than preach to us on such issues as: —Korea and the possibility of cooperative measures to promote a peaceful and just evolution of the situation on the Peninsula. —Africa and ways in which we might pursue separate yet reinforcing ways of preventing outside powers from establishing positions of dominance on the Continent. —Global strategic matters and ways in which US efforts to promote arms control and disarmament can take into account the Chinese position and encourage the Chinese to participate in our efforts. —In short, we see China as a significant actor on the world scene, we consider that we have many parallel strategic interests with China, and we wish to act upon these parallel interests in order over a period of time to encourage the Chinese to play a constructive role in the addressing of man’s many problems. Non-Aligned Movement. President Tito will want to talk with you about the Non-Aligned Movement. It would be useful to seek his moderating influence on a particular question—the next meeting of the Movement in Havana in 1979, when Cuba wants a signal success: —Historically, the position of the US Government to the Non- Aligned Movement has been one of distance at best, and hostility at worst.
