52
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
3. Counter-attack: Attack is the best defense.
I think you ought to strive to the extent that you can to shift the dis-
cussion to such matters as:
Non-proliferation
Republican failures in Cyprus and Angola
Republican indifference to the human rights issue, especially in the
Soviet Union
Republican disinterest and absence of leadership with regards to
global issues (including on the last item, paralyzing differences be-
tween the Treasury Department led by Simon and the State Department)
Absence of an energy program.
4. Beyond Debates.
It is my general view that the debates will not be decisive the way
the Kennedy-Nixon debates may have been. The public is essentially
looking for indications of true Presidential ability, and you will have
shown that in the debates, but more than the debates will be required.
This is why I feel strongly that you should give at least one presidential-type
speech a week (of the kind that you gave to the FPA in New York).11 Insofar as
foreign affairs are concerned, I think you ought to give a responsibly
tough-nosed speech on East-West relations, along the lines of the draft
that I have sent to you.12 There is bound to be disagreement among
your advisers on the tone and substance of this speech but I lean
towards moderate and responsible toughness as being justified both by
domestic political needs and actual international realities. In addition,
you should demonstrate responsible humaneness and vision on the
larger global issues and here a serious discussion of the North-South re-
lationship would be the proper focus.
All of the above can be, and should be, reinforced by periodic re-
lease of position papers with a more sharply defined focus.13
5. European Expectations.
I was in Europe in connection with my regular work. I met there a
number of people I know quite well (the Foreign Minister and Presi-
dent of Italy; the principal foreign policy advisers to President Giscard;
some top British and German business and political leaders; as well as
some key journalists).
11 See Document 6.
12 Not found and not further identified.
13 The Carter campaign released a series of position papers in six categories under
the headings “The Federal System,” “The Citizen and the System,” “Agriculture and the
Economy,” “Business and Labor,” “Energy and the Environment,” and “Foreign Policy—
U.S. Security.” The issues papers are printed in The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I,
part I, Jimmy Carter, pp. 581–699.
