108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII campaign, and [less than 1 line not declassified] are willing to provide some intelligence. The head of [1 line not declassified] said his organization would be willing to provide training for the dissidents, although it is doubtful he was speaking for [less than 1 line not declassified] Government when he made this comment. CA OPTIONS—PRO’S AND CON’S: 1. Propaganda—Outside Afghanistan. We could generate a worldwide media campaign publicizing the DRA’s problems, exposing Taraki and his colleagues as pawns of the Soviet Union. We could condemn Taraki for attempting to force an atheistic philosophy on the religious population and for violating civil rights. Such a campaign could be conducted unilaterally or with the cooperation of friendly governments such as [less than 1 line not declassified]. It would be virtually risk free, but probably would have little impact within Afghanistan itself. It would, however, establish the groundwork for additional CA activities, including influencing Saudi Arabian and other prospective donors of aid to the rebel cause. 2. Propaganda—Inside Afghanistan. Propaganda material could be distributed inside Afghanistan. Afghans have a tradition of employing “night letters”—clandestinely produced leaflets—to register protest. CIA could produce such material for non-attributable distribution in Kabul and elsewhere in Afghanistan, but this obviously would entail considerable risk for those involved. We cannot predict in advance the success of an internal propaganda campaign or the overall effect it would have on the regime. It probably would have the greatest impact if it were undertaken in conjunction with a broader program of support for the insurgents. 3. Propaganda—Radio. Radio broadcasts in Dari and Pushtu in the standard broadcast band beamed into Afghanistan from neighboring countries would require the cooperation of the Governments of Pakistan and/or Iran.4 In the past the GOP has transmitted propaganda into Afghanistan from a radio station in Quetta. If relations between the two countries deteriorate, the GOP might resume such broadcasts. Some existing shortwave broadcasts, [less than 1 line not declassified], also reach Afghanistan, and we could explore the possibility of putting our message on this medium. Again, cooperation of a third country would be essential. An airborne radio station also is possible, but this too would have to be supported from a nearby country. Satellite broadcasts theoretically could be arranged, but only at great expense 4 Inderfurth circled “/or Iran” and drew a line to the bottom of the page, where he wrote: “I doubt the Ayatollah (or Bazargan for that matter) would go along with this. Maybe later.”
