North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
917
from $1.0 to $8.0 billion. But in the wake of the debts incurred since
1973 by 14 “upper tier” developing countries, their annual interest pay-
ments are estimated at $7.0 billion and their annual payments on prin-
cipal will rise 45 per cent to $16.0 billion (1978–79 over 1975–76). US
trade policies and its reciprocal bargaining with the major developing
countries will have to take into account the need of international
debtors to increase their exports. Without an adaptation to that need
we run the risk of threatening the viability of the international financial
system. Yet even the upper tier of developing countries appear reluc-
tant to break with the Group of 77 on trade and other issues that are re-
lated to this problem. For our part, Congressional pressures make it dif-
ficult to sustain the open trade policies that the situation requires.
Turning to our current approach to North-South trade, foreign
assistance, commodity policy, and technology transfers I feel that we
are in a defensive position on too many fronts. With two possible ex-
ceptions, our approaches to the MTN and foreign assistance, our pol-
icies can be described by one word, containment.2 We seek to contain
first those developed countries that wish to adopt more forthcoming
approaches to negotiations with developing countries; and second, the
leading developing countries, whose proposals are seen as a challenge
to an economic system that has served our interests well and could also
serve the interests of developing countries if given a chance. For the
time being the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries are
at the margin of international consideration of North-South issues. The
influence of the PRC is limited.
On a variety of issues the United States consciously adopts a con-
servative position within the Group of OECD countries. (See Tab A,
p. 4)3 This is done because of (1) a conviction that in so doing we best
serve our interests in a well functioning world economy, (2) concern
that the Congress would oppose “concessions” to the developing
world, (3) bureaucratic inertia, (4) the natural (and appropriate) con-
servatism of the Treasury Department, or (5) the responsiveness of
State’s Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs (E/B) to the short-run
concerns of the business community.
Statements by the President, Ambassador Young and yourself
have described the political and economic changes that require leader-
ship by the United States. But we have not translated your commitment
to work towards a “broader political and economic international
2 Brzezinski highlighted the first two sentences of the paragraph. He also under-
lined the words “to the MTN and” and “word, containment.”
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a January 25 memorandum prepared by the
CIA National Foreign Assessment Center entitled “The International Setting for
North-South Relations in 1978.”
