114 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the Red Cross visited, the women were afraid to tell them they had been threatened.2 10. The hostages believe the two remaining women were kept because they are Farsi-speaking officers. Charles Jones remained in the C&R vault for two hours after the takeover so it is believed the students thought he was an intelligence officer as well. 11. The hostages believe that publicity of their treatment would have a very negative impact on the remaining hostages. 12. The captors appeared to be aware of U.S. public opinion but did not seem dissuaded by it. Instead, they exaggerated or falsified U.S. news stories. They told the hostages that Americans were beating and raping Iranians and that four Iranian students had been killed in San Francisco. 13. The cessation of oil imports, blocking of assets was raised with one hostage but the students used it to try to convince her that the U.S. had abandoned them. 14. The hostages were told by the students that the return of the Shah to Mexico would do no good. 15. The hostages could not determine what the students’ reaction would be to the Shah’s return to Mexico but were generally pessimistic about the possibility of the remaining hostages’ early release. Betts 2 For the Papal emissary’s visit, see footnote 7, Document 19. Representatives of the Red Lion and Sun Society visited the hostages on November 9. (William Branigin, “Security Council Urges Release of Americans,” Washington Post, November 10, 1979, p. A1) 46. Message From the Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Laingen) to Secretary of State Vance1 Tehran, November 22, 1979, 1630Z [Omitted here are handling instructions.] Following is message from Laingen addressed to Secretary Vance, which he handed to the 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 1, Folder 17. Confidential. Sent from the British Embassy in Tehran via the British Embassy in Washington to the Department of State for the Iran Task Force, then forwarded from the White House Situation Room to Camp David on November 23, 5:04 p.m., with instructions to deliver to Hamilton Jordan in a sealed envelope.
