Such a provision would secure to American commercial travelers the right to dispose of their samples to a class of purchasers to whom they are permitted to sell under Austrian law and would not in any way contemplate traffic forbidden by Austrian law. At the same time peddlers would be excluded from the scope of the Treaty and the policy which the provinces of Austria are said to follow with respect to peddling could be maintained. If this suggestion for the consolidation of paragraph (c) and paragraph (g) be adopted, paragraph (h) and paragraph (i) will of course be re-numbered paragraph (g) and paragraph (h) respectively. Article XII. You stated that the Austrian experts have no objection to paragraph (b) of Article XII, provided it is understood that upon departure from the country the cancellation of the bond is to be effected in an Austrian port. The Austrian experts propose also with respect to Article XII, that paragraph (c) of that Article be amended by striking out everything after the semicolon in line 5, so that the paragraph will read as follows: “It is understood that the traveler will not engage in the sale of other articles than those embraced by his line of business.” The Department does not understand that a requirement by Austria that the cancellation of the bond for the payment of customs duties on samples not re-exported should be effected at an Austrian port of departure would be in any way inconsistent with the provision in regard to the cancellation of such bonds contained in paragraph (b) of Article XII. You are authorized to accept the amendment proposed by Austria to paragraph (c) of Article XII. This Government desires to have the words “or other competent authorities” inserted in the third line of the second paragraph of subdivision (b) of Article XII, after the word “officials”. This also is an amendment arising out of the negotiations with Germany. As a consequence of the insertion of these words the word “customs” in the ninth line of this paragraph will be stricken out so that the second sentence of the paragraph will begin with the words “The said officials”. The paragraph as amended will read:
