Hungary
487
favor publication. He would send instructions to Ambassador Kaiser
concerning further discussions of this matter.4
5. On the language itself, the Secretary explained his initial reaction
that reference to the Covenant of Civil and Political Rights would be
an appropriate way to deal with the U.S. desire to refer to the UDHR.
The U.S. would consider the Hungarian proposal and send instructions
to Ambassador Kaiser.
6. The Secretary referred to the limited number of outstanding
family reunification cases and expressed the hope for their early resolu-
tion. Puja replied that the GOH is studying these cases which were
only raised recently, and would continue to maintain a liberal policy
in these matters.
7. High level meetings: Puja then repeated a hope expressed by
Prime Minister Lazar that the leaders of the two countries could meet
soon.5 He then extended a formal invitation to the Secretary to pay an
official visit to Budapest.
8. The Secretary accepted Puja’s invitation, with a date to be set at
some time in the future. On higher level meetings, the Secretary said
that he would discuss this question with the President and be back
in touch.
9. Property negotiations: Puja referred to progress and expressed
hope for resolution. The Secretary noted our pleasure at the progress
4 In telegram 15152 to Budapest, January 19, the Department informed Kaiser that,
after reviewing the Puja proposals, it believed “that reference to International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights likely to produce unhelpful controversy in U.S.” The cable
instructed Kaiser to propose to the Hungarian Government that the language in the
assurances statement provide “an obligation to ‘act promptly, constructively, and with
good will’ concerning emigration cases” in the letter and spirit of the Helsinki Final Act.
The telegram also informed Kaiser that the Department had no objections to the Hungar-
ian Government proposal of also including other subjects in the letters. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780029–0464)
5 In telegram 103 from Budapest, January 7, the Embassy reported Vance’s meeting
with Prime Minister Lazar. The two discussed bilateral relations, the return of the Crown,
and MFN for Hungary. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780012–
0162) Vance also met with the President of the Hungarian National Assembly, Antal
Apro, on January 6. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs: Staff Material, Europe,
USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St Stephen:
1/78) Discussions on a possible meeting between Vance and Kadar had taken place in
late December 1977, and in telegram 4421 from Budapest, December 22, the Embassy
reported that, despite using “oblique” language, the “message was clear: The GOH
would appreciate the Secretary requesting a meeting with Kadar.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770477–0938) The Department replied in telegram
305669 to Budapest, December 23: “We do not repeat not wish to request a meeting
between the Secretary and Kadar. Our strong inclination is to avoid such a meeting if
possible.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770478–0850) The
Embassy reported in telegram 4440 from Budapest, December 23, that the Hungarian
Government understood and that “it is possible the Hungarians will let the matter stand
that way.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770479–0823)
