212
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. Environmental, health and safety regulations have been a significant
factor in raising U.S. steel industry costs, but other countries are doing as
much or more. It is hard to blame a deterioration of the U.S. competitive
position vis-a-vis the Japanese on environmental, health and safety
regulations.
4. A reduction of imports to historical levels—say 1969–71 (the ear-
lier voluntary restraint period) or the last five-year average—would not
significantly improve domestic industry sales. The main way it could
“help” the industry is to permit a rise in prices relative to costs.
5. The cost advantages of Japanese producers (without subsidy)
are sufficient to allow them to underprice American steel producers
within significant parts of the U.S. market without selling below cost.
The opposite is true of European steel makers. (These conclusions have
important implications for the dumping cases against European and Japanese
steel firms now in the courts.)
I intend, of course, to review the CWPS draft closely. But no matter
how carefully worded, the publication of a dispassionate examination
of the facts will arouse a great deal of critical reaction.8
8 The CWPS report on the steel industry was released on October 7. (Edward
Cowan, “Steelmakers Cited As Inflation Source,” The New York Times, October 8, 1977,
p. 29)
63.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, September 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Organizing ourselves on the steel problem
I met this morning with nearly everyone in the government concerned
with the steel problem.2 We unanimously agreed on the following steps. We
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [7]. No classification marking. A stamped nota-
tion reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page” “Mike. J.”
2 Mike Blumenthal (Treasury), Charlie Schultze (CEA), Jim McIntyre (OMB), Bob
Strauss (STR), Ray Marshall (Labor), Sidney Harmon (Commerce), Tony Solomon
(Treasury), Dick Cooper (State), Stu Eizenstat (DPS), Jack Watson (Cabinet Secretary),
and Henry Owen (NSC). [Footnote in the original.]
