1977 23 —Conflict with third countries without Soviet forces involved (such as in Korea). For each of these contingencies, the study should examine each side’s capability to bring military power to bear. Included should be relative capabilities to mobilize, transport, sustain, and command and control forces in the combat area. 3. For each alternative military strategy, alternative force postures will be developed, with cost data provided for each one. These alternatives should again highlight key force structure issues (for example, alternative bomber forces, degree of reliance on land-­based versus sea-­ based tactical air) and should include the current FYDP and postures fundamentally different from that plan; for example, postures involving a strategic dyad or quadrad and those making extensive use of land-­based aircraft for sea control. 4. Alternative military strategies and force postures must be considered in the context of overall U.S. fiscal policy and the competing demands of non-­defense programs and alternative government tax policies. The study will project future overall federal receipts and expenditures, and will explore potential tradeoffs between defense and non-­defense programs. 5. The final report prepared for National Security Council review will not recommend any specific military strategy or military posture. It will provide options for each, and will indicate pros and cons for each based upon considerations such as military threat, foreign policy, arms control, political sufficiency, costs, technological risks, and specific capabilities in the contingencies outlined in paragraph 2 above. Detailed analyses of the areas studied will be included in annexes to the summary report. C. Organization A PRC Military Strategy and Force Posture Group will be created, chaired by DOD. A PRC Working Group for Military Strategy and Force Posture will also be created. It will be chaired by OSD/ISA and will have members from the NSC Staff, State Department, CIA, the Joint Staff, OMB, ACDA, and such other members as the Chairman or Assistant for National Security Affairs may request. Interagency task forces will be organized as directed by the Working Group, and will develop the alternative military strategies to be examined in the study. Among these task forces will be a task force to carry out military contingency assessments, as defined in paragraph 2 above (NSC chaired, to be coordinated with regional net assessment groups). D. Schedule 1. The Working Group should submit to the PRC by April 1, 1977 an interim report:
