Bolivia 189 himself as the party’s candidate for next year’s presidential election. At the moment it would appear Victor Paz was the front runner. Whoever was nominated by the MNR party would undoubtedly follow the same general policy of cooperation with the U.S. as the present Government, Andrade stated, and Mr. Rubottom replied that he was glad to hear Bolivia would continue this policy. Concerning the present economic situation in Bolivia, the Foreign Minister reported that last week he had a long satisfactory talk in New York with the head of the Gulf Oil Company’s Latin American section, and that Gulf had confidence regarding its Bolivian operations. The Bolivian Oil Company, according to Andrade, is expected to become productive later this fall or winter in the Madrejones area, with a possible eventual production there of 10,000 barrels a day. In the Santa Cruz area, agricultural prospects were good, he said, with an improvement in sugar production and cattle raising. He thought that the entire economic picture was slowly improving. There had been impressive gains in manufacturing, end some plants (he specifically mentioned SAID and “a glass factory”) were even rehiring workers. The past year had seen tough tough battles in the social sector, according to the Foreign Minister. The GOB, he said, had resisted the demands of the miners and teachers for higher wages. Andrade stated, however, that something would probably have to be done for white collar workers, such as government and clerical employees, who still earn very low salaries. Mr. Rubottom mentioned the continuing harassment of our aid program in Bolivia, in which La Nación had participated. He said that we understood La Nación had been somewhat better in this respect recently. Andrade replied that he had a long talk with Ambassador Strom2 concerning La Nación. He added that this newspaper must be permitted independence on “little” issues in order for it to support the government’s position on larger issues, else it would be discounted as purely a “government mouthpiece”. Personalities were also involved in the minor irritations between citizens of our two countries, Andrade added. Some U.S. citizens just don’t understand how things work in Bolivia. There was no doubt, Andrade said, that there were different cultural roots and he said we must all have patience. He confirmed that we were agreed on the fundamentals. He referred to the fact that some Bolivian officials considered certain U.S. officials arrogant, and he then mentioned an incident when an American lady at La Paz who had been drinking told him at a party that she was fed up with Bolivia and wanted to go home. Some
