International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
361
These are the two fundamentals. On growth, with Germany and
Japan this is also a fundamental. Even if Schmidt goes now to reach
3.5%, it takes time. Reaching 3.5% implies an accelerated rate of
growth, which would be hard for anyone to do. They hesitate in Ger-
many to go forward very fast. Concerning Japan, its current account
surplus of $13 billion is very worrying. It will not be easy for Japan to
achieve a 7% growth rate. 5.5% or 6% may be the best it can do. In 1978,
therefore, there will probably still be a $9 or $10 billion Japanese current
account surplus.
These are the fundamentals. We will do our part. We seek to limit
disorderly market conditions (working with the Germans), sometimes
with indifferent success. He had prepared some figures on the amount
spent on intervention. Since October 1, Japan had spent $11 billion, yet
the Yen is at 230 (to the dollar) and is still going down. Germany has
spent $5 billion, and we have spent almost $3 billion, with $2 billion
since the first of the year. We couldn’t get Congressional approval for a
large effort. The Exchange Stabilization Fund is limited.3 Therefore, in-
tervention is not the answer.
The Prime Minister said this is true in the short-term, if it (the
dollar?) can be turned around. He hopes the U.S. will be able to do so.
Secretary Blumenthal said that Germany would see the risk of
inflation.
The Prime Minister said he doubts that the U.S. could get a new
swap.
Secretary Blumenthal said we did get one recently, doubling the
amount, but there are still worries. We must work together on trade
and aid and to resist protectionism—it will be difficult. On the Prime
Minister’s idea about motivating the Saudis to place dollars for the
long-term in the U.S., this was good.4 And they (the Saudis) have done
a lot already.
The Prime Minister said he didn’t realize that the Saudis were
placing money for 8 years.
Secretary Blumenthal said that the Saudis were moving to the
long-term—two to five years and longer. But this is a sensitive matter,
and there is a need to be careful.
The Prime Minister asked what was offered on a stable dollar.
3 Through the Exchange Stabilization Fund, established by the 1934 Gold Reserve
Act, the Treasury Department can, among other things, intervene in the foreign exchange
market.
4 The British proposal suggested that “a clearer indication by the Saudis that they
were prepared to place funds in the US at longer term would strengthen the capital
account.”
