January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1299
386.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 28, 1980
SUBJECT
UN Resolution on Jerusalem (S)
At Tab A2 is a memorandum from Warren Christopher, setting
forth the arguments either for an abstention or a veto or non-
participation in the vote on the UNSC Jerusalem Resolution—now
scheduled for Monday afternoon.3 The memorandum does a good job
in setting out the various arguments. (S)
Because of the gravity of this issue—and the risks in any vote—I
believe it would be useful for you to meet on Monday morning with the
Vice President, Ed Muskie, and me to discuss our vote and related
statement. Given Don McHenry’s deep involvement and concern, I be-
lieve it would also be useful for him to be present (his telegram to you is
at Tab B—note, however, that the operative text of the resolution is that
contained in Chris’ memorandum). (S)
Sol Linowitz has asked to be recorded as follows:
We should not be party to any effort to make Jerusalem a political
issue at this time. Under other circumstances, maybe we should abstain
on a resolution containing many of these formulations. Under current
circumstances, we should veto with a statement that deals not with the
resolution’s substance, but rather states as our reasoning that this reso-
lution, at this time, would not advance the solution of Jerusalem or the
Palestinian problem, and would indeed hinder the search for solutions.
Therefore this resolution should not be permitted to gain the force of
law, as it would if we only abstained. (S)
With regard to Chris’ memorandum, I would only note that the
option of “non-participation” might be a distinction that would be
noted in the Security Council, but would make no practical political dif-
ference in Israel. With regard to the draft statement,4 I would note that
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 37, Serial
Xs—(5/80–6/80). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. The date is handwritten. Carter ini-
tialed “C” in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, indicating that he saw the
document.
2 Attached but not printed is the June 28 memorandum from Christopher to Carter.
3 According to a June 27 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, the vote was
postponed at U.S. request. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Country File, Box 37, Israel: 6/20–30/80)
4 Attached but not printed is the undated draft statement.
