740.0011 Mutual Guarantee (Locarno) /27
[Document 28]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State
LONDON, March 16, 1925.
[Received March 25 (?).]
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: In connection with my telegram No. 98, March 14, 1 p.m.,32 I beg to
enclose a copy, in translation, of the memorandum of January 20, 1925, which the
German Government handed to the governments of Great Britain, France, Italy and
Belgium on the subject of a security pact.33 I also enclose a copy of a letter which Mr.
Dufour, Counselor of the German Embassy, handed to me today32 commenting upon
the memorandum in question.
The manner in which I obtained the memorandum was as follows. Recently, having
occasion to speak upon other subjects with Dufour, I asked him if, as a matter of
information, he could properly give me the text of the proposals put forward by the
German Government for a security pact, concerning which there had been so much
publicity. I told him that I would like the text to forward to you and that it would be
given the most confidential treatment, making it clear to him that I was under no
instructions from my Government and that my request should not be interpreted as a
possibility of American intervention in European political affairs in any way. In a day
or two he brought me the memorandum; he thoroughly understands our position.
I gather from him that the British Government have replied informally to the German
Government to the effect that they believed the memorandum contained a basis
deserving of careful consideration, and that the French have replied in a more guarded
manner but have not rejected the idea. Apparently there has been great divergence of
opinion in the British Cabinet as to what form the question of security should take and
even as yet there is no crystallized policy determined upon. It would appear fairly
certain, however, that the British will attempt to induce France to include Germany in
any pact, on the understanding, of course, that Germany will first enter on an equal
footing into the League of Nations. Conversations are now taking place on this basis
between Herriot34 and Chamberlain, but the situation is in a very fluid state and it will
probably be several months before anything definite evolves. Italy can be counted upon
to follow the lead of Great Britain.
There has been much talk in the press here of a Disarmament Conference in
Washington. To me it seems clear that before France will attend such a conference the
question of her security, as she views it, must be definitely settled.
