92
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
While a naval blockade would increase the cost of transport of Iran
and cause severe economic disruptions, basic requirements could con-
tinue to be imported along established rail, highway, and waterway
links with the USSR and, to a lesser extent, with Turkey and with
Pakistan. These transport links have combined optional capacity of
some 7 million tons per year. The most these routes have carried in
recent years, however, is 3 million tons. Iranian imports are currently
running at about 7.75 million tons per year, one-half last year’s amount.
[portion marking not declassified]
In this situation, transport routes through the northwest region of
Iran would become an important funnel for the movement of high-
priority goods. On the rail side, the Soviets could increase the volume
to the rail link with Iran at Jolfa. The two lines, however, are of different
gauges and would require either transhipment or a change of wheel
sets. If there were a substantial pickup in truck traffic, the Iranians
would soon be confronted by problems of both road and truck mainte-
nance (especially since the flow of parts and supplies would be dis-
rupted), which would reduce the capacity of the highway alternative.
[portion marking not declassified]
Other fallback possibilities would include the limited rail and high-
way link with Turkey and the road link with Pakistan. The Pakistani
rail and highway line runs as far as Zahedan, Iran. Zahedan, however
has no rail link with the rest of Iran and the road link is difficult.
For this reason, high-priority goods coming through Pakistan would
probably be airlifted from Zahedan’s airport; Zahedan was used as an
airlift facility for Iran’s support of Pakistan during the last India-Paki-
stan War. [portion marking not declassified]
The backbone of any regional airlift operation would be the Iranian
Air Force’s 50 C–130 and nine 747 aircraft along with Iran Air’s five
707–320Cs. In combination this fleet of 64 aircraft could lift approxi-
mately 1,700 tons at any one time. We estimate that three-fourths of
the combined fleet would be initially available for airlift activities. A
sustained and concerted airlift operation, however, would quickly run
into maintenance problems. [portion marking not declassified]
Iranian Pain Threshold
The effectiveness of economic trade sanctions to compel nations
to act against their perceived national interests has traditionally been
overstated. In the case of the US embargo against Cuba, for example,
the Cubans were able and willing to increasingly tighten their belts.
Khomeini would be able to rally some mass support, especially from
the poorer classes, by focusing on the theme of martyrdom in Shia
Islam. However, substantial disruption of supplies would almost cer-
tainly heighten opposition among the middle and upper classes. The
