North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 939 U.S. POLICY ON DEBT RELIEF FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES U.S. debt policy recognizes the distinction between an immediate debt crisis and a structural balance of payments problem of which debt is one element. U.S. debt relief is provided on a case-by-case basis in situations of default and imminent default where necessary to ensure future repayment. Debt relief should not be used as a form of development assistance and debt reorganizations should normally take place in the framework of a multilateral creditor club. Furthermore, in April 1977, the EPG agreed to recommend opposition to all proposals for generalized debt rescheduling and to the use of debt relief as a normal means of transferring aid resources. The U.S. policy on debt relief reflects: (a) the economic necessity of a case-by-case approach; (b) the importance of honoring contractual obligations; (c) a desire to adhere to the budgetary process and avoid “back door” financing, and (d) the need to maintain the confidence of private capital markets. In considering the alternative positions discussed below in Section II for the UNCTAD Ministerial meeting, two issues arise which could lead to modification of U.S. policy on debt relief: —Should the U.S. use debt relief to provide assistance to LDCs on a case-by-case basis in implementing the structural balance of payments section of the US/EC proposal? (See Annexes B and C.) —Should the U.S. use, with Congressional approval, retroactive terms adjustment (a form of debt relief) on a case-by-case basis to provide assistance to the least developed LDCs? SECTION II: ISSUES FOR THE UNCTAD MINISTERIAL MEETING The U.S. objectives for the meeting are to: (1) preserve the longterm financial interests of the U.S.; (2) maintain a unified position among the major creditor countries; (3) keep discussion of the debt issue and the problems of the LLDCs on a constructive level; and (4) avoid adverse effects on overall North/South relations. These objectives must be delicately balanced; too much emphasis on one will undercut the others. The major questions that need to be addressed with regard to the U.S. position at the UNCTAD Ministerial are: (a) whether or not to support tabling the US/EEC CIEC proposal on debt; and (b) whether or not to support any other debt-related initiatives. There are four possibilities: (1) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal and to taking any other initiatives. (2) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, but opposition to taking any other initiatives. (3) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal, but support for an initiative on retroactive terms adjustment.
