1234 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the postponement would be a relatively brief one, probably not more than a week or so. One of the key factors in his decision to postpone is the forthcoming major address he will be making on Wednesday, May 14,5 in which he will announce some significant Cabinet and policy changes. The Israelis were at first puzzled but then philosophical about Sadat’s proposal to postpone the discussions, and they are anticipating that the postponement will not be an extended one. They can be expected to assert publicly that they had been perfectly willing to proceed with the negotiations and that Sadat’s action makes it less likely than ever that there can be an agreement by May 26. For his part, Sadat now is clearly miffed at Begin’s failure to move forward in the negotiations and tends to discount the possibility of making any real progress with Begin in the months ahead. 2. During the nine days we spent at Herzliya trying to find agreement,6 we accomplished little substantively on the major issues. For several days the Security issue was the major hang-up. Prime Minister Khalil and the Egyptian Delegation refused to discuss any other issues unless and until the Israelis agreed to move forward with discussions of Security by an appropriate group. Begin had asserted at the outset of this round of negotiations that Israel would not discuss Security on any continuing basis unless it were first agreed that Israel would have responsibility for both external and internal security. Predictably, the Egyptians refused to agree, there was almost a breakdown in the talks, and ultimately the Israelis dropped the condition and agreed to a discussion. The Egyptians then put forward their own security proposals which were dismaying to the Israelis and, in important respects, out of line with our own thinking. At that point the negotiations almost broke down for the second time. After some fast footwork and semantics, we were able to get things back on track again. (Reflecting the tone of the discussions and the hypersensitivity of the parties is the fact that I was able to get Egypt and Israel to agree on a formulation for security discussion by proposing that this be done by a “negotiating team” rather than by a “negotiating committee” or “negotiating group”.) The heart of the matter is that the two sides are actually not so far apart in implementation of Security measures as they are in the jargon and rhetoric. Accordingly, I did my best to try to get Ali and Weizman in center 5 During his May 8 meeting with Linowitz, Sadat described his forthcoming speech as a “‘turning point’ in his government’s efforts to institutionalize democracy and structure the government for taking decisive action in rebuilding the country.” (Ibid.) 6 See footnote 2 above. Presumably, Linowitz intended to refer to the length of his entire trip, rather than the duration of talks.
