Eastern Europe Region 71 3. Direct efforts toward moderate change while avoiding frontal confrontation. It has been the U.S. practice to favor regimes in Eastern Europe if they balance greater autonomy with the retention of stability, even though the domestic policies of these regimes are hardly compatible with American political values. The delicacy of the autonomy/stability balance means that we cannot play an “East European card” as we might with China. We must understand why we are doing what we are doing, even if we can not do much. Because the balance is delicate, we must keep our “tight-rope” act in mind and not demand too much clarity in an ambiguous situation. U.S. policies will inevitably contribute to occasional confrontational situations between Eastern Europe and the SU. We will help to exacerbate both Eastern European-Soviet and internal East European tension. There will be sporadic periods of tension vis-a-vis Eastern Europe as a permanent backdrop to U.S. policy-making. The paper prepared for the meeting did not set down specific goals for U.S. policy. A simple matrix of possible U.S. interactions with the Soviets and East Europeans presented four different mixes of cooperation and competition. Some illustrative pros and cons for each mix were used to call attention to the key assumptions underlying policy rationale for each. The brevity of the paper was useful in stimulating review of alternative US/SU/East European relationships, but most discussants thought it made the assumptions appear too stark, and without the nuance that, as it turned out, most thought characterize US-East European relations. Viable, coherent policy alternatives toward Eastern Europe were felt to be difficult to develop because of both domestic and international constraints. Although it was agreed that at the extremes of policy Western Europe is obliged to follow the U.S. lead, it was also felt that we are presently in the middle ground and therefore much less influential in shifting the mix of cooperation and competition. For example, European East-West trade is much larger than US-East European trade. Consumerism is a much larger issue in East Europe than in the SU, and East European politics are more sensitive to economic pressures. The relatively small US-East European trade will thus probably be translated into low political influence where consumerism is concerned. Eastern Europe also has a “Western orientation” or “Western linkage” which must be taken into account and which the Soviet Union lacks. These historical and cultural ties vary in strength. The Western orientation of East European countries, arranged in a descending rank order is: East Germany; Poland; Czechoslovakia; Hungary; Romania; and Bulgaria. This Western orientation acts to increase Western influ-
