514 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II The problems inherent in S/P’s broad-brush approach are exemplified by the one specific case in which S/P attempts to apply its proposed rules—that of Chile. Aside from the political outcry, voting for IFI loans for Chile would create a serious moral dilemma. We have opposed such aid to Pinochet’s regime because it has committed numerous violations of rights of the person and civil and political liberties, including the torture and summary execution of many hundreds of political opponents. Violations of rights of the person have subsided, as Pinochet has stated, because “the national security no longer requires them.” In other words, they have fallen off because sufficient numbers of political opponents have been killed, terrorized or driven into exile. It would be ironic if our logic led us automatically to respond favorably to such “success” by supplying export credits and voting for IFI loans.8 This is particularly disturbing since the institutions of repression remain essentially in place. Rights of the Person vs. Civil and Political Liberties Rights of the person would become the only “legitimate” category of human rights violation which justifies a negative vote in the IFI’s or any restrictions on U.S. Government-financed economic programs. Yet this position conflicts with the PD, the PRM and, contrary to the memo’s assertion, it conflicts with the view of the British and the Scandinavians as to human rights and the IFI’s. A key element in their judgment is whether the country is one where democratic traditions and institutions have been voided. Down-playing civil and political liberties does not accord with the Secretary’s speech and our policy, or with the British and Scandinavian policy. Again, while it may take longer for changes to occur in the area of civil and political rights, that judgment does not mean we should handcuff ourselves in the use of those diplomatic tactics—including restrictions on aspects of our bilateral relationship—which we judge will promote the realization of those rights sooner rather than later. Other S/P Arguments The other arguments that S/P offers to support its restrictive guidelines are tactical in nature. For example, S/P argues that “repressive governments will be more likely to improve their performance if they believe something short of suicide will bring a lifting of economic sanctions.” Translated, the argument amounts to this: “A government is less likely to stop violations of the person, if it believes that economic aid will be restored 8 An unknown hand bracketed the portion of the paragraph beginning with the word “The” and ending with the word “loans.”
