514
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The problems inherent in S/P’s broad-brush approach are exem-
plified by the one specific case in which S/P attempts to apply its pro-
posed rules—that of Chile. Aside from the political outcry, voting for
IFI loans for Chile would create a serious moral dilemma. We have op-
posed such aid to Pinochet’s regime because it has committed nu-
merous violations of rights of the person and civil and political lib-
erties, including the torture and summary execution of many hundreds
of political opponents. Violations of rights of the person have subsided,
as Pinochet has stated, because “the national security no longer re-
quires them.” In other words, they have fallen off because sufficient
numbers of political opponents have been killed, terrorized or driven
into exile. It would be ironic if our logic led us automatically to respond
favorably to such “success” by supplying export credits and voting for
IFI loans.8 This is particularly disturbing since the institutions of re-
pression remain essentially in place.
Rights of the Person vs. Civil and Political Liberties
Rights of the person would become the only “legitimate” category
of human rights violation which justifies a negative vote in the IFI’s or
any restrictions on U.S. Government-financed economic programs. Yet
this position conflicts with the PD, the PRM and, contrary to the
memo’s assertion, it conflicts with the view of the British and the Scan-
dinavians as to human rights and the IFI’s. A key element in their judg-
ment is whether the country is one where democratic traditions and in-
stitutions have been voided. Down-playing civil and political liberties
does not accord with the Secretary’s speech and our policy, or with the
British and Scandinavian policy. Again, while it may take longer for
changes to occur in the area of civil and political rights, that judgment
does not mean we should handcuff ourselves in the use of those diplo-
matic tactics—including restrictions on aspects of our bilateral relation-
ship—which we judge will promote the realization of those rights
sooner rather than later.
Other S/P Arguments
The other arguments that S/P offers to support its restrictive
guidelines are tactical in nature.
For example, S/P argues that “repressive governments will be
more likely to improve their performance if they believe something
short of suicide will bring a lifting of economic sanctions.” Translated,
the argument amounts to this: “A government is less likely to stop vio-
lations of the person, if it believes that economic aid will be restored
8 An unknown hand bracketed the portion of the paragraph beginning with the
word “The” and ending with the word “loans.”
