3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
485
3. Following are talking points which Shulman used orally during
meeting with Dobrynin:
—The Secretary of State regarded the Soviet communication on
Chernyayev and Enger intemperate and offensive. It is not only not
helpful, but it has had a negative effect on the prospects for resolving
this case.
—I will not dignify the note by a paragraph-by-paragraph re-
sponse, but there are several points that need to be made.
—If there is damage to US-Soviet relations, it arises from the abuse
of United Nations status by the espionage activities of these two men.
As you know, the matter has been handled by the courts in accordance
with our legal procedures. It has been handled fairly and openly, and
the men had the benefit of counsel of their choosing.
—It should be appreciated in Moscow that bail arrangements en-
abling Chernyayev and Enger to remain out of jail reflect a major effort
to take Soviet interests into account.
—What is more, as you know, an effort is being made to settle this
matter along lines previously discussed, and we await a response to
our most recent discussions.4 In the meantime, we hope that these com-
munications will not be burdened or impaired by unnecessary pub-
licity or further outbursts in official exchanges.
—Finally, while some agreement on “ground rules” is desirable,
the abuse of United Nations status for espionage purposes would rep-
resent a continuing difficulty as distinguished from personnel covered
by diplomatic immunity.
4. Dobrynin made no significant response to points made orally
and in non-paper other than to express agreement with the point that
further private discussions should be expedited.
Vance
4 Reference is to two telephone conversations between Dobrynin and Brzezinski,
November 3 and 6, in which the release and expulsion of the Woodbridge Two were dis-
cussed. The memoranda of conversation are in the Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated
Material, Geographic File, Box 19, U.S.S.R.—Prisoner Exchanges: (8/78–5/79). Dobrynin
and Brzezinski also met on November 9 to discuss the logistics of the exchange. The
memorandum of conversation is ibid.
