VI
Preface
the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommenda-
tions on particular problems that come to its attention.
Because of the history and significance of this volume, the Advi-
sory Committee offered advice throughout its lengthy preparation and
took the unusual step of delegating a member to review the manu-
script. Although the committee appreciates that some documenta-
tion remains classified and does not appear in the volume, it assesses
the volume as a reliable guide to the trajectory of U.S. policy to-
ward Iran from 1951 to 1954 and an exceptionally valuable addition
to the historical record. Accordingly, the committee recommended its
publication.
Declassification Review
The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Ad-
ministration, conducted the declassification review for the Department
of State of the documents published in this volume. The review was
conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive
Orders 12958 and 13526, as amended, on Classified National Security
Information and applicable laws.
The principle guiding declassification review is to release all infor-
mation, subject only to the current requirements of national security as
embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed
concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in
the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Govern-
ment, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific doc-
uments of those governments. The declassification review of this vol-
ume, which began in 2004 and was completed in 2014, resulted in the
decision to withhold 10 documents in full, excise a paragraph or more
in 38 documents, and make minor excisions of less than a paragraph in
82 documents.
The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research
conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassifica-
tion review process described above, that the documentation, annota-
tion, and editorial notes presented here, and read together with Foreign
Relations, 1952–1954, volume X, Iran, 1951–1954, provide a broadly ac-
curate account of the main lines of U.S. policy toward Iran from 1951 to
1954.
Acknowledgments
The Office of the Historian wishes to express its gratitude to Am-
bassador Harmon Kirby for his tireless efforts in pursuit of transpar-
ency and accountability in his work on the Foreign Relations series. This
volume is dedicated to his memory.
The editor wishes to acknowledge the valuable assistance of the
Historical Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence at the Central
