North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 873 All the strategies described below have four things in common: —All would continue Security Supporting Assistance,9 as a means of providing concessional aid to advance our political purposes. —All would continue, in varying degree, the US policy of using bilateral development aid and PL–480 aid to serve basic human needs of the poor abroad.10 This means a focus on improving the lives of poor people and helping them to gain access to such amenities as adequate food and nutrition, health and family planning services, shelter, and basic education. (The definition of aid for basic human needs recommended by the PRC is given at Annex D.)11 —All would have the US take account of the human rights performance of countries in allocating aid.12 —All would emphasize global problems—food, population, health, and education13—in some degree. This emphasis could be harder to come by under a strategy that stressed political purposes than under one that stressed helping poor people. If the attack on global hunger was given greater emphasis as a rationale for increased aid, we would probably elicit increased support among the American people. Strategy #1 would limit bilateral development assistance to meeting the basic human needs of poor people in poor countries (defined as those meeting the IDA eligibility of $520 or less in 1975 dollars),14 on the grounds that they need it and have no other recourse. The proportion of PL–480 going to poor countries would rise. Bilateral development assistance and PL–480 would be heavily concentrated in Africa and South Asia; bilateral development aid to governments in Latin America and the Near East would be limited to a few poor countries. Allocation of concessional development aid among IDA eligibles would be determined principally by the receiving country’s economic performance and commitment to helping its poor. Concessional aid to middle-income LDCs would be gradually phased down; concessional aid to these countries in support of technological collaboration (increased US support of research, development, and training on problems of special concern to LDCs) would continue, as it would under the other strategies discussed in this report. SSA and 9 Carter underlined the words “continue Security Supporting Assistance.” 10 Carter underlined these words and phrases in this sentence: “continue”; “using bilateral development aid”; “PL–480 aid”; and “poor.” 11 Tab E (not Tab D, as indicated in the memorandum), attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “PRC Recommendation for the Basic Human Needs Approach of US Foreign Assistance.” 12 Carter underlined the words “human rights performance.” 13 Carter underlined the words “food,” “population,” “health,” and “education.” 14 The map at Tab E shows eligible nations. [Footnote in the original. Tab D (not Tab E, as indicated in the memorandum), attached but not printed, is a World Bank map entitled “Countries Eligible for Soft Loans from the International Development Association (IDA).”]
