1008 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement praise to which the Embassy is probably not entitled because we did no more than fulfill our clear responsibilities. Summarizing, we would conclude that the Embassy policy has not been one of unreasoned liberality with loans to the Paraguayan Government. Every loan has been timed and sequenced to have the optimum effect politically, on fiscal stability, and to prepare the way for economic development. In this, our liaison has always been tight with the International Bank and its special mission of 1956, and with all other lending agencies. [text not declassified] 3. The United States Operations Mission to Paraguay In a manner that would avoid the possibility of creating an impression that the Embassy was trying to direct its affairs, the Embassy has made an evaluation of the past and present programs of the USOM/P. In the process of so doing, the Embassy has received the fullest cooperation of USOM/P’s Director and Assistant Director. [text not declassified] Under the firm belief that the United States cannot forever pamper so many nations of the world, or subsidize their legitimate budgetary charges, we have established termination dates for USOM/P’s services and projects. We are convinced that if we are to attain the objectives of ICA, projects must have final date goals as well as goals of accomplishment. The built-­in habit of U.S. bureaucracy—as is true of all bureaucracies—to perpetuate itself is an understandable, a human, but a vicious tendency. We can understand why each servicio and each ­special project has a hundred excuses for its own expansion and perpetuation. At the same time, I want to put it clearly on the record that the Director of USOM/P and his Assistant Director are cognizant of this tendency and are fully with me in putting this practice to the guillotine. Appended as Exhibit II6 is a list of the projects that are in being, as well as those which are contemplated in the Paraguayan technical aid program, and we have indicated the projected dates of termination. It is the firm recommendation of the Embassy, concurred in by USOM/P’s Office of the Director, that these dates be strictly observed. 4. Private Enterprise The Embassy has placed great emphasis on private enterprise, and as a matter of policy and basic experience, we believe that representative freedom can never be enjoyed unless enterprise is free. [text not declassified] 6 Not printed.
