not accept that the provinces of Tacna and Arica shall be a subject of the
bargain.
Our country never consented, not even at the time when it was under the
pressure of armed forces, to cede Tacna and Arica neither for money nor for
any compensations and it is precisely for that reason that the formula was
adopted of a plebiscite to take place at a certain time.
The Honorable Secretary of State declares that, leaving out of consideration
the attempt to carry out the unfulfilled provisions of the Treaty of Ancon, it
appears that, from the nature of the case, there are but three ways to deal
with the disputed territory: 1. delivery of the disputed territory in its entirety
to one or the other of the parties to the dispute; 2. division of the said
territory between them upon bases to be established; 3. some arrangements
by which neither contestant could retain any part of the territory. In respect
to the first way indicated, it is expressed that it may be correctly stated that
such a formula has virtually ceased to be regarded as a practical solution by
anybody who really hopes for a permanent settlement.
My Government must, at this point, insist upon declaring that there is no
reason for concluding that such way is impracticable and that it is virtually
abandoned. That way is precisely the one pointed out by law and justice in
as much as the third clause of the Treaty of Ancon has been obliterated by
the failure of the plebiscite and, therefore, Tacna and Arica continue to
constitute an integral part of the Peruvian territory. It would be quite natural
for any judge to so declare it.
 
It is to be repeated here that although Peru accepted as an act of
Americanist abnegation and as a deference to the high personality of the
Arbitrator, to enter into the discussion of other formulas of solution she did
so exclusively for the purpose of arriving at a settlement with Chile; but
Peru did at all times maintain the intangibility [untouchability?] of her
rights and the consequent reintegration of Tacna and Arica to her territory,
suggesting only the zone to the south of Azapa for the purpose of giving
therein a port to Bolivia.
