El Salvador  609
ES–23.	
Airgram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi) 
to the Department of State1
 
San Salvador, September 27, 1960.
G-9. Ref: Deptel 109, September 19, 1960. The chance of the Lemus 
government survival is directly dependent on the President’s capacity 
to use the forces now rallying to-­his support, not as Lemus (because 
in few short weeks I believe he has aroused strong animosity against 
himself in El Salvador) but as the President of the Republic and as the 
embodiment of law and order. For the moment he is able to count on 
the Army, the security forces, the cabinet, the business community and 
the church. The support is based on the concept that the best interest of 
Lemus supporters lies in their trying to work with him and to maintain 
him in power despite his idiosyncrasies and their personal piques.
However, there is a strong wave of public indignation and resent-
ment running against him, especially because of the beating of the 
Rector. The advice of those immediately about him is faulty, and it is 
not beyond the realm of possibility that it is deliberately poor.
On September 19 a meeting of 50 leaders in response to the call of 
Ortíz Mancía at the Regalado home resulted, after frank and heated 
discussion, in a decision to try to work with Lemus and to finance a 
public relations program building support for the government and 
educating the public about Communist tactics, aims and threats. The 
consensus was that Lemus was his own worst enemy and that cabinet 
changes were overdue, especially in the case of the Sub-Secretary of 
Justice, Julio Fausto Fernandez, the supposedly reformed Communist 
and ex-­Secretary of the Salvadoran Communist Party. Several subse-
quent meetings have only strengthened the basic decision and spurred 
the creation of a new publicity agency backed with substantial funds.
The length of the Lemus government’s new lease on life is directly 
dependent on Lemus’ ability to curb his egotism, abandon the determi-
nation to go-­it-­alone and to develop at least the appearance of gratitude. 
To survive he must take counsel of others than those who currently sur-
round him and to be more accessible to many who are anxious and in 
a position to help.
How long Osorio and his forces will remain withdrawn from the 
scene will in a large measure depend on President Lemus himself. 
Signs indicate that Lemus may not be helping his cause to any mate-
rial degree. The current publicity program emanating from the Casa 
Presidential at first appeared vengeful and sensational rather than qui-
eting and calculated to restore normal order. Even more disturbing is 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.00/9–2760. Secret. Co-­drafted by 
Downs.
