National Security Policy  215
including non-­white forces, should not be recruited. This idea is being 
examined now in the Department of Defense. Also being examined is 
whether the US needs the numerous strategic weapons systems which 
it now plans for. It does not follow that, if our strategic weapons can 
be cut down, we would automatically build up our limited war capa­
bilities. Over the long run one might be able to reduce over-­all defense 
expenditures, but not now. He speculated as to whether we should let 
our allies know more about our limited war capabilities—­but, perhaps, 
we don’t have enough to do this.
Secretary McElroy then introduced Rear Admiral Triebel, who 
gave a briefing on the Joint State-Defense-JCS limited war capabilities 
study. As this study is available in the Department of State, this briefing 
will not be detailed here.
Upon conclusion of the briefing, Secretary McElroy asked what the 
basic problem was. Is it because our allies do not know about our lim­
ited war capabilities or are our capabilities insufficient?
Secretary Dulles said there were two problems: (a) the Strategic 
Concept; and (b) our limited war capabilities.
These capabilities are relevant if our strategic concept contem­
plates limited war. The Joint State-Defense-JCS study shows that we do 
have a doctrine for limited war, and we seem to be in reasonably good 
condition in regard to limited war capabilities and in the matter of rela­
tions with our allies in this respect.
Secretary Dulles said that, although there is no US commitment 
to come to Iran’s defense, there is a gap in our military capabilities in 
regard to Iran. He referred to the concern reported by General Taylor 
last winter that Iran would be used as a funnel for an attack. We must 
face up to this problem in connection with the forthcoming visit of the 
Shah of Iran.
The Secretary said that the big problem involving the strategic 
concept is in relationship to NATO. In our thinking we assume that 
there can be no limited war in Europe. He said he did not quarrel with 
this assumption—­he shared this judgment. However, we in the State 
Department detect a growing concern, voiced by responsible European 
officials as well as demagogues, that the US, when it comes squarely 
under the threat of ICBM attack, will not launch an all-­out nuclear 
attack on the Soviet Union if another NATO nation is attacked.
Secretary Dulles referred to Duncan Sandys’ concern to this effect, 
of which he had been advised at Copenhagen. The Secretary then read 
pertinent excerpts from Sandys’ paper which had been presented to the 
British Cabinet.
Secretary Dulles also reported Ambassador Houghton’s judgment 
that, during the forthcoming visit to Paris, de Gaulle would make two 
points in justification of a French nuclear weapons production program.
