National Security Policy  499
162. Air support of tactical operations in Western Europe could be 
provided by about 1,600 jet light bombers stationed in Eastern Europe 
and Western USSR, as well as more than 4,500 tactical jet fighters sta­
tioned in these areas. However, the dual missions of tactical fighter units 
and the probable assignment of a considerable number to air defense 
would limit the availability of fighter aircraft for tactical support in the 
initial phase of the land campaign. Ballistic missiles and tactical nuclear 
weapons could now be available for the support of offensive opera­
tions, and their availability will almost certainly increase as the period 
advances.
163. Offensive Capabilities in the Far East. The USSR has about 30 line 
divisions in the Far East, together with nearly 3,500 aircraft and a sizable 
naval force. Stockpiles of supplies are probably sufficient, not only for 
the initiation of operations, but also for a considerable period of combat. 
Soviet forces in the Far East could, alone or in conjunction with Chinese 
Communist and North Korean forces, renew hostilities in Korea. They 
could probably launch an operation against Japan with an airborne 
force equivalent to 3 divisions in a one-­day operation, and up to 5 divi­
sions in a five-­day operation. An initial seaborne attack for the purpose 
of seizing port facilities could be undertaken by lightly-­equipped troops 
landed from a heterogeneous group of ships and craft. Balanced forces 
equivalent to 5–6 divisions could be embarked in a follow-up operation 
and landed through the port facilities seized. The same technique could 
be employed in other areas of the Far East within range of land-­based 
aircraft. Airborne and amphibious attacks on a small scale could also be 
launched against Alaska.
164. Capabilities for Naval Warfare. At the present time the capabil­
ities of Soviet naval forces include: extensive submarine operations 
along most of the world’s strategic sea lanes, employing conventional 
and possibly nuclear torpedoes and mines; attacks against US and 
Allied carrier task forces by submarines and shore-­based naval aircraft, 
some of which could probably be equipped with air-­to-­surface missiles; 
operations in Bloc coastal areas by surface units and supporting shore-­
based aircraft, primarily to deny Western access and to protect the sea­
ward flanks of ground campaigns; attacks against port facilities which 
would be used by US overseas reinforcements, employing shore-­based 
aircraft, surface forces and submarines, some of which could probably 
employ surface-­to-­surface missiles. In short, we estimate that the USSR 
has an extensive capability to interfere seriously with US and Allied sea 
communications in the event of war.
165. Soviet capabilities for naval warfare will continue to increase, 
especially with the probable advent of nuclear-­powered submarines, 
increases in over-­all submarine strength, increasing capabilities to
