1955  327
to easing tensions and improving relations between two countries. He 
had put forward two subjects for discussion: lifting of embargo was 
demand voiced by many countries, and preparation for Sino-American 
negotiations at higher level was desired by people many countries as 
well as by high officials of US. He hoped we could enter upon discus­
sion these problems without delay and he would be glad to hear any 
positive views I might put forward on agenda item two.
8. I replied I pleased note his statement he would consider any 
specific opinion we wished put forward regarding implementation 
announcement. In previous meetings I had put forward a few simple 
questions on implementation which carried with them clear implication 
of suggestions. I did not want any more than he did to spend our time 
on these subjects and I did not think we need do so. Questions I had pre­
viously asked were simple and straightforward and they required only 
simple and straightforward answers. Unless we were willing to keep 
each other fully and frankly informed on steps our governments had 
taken it was going to be very difficult to discuss successfully other mat­
ters. I thought these matters too important to be referred to our assist­
ants, but hoped we could quickly complete their discussion between the 
two of us.
9. I said he had mentioned certain matters regarding our imple­
mentation of agreed announcement upon which I wished to comment 
briefly. He said I had admitted students in US afraid make application 
to depart. I could not imagine what statement I had made which could 
be so interpreted and I rejected that implication from any statements I 
may have made. He stated some students did not have courage now 
apply depart but I could not see what he referred to, because it was not 
necessary for them to make application to any government agency to 
depart. In addition, arrangement with Indian Government in full effect 
and any student had full right communicate with Embassy GOI if he 
thought his right depart being interfered with. He had spoken of list 
I gave him of 76 Chinese against whom restraining orders had been 
lifted and said 42 of 76 not yet returned. I did not know of any Chinese 
in US who desired to return who was now prevented from doing so. I 
had no information whether any of 42 had postponed their departure 
or had changed their minds. Maybe, as had been said in NCNA broad­
cast September 20, some these Chinese wanted postpone departure in 
order complete work or studies in US. Whatever reason, basic fact was 
Chinese in US free to do what they wished. If there were other aspects 
our implementation of announcement he wished discuss I would cer­
tainly be glad discuss with him.
10. I said one question I had raised previous meeting concerned 
ability Americans imprisoned to learn of terms agreed announcement. 
I had understood from him there were arrangements for reading and
