Romania
649
ing. He promised to look into the matter.6 He assured Mr. Andrei,
however, that this was not a deliberate policy on the part of the U.S.
government, which he stressed does not engage in such activities as a
matter of policy. He would check on it and asked Mr. Larrabee to
investigate the charges and report his findings to him. If the charges
proved to be true—which he doubted would be the case—he would
call a halt to such activities.
Dr. Brzezinski then turned to the case of Ion Pacepa. He pointed out
that Mr. Andrei could not be serious about the charges. The Romanians
could not charge that Pacepa was a CIA agent and then at the same
time ask for his extradition. They could not have it both ways. He was
sure that Romania did not turn over its agents, and the Romanians
could not realistically ask the U.S. to do something which they them-
selves would not do. Dr. Brzezinski stressed, however, that the U.S.
was prepared to arrange for Pacepa’s resettlement in a third country
with his family. He assured Mr. Andrei that the U.S. had not enticed
Pacepa to defect. In his view, the best way to handle the case was
quietly and he emphasized that the U.S. had no intention of exploit-
ing the case, which should not be allowed to become an irritant in
Romanian-U.S. relations.
Dr. Brzezinski next raised the case of several employees of Radio
Free Europe (former Romanian citizens) in Munich who were beaten
up under strange circumstances.7 Mr. Andrei replied that he knew
nothing about the case. Dr. Brzezinski noted that as Foreign Minister,
it was quite possible that Mr. Andrei did not know about such incidents
6 In telegram 257771 to Bucharest, October 11, the Department reported allegations
made by Andrei that U.S. Embassy employees were encouraging Romanian citizens to
emigrate and asked the Embassy to investigate. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780416–0508) The Embassy response in telegram 7264 from Bucha-
rest, October 13, stated that the allegations were “without foundation.” Aggrey wrote:
“It is my strong impression that Andrei’s complaint was prompted by two different but
related considerations: hypersensitivity of Romanian security establishment and GOR
top level to US-Romanian consular relations in wake of Pacepa defection” and Embassy
officials’ contact with Romanian citizens, especially Vlad Georgescu and Ecaterina Rauta.
Aggrey continued: “These are sensitive cases for GOR, especially at this time. However,
contacts involve legitimate US interest in persons who decided on their own, prior to
contact, that they wish to travel to US.” Aggrey recommended that the Department
inform the Romanian Government that the complaint was carefully investigated and
found to be without merit. The Ambassador also recommended that the Romanians be
informed that “it would not be supportive of progress in bilateral relations both sides
seek for current sensitivities to result in restrictions on or obstacles to normal conduct
of consular operations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780419–0034)
7 In telegram 3597 from Munich, November 22, 1977, the Consulate reported the
attack in Paris on RFE Romanian broadcast freelancer Monica Lovinescu. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770433–0070) See also footnote 1, Docu-
ment 207.
