Rhineland as the logical repercussion of a pact said to be bilateral. This omission he apparently regards as the negotiation [negation] of the true spirit of peace and reconciliation which Locarno was supposed to embody. It explains his utter lack of confidence in Locarno at this date. His distrust of Europe has since been considerably heightened: first, by the intrigues which led to the postponement of the Preliminary Disarmament Conference; and, secondly, by those which preceded the recent session of the League at Geneva. The continental powers, he declares, are not sincerely anxious for disarmament, least of all France, which is determined not to disarm on the proportionate basis of the Versailles Treaty” …67 “Italy and Japan, he thinks, are associated with France in the endeavor to oppose the White House in any real scheme for the reduction of arms as well as for a separate naval conference at Washington desired by President Coolidge, just as the new Latin syndicate within the League is designed, in his opinion, to thwart Great Britain. Mr. Houghton considers Great Britain to be the only honest and pacific state among the powers of Europe but he thinks that official policy of conciliation although genuine, is misguided and weak in its subservience to continental, and in particular French, influences.” [Paraphrase.] Discussion in private circles, as far as I have heard of it, is expressive of surprise at the Ambassador’s frank utterances but is in no wise unfavorable to him. STERLING 64 Mr. Alanson B. Houghton, Ambassador in Great Britain, who was temporarily in Washington. 65 To the Embassies in France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy and the Legation in Switzerland, stating that “In view of unauthorized stories in the press the Department is today making following announcement: ‘The Department of State today announced that neither Ambassador Houghton nor Minister Gibson [Minister in Switzerland] has divulged to any unofficial person the nature of their reports to the President or Secretary
