3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
606
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
lations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union which we considered
very important. We had nothing to conceal from the Soviet Union re-
garding that relationship.
The President concluded that he hoped that an exchange based on
those views which he had given and which no doubt Brezhnev would
be presenting today, would be productive. Inevitably, we would have
differences on how to resolve some problems between us and among
other countries. But the President wanted Brezhnev to understand and
trust our intentions. He was eager to listen to Brezhnev in order to un-
derstand the Soviet concerns. He was sure that peaceful solutions of
these differences would serve better relations between the U.S. and the
USSR.
In fact, the President hoped that Brezhnev would agree with every-
thing he had said.
Brezhnev said that before setting forth his considerations on inter-
national problems, the subject of this meeting, he wanted to refer
briefly to the questions he had mentioned earlier this morning re-
garding further negotiations on SALT,2 that is, in addition to the con-
siderations he had already expressed in Vienna. He did not want to ad-
dress in detail all the questions raised by the President. There could be
differences of view on all of them and it was difficult to predict what
decisions will come out of the forthcoming negotiations. However, it
was impossible to escape the fact that before these talks developed into
full scale negotiations it was necessary to consider a number of ques-
tions of principle. For one thing, the follow-on agreement had to in-
volve not only the systems of the U.S. and the USSR, but also those of
other nuclear powers. Second, there must be full clarity to the effect
that the follow-on agreement must relate substantively to the forward-
based systems of the U.S. and its allies, because, as was widely known,
these systems were targeted against the Soviet Union and its allies.
Third, underlying the follow-on negotiations—and this was the holy of
holies from which the Soviet Union would not depart—must be the
principle of equality and equal security and the necessity of taking into
account all factors affecting the strategic situation. At present, it would
be abnormal to negotiate some kind of annual reductions, say by 5 per-
cent, in the levels of strategic offensive arms, independently of the
other problems involved in SALT III. In other words, it was necessary
to give further consideration to the follow-on negotiations. At this time,
we should ensure prompt entry into force of the SALT II Treaty which
has been fully approved and which we will be signing tomorrow.
2 See Document 203.
