868
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
On July 28, Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff wrote
the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brze-
zinski, that the Ambassadors of France and the United Kingdom would
attend. He wrote:
“As you know, it was my view that our position on sending Roy to
the funeral should be made independently of the rest of the diplomatic
corps. I never liked the idea of hiding behind others’ skirts on this
issue. However, I think we will look both foolish and cowardly if other
Western nations send ambassadorial representatives to the funeral and
we do not.”
In the upper right corner of this memorandum, an unknown hand
wrote: “ZB thinks the President should be aware of this right away.”
Carter then wrote at the bottom of the memorandum: “3:35 p.m. 7/28
I told Ed [Muskie] to let Atherton attend. J.” (Ibid.)
The Shah’s funeral took place on July 29. In attendance were former
President Richard M. Nixon, exiled King Constantine of Greece, Ather-
ton, and diplomats from the United Kingdom, France, China, Israel,
Australia, and Morocco. According to an August 11 Time magazine
article, “An Exile Laid to Rest,” on his deathbed, the Shah “asked to
be buried ultimately in Tehran near his executed generals, named son
Reza as his successor and prayed for the overthrow of the Ayatullah
Khomeini.”
A Central Intelligence Agency National Foreign Assessment Center
Spot Commentary on the Shah’s death noted that reaction in Iran
had been “low key,” although Tehran radio had reported that “the
bloodsucker of the century has died.” The Spot Commentary con-
cluded: “The Iranians are unlikely to change their fundamental position
on the hostages in reaction to the Shah’s death. The hostages will
remain pawns in Tehran’s continuing power struggle.” The report
noted, however, that Iran’s reactions might change depending on
actions of the Shah’s family and the exile opposition, prominent mem-
bers of which gathered in Cairo. Some of the exile opposition “report-
edly suggested that the Crown Prince name himself Shah. Such an
announcement could aggravate tensions in Iran.” On the Spot Com-
mentary, an unknown hand wrote: “and in the U.S. since he is resident
at Williams College.” (Department of State, Records of David D. New-
som, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–
1981, Lot 81D154, Briefing Book: The Shah Panama Jan–March 1980,
Egypt Jan–July 1980, Vol. V) On October 31, from Cairo, on his 20th
birthday, Crown Prince Reza Pahlavi proclaimed himself Shah Reza II
and called for an uprising against the current government. (“Son of
the Shah Assumes the Title,” New York Times, November 1, 1980, page 1;
“New Shah Urges Revolt,” Chicago Tribune, November 1, 1980, page S2)
