Bearing in mind your instructions in paragraph 6 of No. 354, relative to the
publication of full particulars, and desirous that a certain measure of
publicity be given to the point of view that full publicity is essential, I took
occasion to prepare certain remarks on this subject for the plenary meeting.
When it became clear that the Commission would not even transmit the
report of the subcommittee to the Council, it became still more necessary, in
my opinion, that some expression of this view should be embodied in
permanent form in the records of the third session of the Commission. I
therefore delivered a speech, the text of which the Department will find in
the minutes of the second meeting.81 This speech, as was to be expected,
aroused a high measure of satisfaction among those who were advocating a
large degree of publicity, but Mr. Massigli, the French Delegate, in taking
leave of me after the session, remarked: “I had thought that the elections in
the United States were over”.
I venture to invite the Department’s attention to the advisability of
immediate consideration of these questions, and especially of immediate
study by technical experts of the Belgian proposal in anticipation of the
meeting of experts which will presumably be summoned around March 1st.
Probably this meeting will shortly be followed by another meeting of the
full Commission and therefore I would appreciate the study and preparation
of fresh instructions based on the events in the third session at the earliest
possible moment. This is particularly necessary in view of the fact that it
was decided in the final plenary meeting that full discussion of all the
articles of the draft convention will again be opened. I shall submit
subsequently various considerations as to the new instructions.
With reference to the latter half of the final paragraph of your 354, I
constantly bore in mind your suggestions and venture to submit what can
only be impressions. I found that the British delegation made certain
concessions in the direction of the draft convention—concessions which
were designed to make possible unanimity in the adoption of a single text.
There was, however, no such complete agreement between the British
delegate and his French colleague as to prevent them from debating actively
certain points on which their views differed. In fact I could find no evidence
of a previously prepared common basis on naval matters.
