Yugoslavia
885
an economic and political colony of the Serbs. And, from 1968 to 1972,
Serbs and Croats engaged in a prolonged confrontation, during which
tens of thousands of citizens joined outspokenly nationalist organiza-
tions and participated in nationalist demonstrations, and almost the
entire Croatian party leadership evinced “national Communist” pro-
clivities.
16. Despite the relative tranquillity that has reigned on nationality
issues since the so-called Croatian crisis, the perceptions and passions
that fueled these nationalist outbursts have not disappeared. Because
of their self-replenishing and mutually reinforcing religious, cultural,
and linguistic roots, these perceptions and passions could easily be
reactivated not only by impending economic stringencies but by a host
of other stimuli. With Tito’s departure, moreover, the regime will lose
most of the protection that it has enjoyed as a result of his unimpeach-
able reputation as an ethnic nonpartisan. None of his likely successors
have even a remotely comparable reputation. And some have such
close and exclusive ties with “their own” particular republics that
almost any policy that they initiate or support is likely to be challenged
as ethnocentric.
E. Soviet Pressures
17. The Kremlin will not necessarily attempt to prevent a smooth
and orderly Yugoslav succession. Under certain circumstances Moscow
would see advantages in a stable, viable Yugoslavia. In any case, the
USSR is likely to adopt a restrained policy in the immediate post-
Tito period. Although it probably retains a desire to reincorporate
Yugoslavia into its East European empire, Moscow could adopt a
hands-off or even supportive policy in the immediate post-Tito period.
Such a policy could persist for some time should Belgrade become
more responsive to Soviet policies and more distant from the West.
While not impossible, however, such a long-term change in Yugoslav
policy is unlikely.
18. Even if developments in Yugoslavia prove less favorable to
Soviet interests, Moscow is unlikely to subject Yugoslavia to a direct
military intervention. A Soviet resort to force will remain improbable
so long as it continues to entail serious risks of a sustained Yugoslav
resistance and possible Western political and military support. How-
ever, a very sharp escalation of centrifugal tendencies within Yugo-
slavia might be seen by the Soviets as significantly reducing those risks,
particularly if it were perceived as both fragmenting the Yugoslav will
to resist and discouraging Western readiness to respond.
19. If the temptations created by such a perception of Yugoslav
and Western weakness were combined with sufficient danger of a
radical growth of Western influence in parts of a disintegrating Yugo-
