1566  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
part and parcel of a new emphasis on political means of struggle which 
became increasingly evident after the death of Stalin.
44. The USSR’s activities in its struggle with the West continue 
to be manifest principally in the political and economic realms. The 
image of military strength resulting from Soviet advances is, however, 
an integral part of the setting in which the USSR pursues this strug­
gle. Moscow evidently regards its real and presumed military strength 
as a significant asset in political warfare. Soviet leaders probably esti­
mate that if they launched a general war at present, even with surprise 
nuclear attacks, the USSR would suffer unacceptable damage from US 
nuclear retaliation. On the other hand, they are probably confident that 
their own nuclear capabilities, even though not as great as those of the 
US, have grown to the point where they constitute a powerful deterrent 
to the US. It is therefore probable that in the Soviet view both sides are 
now militarily deterred from deliberately initiating an all-­out nuclear 
war or from reacting to any crisis in a manner which would gravely 
risk such a war, unless vital national interests at home or abroad were 
considered to be in jeopardy. However, we believe the Soviet leaders 
do not exclude the possibility of nuclear war resulting from accident or 
miscalculation.
45. While we believe that the Soviet leaders do not at present intend 
to pursue their objectives by employing their own forces, they will rec­
ognize, particularly in consequence of the policies they are pursuing 
to compel a retraction of Western power by political means, that situa­
tions might arise in which the use of force would seem essential to one 
side or the other. In such situations the Soviets would prefer to provide 
logistic and other support for local operations in which only non-­Soviet 
forces participated directly. Their objectives in such operations would 
be limited, and they would seek to avoid direct Soviet involvement, 
to limit the geographic area of engagement, and to prevent the use of 
nuclear weapons by either side.
46. Soviet planners probably consider, however, that such lim­
itations might be impossible in some instances, and that encounters 
between their own and Western forces might result. In this event, they 
would prefer to minimize the amount of force employed in such situ­
ations in order to limit the scale of conflict and the degree of their own 
involvement as much as possible. For example, they would almost cer­
tainly wish to avoid the use of nuclear weapons. In deciding whether 
to employ their own forces in any particular local situation the Soviets 
would have to balance the risk of provoking a train of counteractions, 
possibly leading to general war, against the stakes involved in the area 
of local conflict. They probably believe that the West’s military pos­
ture and doctrine rest increasingly upon the use of nuclear weapons, 
even in limited wars. But they probably also view their own nuclear
