1044  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
I handed Gallo Porras a letter containing Ambassador Achilles’ 
congratulations.2 I told him Mr. Linville and I also were happy he had 
accepted the Prime Ministership and position as Minister of Treasury; 
that the Embassy was ready to cooperate with him in every possible 
way.
He said he was concerned about the economic situation and that 
Pedro Beltran was in the United States at the present time discuss-
ing financial matters. He had taken some documents there regarding 
Peru’s financial needs. Gallo Porras said they were planning to nego-
tiate for a loan in the United States. I asked whether this meant the 
work was not to be carried on here in Lima. He stated it was their 
intention to negotiate through Ambassador Berckemeyer. He said they 
felt it would be much better to carry on the talks in Washington away 
from interference and opposition of Communist elements and political 
opponents. When questioned further, Gallo Porras stated the request 
for a loan had not actually been prepared but was being worked on 
here presently.
I told him Mr. Samuel Waugh of the Export-Import Bank had pos-
sibly informed him (Gallo Porras) as I know he had former Minister of 
Treasury Thorndike that it was essential for Peru to make a detailed 
exposé of its financial plan when requesting a loan. I told him that only 
one week ago in Washington the Department of State had also advised 
me to so inform Peruvian officials concerned. I stated this was strictly a 
business matter, that Peru was dealing with precise “Boston Bankers” 
and, therefore, their case must be well presented. Gallo Porras indi-
cated his understanding.
Gallo Porras said the situation was critical and that an extraordi-
nary session of Congress was being called next week. He said the coun-
try was heavily in debt; that it owed Grace & Co. 50,000,000 soles (Gallo 
Porras was in error on the amount. Peru owes Grace & Co. 25,000,000 
soles and 52,000,000 to International Petroleum. The total debt to vari-
ous local concerns is estimated at 350,000,000 soles.) and Ferreyros and 
Company a large sum.
I told the Prime Minister I knew he was extremely pressed for 
time; however, I wished to inform him of the Embassy’s preoccupation 
with the climate for foreign investment and particularly the treatment 
of American business. I stated I was leaving with him a Memorandum 
concerning the main points at issue.3 I said the climate for invest-
ment had deteriorated during the past eight months. The treatment of 
International Petroleum Company—he asked what I meant, “their not 
2 The referenced letter was not further identified.
3 The referenced memorandum was not found in Department of State files.
