38  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Tab A
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council3
Washington, undated
Tab A—START Policy Review
Procedure. The Arms Control PCC will hold weekly meetings to 
review our START position beginning on April 12, 1989. Topics are 
indicated below. Agencies represented on the Arms Control PCC will 
review relevant sections of the existing Joint Draft Text. The agency’s 
PCC principal will identify not later than April 5, 1989 those areas where 
they believe existing U.S. positions should be modified. For each such 
area agency PCC principals will provide the PCC Executive Secretary 
specific proposals (but not treaty text language) by the Friday preced-
ing the appropriate PCC meeting. The PCC Executive Secretary, or an 
alternate designated by the PCC Chairman, will circulate an options 
paper at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. The PCC Executive 
Secretary will prepare and forward within one week after the meet-
ing a record of decision recording consensus and a paper setting forth 
options and agency views where consensus cannot be reached. Where 
issues arise which require further analysis, they will be identified and 
scheduled for reconsideration in May. Consideration of options by the 
Deputies Committee, the NSC and the President will be scheduled on 
a case by case basis. (U)
On April 12, 1989 the following will be reviewed:
1. Ballistic Missile Issues (other than those associated with 
mobile ICBMs).
— The fundamental numerical limits on ballistic missiles, includ-
ing sublimits of ICBMs and the lack of sublimits on SLBMs;
— The acceptability of existing agreed counting rules for the num-
bers of warheads attributed to each existing type of ballistic missile;
— Current United States proposals to ban flight testing and mod-
ernization of heavy ICBMs and past contingency proposals to allow 
heavy ICBM testing/modernization subject to a formal equal U.S. right 
to deploy heavy ICBMs. (S)
2. Throwweight. The existing U.S. approach to reductions to equal 
levels in ballistic missile throwweight at approximately 50 percent 
of the current Soviet level; the U.S. proposal to treat throwweight for 
existing types on an “as agreed” basis (i.e., by attributing a negotiated 
3 Secret.
