August 8–September 17, 1978 65 22. Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the Department of State1 Jerusalem, September 1, 1978, 1715Z 2427. Subject: Camp David—The Missing Palestinians. For the Secretary, Atherton and Saunders. 1. It is indeed ironic that a summit meeting which will have as its focus the future of the Palestinians, especially those in the West Bank and Gaza, will not have any bona fide Palestinian representatives present. The PLO, which a majority of Palestinians say represents them, is absent because of Israel’s refusal to deal with the organization. Hussein, who could be a surrogate under certain circumstances, has excluded himself. Sadat is not regarded as an authorized spokesman and West Bankers fear that Israeli intransigence may compel him to modify his heretofore acceptable position on the Palestinian problem in order to achieve a deal on Sinai. 2. As seen from here, Israel at Camp David will have a unique opportunity not only to cement its relationship with Egypt but to make peace with Jordan and a majority of Palestinians if it is able to rise to the occasion and make genuine concessions on settlements, withdrawal, refugee return and a Palestinian entity without endangering its security. 3. What West Bankers want. We believe that a majority of West Bankers emotionally support the views of Bassam Shaka, the Mayor of Nablus, the West Bank’s largest city: total Israeli withdrawal to 1967 lines, Palestinian self-determination and recognition of the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people. After the achievement of nominal independence, many West Bankers recognize that a close association with Jordan as well as open borders with Israel would be a necessity. At the same time, all West Bankers, moderates and PLO supporters alike oppose the Begin plan lock, stock and barrel for, among other reasons, it is the plan of the occupier. Its objective is perceived as continued occupation with Palestinian participation. 4. Although nationalistic West Bankers espouse their allegiance to the PLO and proclaim their pessimism that Camp David will result in Israeli flexibility, we have detected tantalizing indications that under certain circumstances authentic West Bank leaders might be willing to take part in an interim government and participate in negotiations with 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 6, Camp David Summit—September 1978 and working papers. Secret; Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis.
