334 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement A cold war contribution of U.S. military power to reinforce and support, in appropriate ways, overt and covert political, economic, psy­ chological, technological and cultural measures. II. SUMMARY EVALUATION BY THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF OF OUR ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL CAPABILITIES TO FULFILL CURRENT MILITARY COMMITMENTS AND BASIC OBJECTIVES AS OUTLINED IN NSC 5810/1. The nuclear retaliatory forces continue to provide the United States with a capability to inflict such loss and damage upon the enemy as to achieve a margin of advantage which, if exploited effectively in con­ junction with other military operations, would permit the United States and its allies to prevail in general war. “However, despite continued improvement in the quality and posture of these forces during FY 1958, and notwithstanding the promise of continued improvement in the future, recent Soviet technological advances and the concurrent quanti­ tative reductions in U.S. forces have combined to diminish that margin of U.S. military superiority. If these trends continue, it is estimated that this superiority will be lost in the foreseeable future.” Improvements have been made in Continental Defense during FY 1958; but concurrent Soviet offensive improvements have made any relative U.S. gain questionable. The Continental Defense system is not capable of preventing an attack which could seriously damage the United States. The ready forces of the United States are capable of responding selectively and flexibly to local aggression in most parts of the world. These forces have been quantitatively decreased but qualitatively improved during FY 1958. This qualitative improvement has been attained by the further equipping of forces with advanced weapon sys­ tems, including more nuclear weapons, and by improved organization, planning, and techniques. The scope and timing of response to local aggression would be limited primarily by the degree to which malde­ ployment for initial tasks of general war could be accepted. The capa­ bilities of our Allies to assist in coping with local aggression, with few exceptions, are very limited. The United States and its Allies are capable of controlling essential air communications. The Soviet threat to the control of essential sea areas at the onset of a general war is so great that U.S. and allied forces, because of quantitative deficiencies and technological difficulties, are only marginally adequate to deal with it. As attacks at the source, offen­ sive ASW operations and coastal and shipping defense operations take effect, U.S. capabilities to control essential sea areas will improve. The capabilities of allied forces to assist in the control of essential air com­ munications and sea areas generally are limited to their homelands and coastal waters and are steadily diminishing.
