Human Rights 457 begun a series of consultations with Congressmen particularly interested in human rights issues. In this connection, we have arranged small breakfasts and luncheons where relevant human rights issues, including our actions in the IFIs, can be fully discussed. In our consultations with Congress, we have explained that in view of the diverse circumstances of the countries proposed as recipients of assistance—as well as the diversity of our foreign policy interests—it is inevitable that we will pursue our human rights objectives in somewhat different ways as to different countries. As for the claim that we have been too prone to use “sanctions,” we have explained the facts set forth above which show that we have been quite moderate in the use of “sanctions.” With respect to objections from Congress about our treatment of particular countries, we have made a special effort to explain our rationale and actions to the members who have raised a question. While it would be inaccurate to say that our explanations are always considered satisfactory, it has been our experience that a sincere effort to explain our position fully has led to increased understanding. Concern has also been expressed in Congress about the Administration’s efforts to block certain restrictive human rights amendments. Some members feel the Administration’s efforts have been too late and poorly coordinated. Several members have indicated that they do not plan in the future to support the Administration’s efforts to block popular human rights legislation since they think those efforts are likely to be futile. We have been advised by one congressman who is a strong supporter of our human rights initiatives that it would be preferable for the Administration to deal with proposed human rights amendments while bills are still in committee or in conference rather than when they reach the floor. He argues that once the bills reach the floor, it is much more difficult to defeat an amendment. Thus, he has urged that the Administration should let human rights supporters in Congress know as soon as possible which amendments or parts of amendments the Administration can and cannot live with. We believe this is sound advice and are taking steps to implement it to the degree feasible. It must be noted, however, that in a variety of instances in the past we have made our views clear in committee—and worked out desirable language there—only to have such understandings rendered moot by floor revisions. We have been advised that a great many human rights amendments may be offered this year in committee or on the floor. Thus far, however, there have been only a few proposed amendments and initiatives as set forth below. Some of them pertain to the IFIs; others to other forms of U.S. assistance:
