132 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I next week5 and the subsequent consultations might help to relieve this irritant, while the forthcoming summit should provide us with the opportunity for an affirmative recommitment to basic unity among the trilateral countries. I should note, however, that our human rights policy has evoked rather mixed feelings in Western Europe. This is not surprising, given West European political traditions and their proximity to the Soviets, but for some Europeans—especially the Germans—it is a source of concern. China Our policy towards China is yet to unfold and it needs to be unfolded. Nonetheless, Soviet efforts to promote Sino-Soviet normalization and/or reconciliation have so far failed. This gives us the needed time to develop the required initiatives, though these should be forthcoming in the course of the spring, lest the Chinese begin to think that we ignore them or take them for granted. I will be making some concrete proposals soon. South Asia With the political change in India, we have again the opportunity for a significant improvement in U.S.-Indian relations.6 Though my own view of India’s future remains pessimistic, such an improvement—at least in the short run—is highly desirable. Africa It is a morass. Current African events can be seen in terms of two broad interpretations, both of them probably right but each yielding a contradictory conclusion. The first is that Africa is in the midst of a social-political upheaval, with post-colonial structures simply collaps- 5 On April 7, during a question-and-answer session held in the Briefing Room at the White House, the President announced that the administration had engaged in a review of issues related to the use of nuclear power; as a result of that review, the administration would pursue a major change in U.S. domestic nuclear energy policies, designed to limit the production of plutonium, encourage research into alternative nuclear fuel cycles, increase production capacity for enriched uranium, and continue discussions with a number of governments over the establishment of an international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation program. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 581–583) The White House also released a statement on nuclear power policy, containing these and other objectives, on April 7. For the text of the statement, see ibid., pp. 587–588. See also Edward Walsh and J.P. Smith, “U.S. Acts to Curb Plutonium, Asks Allies to Assist,” The Washington Post, April 8, 1977, pp. A–1, A–19. 6 Reference is to the lifting of the Indian state of emergency imposed by Gandhi in June 1975; see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–8, Documents on South Asia, 1973–1976, Documents 204, 207, 208, and 213. Gandhi called for elections in March 1977, only to be defeated by Janata Party leader Morarji Desai. Additional information about the election is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
