406
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
atheism. Present US policies in spite of huge funds spent by US Govt
would not be effective in combatting internatl communism.
3. Referring to Moslem conference which he plans call in near fu-
ture Kashani said invitations had not as yet been issued. Instructions
had however been sent thru Min Fonaff to Iran diplomatic reps in
various countries asking they submit lists of influential religious-
political leaders whom it would be appropriate to invite and who
might be willing come. After these lists had been recd invitations
would be sent. Kashani maintained that delegates to conference would
be restricted to responsible religious-political leaders and no one could
attend without invitation from him.
4. Kashani said it was his intention in near future to undertake or-
ganization in Iran of national, as distinguished from state, army of mil-
lion Moslems who would be under his personal direction and leader-
ship. Members this “army” would agree to be given several hours
military training daily; they would be pledged to give their lives at his
call to the cause of Islam; they would be instructed in virtues of Islam;
they would be required to submit to strictest discipline. At coming con-
ference he would suggest that religious leaders in other Moslem coun-
tries also organize similar “national armies”. Armies of this kind were
necessary in order restore religious fervor and unity to peoples of
Islam.
5. During our talk I told Kashani in confidence I would probably be
going to Washington within few days for consultation. He said he
hoped I would inform my Govt fully re his conversation with me and
that I would endeavor make my Govt understand that it would be in
US interest and interest of world peace if it would give serious attention
to his statements. “I am not an ordinary person. I am leader of Moslem
world and Moslem world will soon be force to be reckoned with. It is in
interest of good people everywhere that Moslem world and US
cooperate.”
Henderson
