(8) Statement showing the application of the League of Nations Loan as of December 31, 1927. The foregoing tables, it will be perceived, are in millions of Schillings, and comprise the documents transmitted by the Austrian Federal Ministry for Finance to Mr. Weems (referred to in my despatch under reference) for the confidential information of the Morgan firm. Dr. Kienböck, the Federal Minister for Finance, in talking to me stressed the fact that much of the information was confidential, and I promised him that it would be so regarded. He was good enough to supply me with additional copies upon my statement that such copies would be useful for possible distribution among the various interested departments of my government. Mr. Weems left for New York on Thursday and he came to see me on the eve of his departure. His task here had been, he said, to articulate the various statements and statistical figures submitted to him. Wherever he and his assistant detected a discrepancy, an explanation was asked from the different departments, usually orally. Inasmuch as the major part of the new projected loan was to be expended in railway, telephone and telegraph developments (the two latter branches are under the postal administration), he had concentrated his attention mainly upon the condition of these three public utilities, which are all government owned. Weems told me that he had found the railways and the administration of the posts in a better condition than he had expected. Since he is cautious and not given to optimism, I attach importance to this statement. He has had some training in the railway field, and his conclusions here are entitled to weight. Altogether Weems found a substantial improvement as compared with the general situation when he was here two or three years ago. The agricultural development had been, he thought, quite phenomenal and the banks and government-owned public utilities were in a stronger position. The improvement in the industrial field had been less marked, though even here there were exceptions. The paper industry was more prosperous than it had been before the war, and the Austrian iron and steel industry was doing fairly well, due no doubt largely to its participation in the European cartel. There is one fact to be kept in mind in passing upon the condition of Austrian public utilities. It is always possible that the Government may
