1978 411 1. The strategic balance 2. The NATO-Warsaw Pact military balance 3. Power projection 4. The diplomatic balance 5. The political-­ideological balance 6. The economic and technological balance 7. Europe 8. East Asia This overview report summarizes the conclusions of these basic reports and attempts to spell out some of the implications of those conclusions for U.S. strategy. II. Capabilities and Trends No radical changes in the overall global balance of power have occurred during the past 18 months, and the broad conclusions of the PRM–10 net assessment remain valid today: 1. A rough asymmetrical equivalence in military capabilities exists between the U.S. and the USSR. 2. The U.S. holds significant advantages in economic, technology, diplomatic access and support, and political appeal; 3. The Soviet-American relationship is a mixed one, involving elements of both cooperation and competition. In none of the central elements of the global balance of power did either superpower lose to the other an advantage in capabilities between January 1977 (Table 1) and July 1978 (Table 2). In a majority of categories, however, trends in the balance either changed direction or were intensified between these two dates (Tables 1, 2, 3). The pro-Soviet trend in the strategic balance which existed in January 1977 has now intensified so as possibly to call into question the future of essential equivalence. With this notable exception, all the other trend changes were in a pro- U.S. direction. As a result, the trends in almost all non-­military components of national power (except technology and covert action) now favor the U.S. The trends in the military components of national power, on the other hand, all favor the Soviet Union, except for a mixed trend in the NATO-Warsaw Pact military balance. The last eighteen months have thus seen a heightening of the incongruence in capabilities noted in PRM–10. With the notable exception of technology, the U.S. is pulling further ahead in the principal non-­military areas where it already had the advantage. In the military areas, the capabilities are more even, and the trends more generally favor the Soviet Union. This pattern of incongruent trends gives renewed urgency to three key questions:
