understanding that the draft was merely to form the basis of discussion with
the Chinese. The French and Belgian Delegations said their Governments
assented and the Italian Delegation referred to a reservation made in a
document circulated a few days previously. The Swedish Delegate said that,
since his Government was undergoing a change he could give no definite
reply, but that he hoped to give a favorable reply shortly. The American, the
Danish, the Norwegian, the Spanish and the Netherlands Delegations
announced that their Governments approved. The Japanese Delegation,
through Mr. Hioki, went into a detailed explanation of what the Conference
had been doing for some months past and, after saying that until definite
instructions had been received from his Government no commitment could
be made, evinced a desire to proceed with the general work of the
Conference and emphasized the need of adjusting the debt question. After a
lengthy discussion on the work of the Conference, Mr. Strawn urged that
the proposal to implement the Washington Treaty be acted upon, since it
was most important that this be done without further delay. Mr. Hioki
inquired if it was still the sense of the Delegates that they would sign a
Washington Surtax Agreement with any Chinese Government that might be
present when the foreign Delegates had reached a point among themselves
of readiness to negotiate with the Chinese.
 
Sir Ronald Macleay said that this question would have to be submitted to
his Government when the moment for signing arrived. Mr. Strawn drew a
distinction between signing with a given group an agreement concerning
the Washington surtaxes and signing with that same group a larger and
more important treaty concerning the interim surtaxes. In connection with
the former he suggested that the Delegates could accompany their assent
with specifications laid down in a separate document which would impose
obligations and limitations. Mr. Strawn also said that the Diplomatic Body,
by being present and remaining here, gives an implied recognition to such
Government as exists; that they could not consistently stay here and yet
affirm that there is no Chinese Government. Mr. Cerruti shared this view
and Mr. Kauffmann said that he shared the view of the Japanese, i. e., that
the implementing of the Washington surtaxes might be the concluding and
final act of the Conference. After further discussion it was agreed that
