March–August 1953 747 as the Seven Year Plan, would create popular confidence. This action, if properly propagandized, could be developed into a nation-wide popular appeal, having the effect of reducing the appeal of extreme nationalism and communism. 4. U.S. aid now contemplated may tide Iran over financially for the time being and also provide means for starting developmental works, but in the long run the solution lies in a settlement of the oil problem. 5. The new government wasted no time in clamping down on the Tudeh Party by raiding cells and publications and making arrests. It has established its control over the country generally through the Army and civilian appointments. There is no information on the residual strength of the now latent, extreme nationalist and other pro-Mossadeq elements. 6. The Qashqai who appeared to be on the point of rebelling against the new government at the time of its accession to power, are quiescent at least momentarily, and with a consolidation of the new government it is unlikely that they will take action against it. The Shahsevan and at least a part of the Bakhtiari have given their allegiance to the new government. Other tribal elements appear to be quiescent, except a few minor groups who frequently take advantage of unsettled conditions to raid and plunder. B. Station Synopsis [Omitted here are paragraphs 7–12.] C. Operational Summary Political and Psychological Warfare 13. Although the anti-Tudeh activities continued, PP operations were largely directed in support of bringing about a change in government. [4 paragraphs (11 lines) not declassified] Paramilitary Operations 18. There were no important developments in the paramilitary field during the month, as Iranian political developments compelled the station to concentrate its efforts on political and psychological warfare activities. [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] John H. Waller2 CNE-4 2 [name not declassified] signed for Waller above Waller’s typed signature.
