1957  1371
our treaties with like-­minded countries who entered into arrangements 
to pool defensive strength against aggression. US adherence to this prin­
ciple without exception and without equivocation amply demonstrated 
to world in recent months. None who did not have aggressive intent, 
none willing accept principle peaceful settlement disputes had anything 
to fear from any defensive arrangements US might make with countries 
of like mind. No threat to use force being posed by US anywhere in 
world, including area Taiwan.
11. I continued, I wanted point out on October 8, 1955 I made pro­
posal here that force be removed in settlement our disputes including 
dispute in Taiwan area. That was proposal which he thus far rejected. 
Threat hostile action Taiwan area thus still being maintained by his 
authorities. US would be deficient in carrying out international obliga­
tions and lacking in responsibility if it did not recognize this fact and 
take whatever defensive measures appeared be prudent. This posed 
no threat to his country or anyone of peaceful intent. I still hopeful 
he would accept proposal I had made for unconditional renunciation 
force in Taiwan area as well as elsewhere. No one of truly peaceful 
intent could object to that proposal.
12. Wang replied, cases Chinese civilians residing US who encoun­
tered unreasonable obstruction on part American authorities appear­
ing every day. Experience of Dr. Lin to whom he referred this morning 
was only one of many similar such cases. Actions taken by American 
Immigration authorities in case Dr. Lin assumed such scale one could 
only term it plain robbery by taking away private property and con­
fiscating all her notebooks. I had just now argued Dr. Lin returned 
Wang’s country after all. He wanted point out she did not return freely 
as entitled to under Geneva Agreement. Succeeded returning only after 
encountered series unreasonable obstructions by American authorities. 
Fact that Dr. Lin succeeded returning did not absolve US authorities of 
responsibility for obstructing her return. As to allegations I made this 
morning regarding alleged ill-­treatment Americans in China, he could 
only term them entirely unfounded and irresponsible allegations. 
There were facts to prove even persons released out of prison, desired 
remain in his country of their own free will. These facts would shatter all 
unfounded rumors and slander against his country.
13. Wang continued with regard protest he had lodged with our side 
this morning regarding act aggression by US government by station­
ing guided missiles atomic unit on Chinese territory Taiwan, he could 
not accept statement I had just made. It was entirely due to military 
occupation by US government that Taiwan still not united with Chinese 
mainland. Unreasonable stand taken by US government in supporting 
in Taiwan the KMT regime to oppose the Chinese government also met 
a disapprobation by all peace-­loving peoples of the world. Underlying
