Chapter 2, January–June 1989 131 are unlikely to know real Soviet bottom lines in the negotiations until START is closer to completion. Two discussion papers on Defense & Space, are attached as Tab II: One on options to permit SDI tests during a period of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty; and a second on options to permit us to deploy SDI after the period. All agencies, except the JCS, agree that we should return to Geneva with our current position on both issues. In some cases (OSD, Energy, ACDA) this reflects contentment with the position. For others (State) it simply reflects recognition that we cannot fundamentally alter our position in an orderly manner before June 19. The JCS approach to the Defense and Space Talks stems from their concern that we could unintentionally push the Soviets to exploit their near-­term ABM advantages before we know whether we can and will deploy SDI. They worry that we could eventually find ourselves in the worst possible situation, one in which the Soviets have deployed defenses but we have not. The Chiefs are concerned that our current approach during the non-­withdrawal period of providing “unilateral assurances” to the Soviets could tie our hands but leave the Soviets much freer to break out of the ABM Treaty. JCS would prefer that the testing which the sides could do under ABM Treaty be mutually agreed, so that both we and the Soviets faced the same constraints. Others believe that this would be true in any event because the Soviets now are bound only by the broad interpretation, which underpins the U.S. position. The Chiefs likewise are concerned that the current U.S. position, which would permit us to deploy SDI anytime after the non-­withdrawal period (upon six months notice), virtually obliges the Soviets to do whatever they can to be ready to deploy defenses themselves at the end of the non-­withdrawal period. They then would be free to do so, whether or not we were ready ourselves. The Chiefs may prefer that our position be changed so that there is a longer interval (e.g., two years) between a decision to deploy defenses and the time at which deployments could actually begin. Other agencies OSD, ACDA, Energy take the view that by exercising their rights under Article XV of the ABM Treaty, the Soviets could now deploy nationwide ABM defense upon six months notice. Those agencies believe that the only practical effect of our current position would be to relieve the U.S. of the political burden of withdrawing from the ABM Treaty, which does not apply to the Soviet Union. Despite the JCS misgivings, their representatives have not been very vocal during the NSR-14 review, and neither the PCC nor the Deputies Committee seemed willing to critically review our current approach to the D&S talks. The NSC also may be inclined to duck, but the Chiefs have now gone on record with a formal request that the
