Yugoslavia 787 reporters in the city covering CSCE he planned to provide background information to the reporters at a press conference in order to make sure that the inevitable news stories were accurate. Ljubicic agreed. After an exchange of pleasantries, the meeting broke up. SECOND LIMITED MEETING The second private meeting between SecDef and General Ljubicic took place at 0840, 14 October in the Defense Secretariat.3 SecDef began by explaining that he requested the meeting after Mr. Bernardic expressed to Ambassador Eagleburger the concern of the Yugoslavs over the results of the first plenary session. SecDef did not want such issues to remain unanswered, nor that the US side be misunderstood. He stressed that he viewed his visit as the beginning of a process and did not plan to reach final agreements during the visit. He repeated his exposition of the previous day concerning the recent decision by President Carter to increase military sales to Yugoslavia of defensive weapons but not to transfer sensitive technology. This decision was taken concurrently with the President’s decision to reduce arms sales worldwide, and the significance of these two decisions should not be overlooked. He explained that the purpose of this visit was to describe the new Presidential decision and to begin the process of putting it into effect. It will be a lengthy process requiring more meetings, probably at a lower level. The Secretary said that he hoped to see General Ljubicic in the United States when such a trip would be convenient. Brown said that further staff meetings will be necessary and the specifics of individual weapons will result from such meetings. That will take time. Concerning the new procedures, there must be full understanding on both sides in order to overcome past problems. We must understand Yugoslav needs for equipment in order for US to meet the needs. The Secretary explained that the Yugoslav Embassy in Washington will still play an important role. Many past problems resulted from absence of a single US point of interest. The various agencies involved—American contractors, American military services, our Defense Security Assistance Agency, the Embassy in Belgrade— do not always know what the others are doing. He suggested that we should initiate the new process by sending an expert from Washington who is thoroughly familiar with our procedures to advise our Embassy and Yugoslav officials and, if the Yugoslavs wished, the Yugoslav 3 The second plenary session, which followed the unscheduled private meeting on October 14, consisted of a Yugoslav presentation of military cooperation with the United States and Yugoslav expectations. (Ibid.)
