Chemical and Biological Weapons 245 priate allied Delegations on the reasons for our reservation on compliance; (4) we would not seek to accuse the Soviets directly or to overly dramatize the situation pending any Soviet response; and (5) we should not support a recent Swedish initiative to amend the BW Convention to provide for a Consultative Commission but consider support for a UK response to the Swedes which suggests some consultative arrangements within the UN. (FYI: The Convention now provides for private consultation and cooperation under Article V and provides for raising unresolved issues in the UN Security Council under Article VI. The thrust of the Swedish proposal is to provide an international body of inquiry which would not be subject to major power veto; this nonveto aspect has made the Swedish proposal attractive to many nonaligned members of the Convention. End FYI) (S) It was noted that the extant intelligence information was briefed to the intelligence communities yesterday. It was agreed that our approach to the Soviets should be communicated to the Foreign Relations Committees forthwith. (S) It was noted that the Sverdlovsk incident was alleged in the German press and brought forth a strong denial by Tass. It was agreed that there is a high probability that the matter will shortly come out in the U.S. press. It was also agreed that a working group will prepare material suitable for briefing the U.S. press on background if that is later decided to be useful. (S) It was agreed that a number of technical and intelligence points should be followed up with some urgency. (C) 113. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1 Washington, March 15, 1980, 0509Z 68654. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree only. Subject: Sverdlovsk BW Incident. 1. (Secret—Entire text). 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0588. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent immediate to the Mission in Geneva. Drafted by Mark Palmer (PM/DCA) and Martin Mclean (EUR/SOV); cleared by Aaron (NSC), Robert Martin (INR/PMT), Marshall Brement (NSC), Shulman (S/MS), Earle (ACDA), Peter Wilson (S/P), Slocombe (DUSD/PP), John Taylor (S/S–O), J.S. (Pustay), McCrory (CIA), Jerome Kahan (PM), and Robert Barry (EUR); and approved by Christopher (D).
