Chemical and Biological Weapons
245
priate allied Delegations on the reasons for our reservation on compli-
ance; (4) we would not seek to accuse the Soviets directly or to overly
dramatize the situation pending any Soviet response; and (5) we
should not support a recent Swedish initiative to amend the BW Con-
vention to provide for a Consultative Commission but consider sup-
port for a UK response to the Swedes which suggests some consultative
arrangements within the UN. (FYI: The Convention now provides for
private consultation and cooperation under Article V and provides for
raising unresolved issues in the UN Security Council under Article VI.
The thrust of the Swedish proposal is to provide an international body
of inquiry which would not be subject to major power veto; this non-
veto aspect has made the Swedish proposal attractive to many non-
aligned members of the Convention. End FYI) (S)
It was noted that the extant intelligence information was briefed to
the intelligence communities yesterday. It was agreed that our ap-
proach to the Soviets should be communicated to the Foreign Relations
Committees forthwith. (S)
It was noted that the Sverdlovsk incident was alleged in the
German press and brought forth a strong denial by Tass. It was agreed
that there is a high probability that the matter will shortly come out in
the U.S. press. It was also agreed that a working group will prepare ma-
terial suitable for briefing the U.S. press on background if that is later de-
cided to be useful. (S)
It was agreed that a number of technical and intelligence points
should be followed up with some urgency. (C)
113.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, March 15, 1980, 0509Z
68654. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree only. Subject: Sverd-
lovsk BW Incident.
1. (Secret—Entire text).
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0588. Se-
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent immediate to the Mission in Geneva. Drafted by Mark
Palmer (PM/DCA) and Martin Mclean (EUR/SOV); cleared by Aaron (NSC), Robert
Martin (INR/PMT), Marshall Brement (NSC), Shulman (S/MS), Earle (ACDA), Peter
Wilson (S/P), Slocombe (DUSD/PP), John Taylor (S/S–O), J.S. (Pustay), McCrory (CIA),
Jerome Kahan (PM), and Robert Barry (EUR); and approved by Christopher (D).
