662
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
LIMITS ON TRANSFERS OF NEW SYSTEMS
Vance recommends Controls 1, 2, and 4. He believes that this issue
is at the heart of the arms sale problem, and strict controls need to be
established.
Brown recommends Control 1, and if dollar volume ceilings are not
imposed, he recommends Control 4 also. He does not recommend Con-
trol 2, because of our Latin American experience which has demon-
strated that unilateral restraint on our part does not reduce the flow of
weapons to a region.
Warnke recommends Controls 1, 2, and 4. He also believes this
issue is central to the arms sale problem, and that strict control is thus a
necessity. He notes that Controls 2 and 4 are inextricably bound, that
applying Control 4 without Control 2 would be of little use.
Smith recommends Control 4.
Lance recommends Controls 1, 2, and 3.
Brzezinski recommends Control 1, assuming dollar volume ceilings
are established. He notes that while Control 2 appears reasonable in the
abstract, it might unduly limit our flexibility in future situations, where
transfer of limited amounts of high-technology equipment may ad-
vance our interests.
LIMITS ON TRANSFER OF SIGNIFICANT NEW SYSTEMS
Issue: The issue is the extent to which we should limit the transfer,
or production abroad, of significant, newly-developed weapons sys-
tems. The transfer of advanced systems raises concern about destabi-
lizing effects in the region involved, the financial burdens involved for
recipients, and the compromise of new technology.
Controls:
1. Establish more extensive guidelines for assessing requests for
equipment sales, including requirements 1) that supplying the system
would uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military
functions which serve U.S. security interests, and 2) that less-advanced
existing systems with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable
from the United States.6
2. Enunciate the principle that the United States will not be the first
supplier to introduce into a region an advanced weapon that creates a
new or significantly higher combat capability.7
6 Carter wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin beside this paragraph, and a comment
beneath it that is illegible.
7 Carter wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin beside this paragraph.
