1378  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
May 26–28 under the joint sponsorship of the University of Puerto Rico 
School of Medicine and the Commission. Their favorable comments 
about the Center are considered particularly meaningful in the light of 
certain other recent political events in South America.
51. Asian Nuclear Center. A tentative plan has been prepared for a 
more modest Asian Nuclear Center involving $6 million in capital costs 
and $4 million in operating expenses for the first three years. This plan is 
based on the assumption that the Philippine Government will cooperate 
with the United States in establishing the Center and donate land adja­
cent to the University of the Philippines in Quezon City for the Center.
52. Plans call for coordination of the proposed Center with the 
national Philippine nuclear energy program to avoid duplication or 
overlapping of facilities. Instruction and training would be related to the 
limited technological resources prevailing in most of the Asian nations 
which it is anticipated would use the Center, and primary emphasis 
would be placed on medical agricultural applications of nuclear energy.
MAJOR COUNTRY PROGRAMS
53. USSR. Recent reports indicate the USSR nuclear power pro­
gram is slipping further below the goal announced in February 1956 of 
installing 2,000 to 2,500 electrical megawatts of nuclear power during 
the 6th five-­year plan ending in 1960. The May 1957 Soviet report to the 
United Nations outlines a program totaling only 1,400 EMW involving 
three large and four small experimental nuclear power stations and no 
target dates were given.
54. Several recent Russian articles mention only one large station 
under construction in 1957 and, as late as April 1958, U.S. visitors were 
still being denied visits to the “large Soviet nuclear power stations” on 
one pretext or another. There is some evidence to show that the Soviets 
may have only about 700 EMW installed by the end of 1960, this being 
based on the completion of two pressurized water reactors of 100 EMW 
each, one 200 EMW graphite moderated water-­cooled reactor, and four 
experimental stations.
55. However, it also is possible that the USSR is building dual-­
purpose reactors optimized for plutonium production that are not 
included in its “peaceful purposes” program. The USSR has never 
identified its atomic energy production sites. Therefore, one should not 
discount the possibility of the USSR achieving something closer to its 
announced 1956 goals via the dual-­purpose reactors than is indicated 
in the estimated 700 EMW based on what the Soviet chooses to show 
Western visitors at this time.
56. United Kingdom. A British White Paper issued in April moved 
the completion date for the U.K. 5–6,000 megawatt nuclear power pro­
gram from 1965 to 1966. It also indicated that a substantial proportion
