184
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
American concept. But the parties must agree at the beginning on perti-
nent principles to be applied. This should not be left to the end, other-
wise the self-governing arrangement will simply be perpetuated. The
Israelis will have a veto. Leaving the issue vague, as the American
paper does, poses a problem for the final settlement.
The Secretary observed that if one tries to eliminate Israel at this
point, one is prematurely forcing a decision on the sovereignty ques-
tion. The Israelis are reserving their claim to sovereignty in the West
Bank, but are not now asserting it. The United States and Egypt believe
that the people of the area should decide. El-Reedy contended that it
will be difficult to proceed with two interpretations of this issue. If a
way is left for Israel to assert sovereignty, it will cause trouble. The Sec-
retary said we cannot stop the Israelis from doing so. El-Baz argued
that this is a basic issue. The Secretary agreed, but said we had agreed
not to face it now. El-Reedy said that if Israel is to determine the future
of the West Bank/Gaza, Israel will always believe that is its objective.
El-Araby argued that the sovereignty issue should be faced squarely.
El-Araby stated that when the right of self-determination is men-
tioned, this means the final step. It should be decided by the Pales-
tinians living there, either through plebiscite, referendum, etc. No one
but the Palestinians should participate. Egypt accepts negotiations with
the Palestinians and Jordanians on security measures, but not on de-
ciding the final status of the West Bank/Gaza. The American paper
confuses this issue. El-Baz asked what happens if Israel does not reach
agreement with the Arabs? The American proposal omits any clear and
unequivocal obligation on the part of Israel to withdraw from the West
Bank/Gaza with the possibility of minor rectifications that do not re-
flect the weight of conquest. This has been the constant United States
position.
El-Baz also noted that the Aswan formula4 has not been repro-
duced in full in the American paper. The term “people” had been
omitted. The Secretary said that he was willing to put this back.
El-Araby next indicated Egyptian unhappiness with the “amalga-
mation” of the Palestinian refugees and displaced persons. The Israelis,
he noted, are given a veto in our paper on the return of displaced
persons. In the case of the refugees, El-Araby acknowledged, Israel has
a say in accordance with UN resolutions. However, UN Resolution 237
of 1967,5 which the United States had voted for, governs the status of
4 See footnote 5, Document 3.
5 U.N. Security Council Resolution 237, adopted on June 14, 1967, called on the Is-
raeli Government to ensure the safety and facilitate the return of residents who had fled
the fighting during the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war. For the complete text of the Resolu-
tion, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1967, pp. 190–191.
