3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 768 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI viets had gotten along very well with the King3 and with Daoud and then talked about the excesses of Amin, whom he compared with his namesake Idi Amin. He said that the elimination of the Amin regime, while in the Soviet interest, was also somewhat in the American interest because they were attempting to remove a bloody tyrant, installing a more generally popular regime, and bringing stability to the region. 7. As for how long it might take to bring about the stability they were seeking, Arbatov thought maybe only a few months—provided outside interference stopped. He did not dispute my point that the Brezhnev formula seemed like a non-starter, since it was impossible for us to pledge to stop doing something we are not doing. He did not seem much interested in talking about other formulas for getting the Soviets out of Afghanistan, although he thought the idea of having Mrs. Ghandi4 and a group of nonaligned nations or others work together to find some way to guarantee the Pak/Afghan border was an idea worth exploring. 8. The main point we made repeatedly with regard to an Afghan settlement was that the US seemed intent on “punishing” the Soviet Union and that they would not under any circumstances accept a solution that made them look punished. He said that when the US was willing to cease making Afghanistan a pure propaganda issue the matter could be treated seriously. 9. We talked in general about the state of US/Soviet relations, and Arbatov spent a good deal of time characterizing the things that made the Soviets decide after Vienna that the Carter administration was not going to follow through on SALT II. Among the things he mentioned were the Cuban brigade issue, human rights, the decision to go for a five percent increase in defense spending, and the refusal to accept the Brezhnev offer for negotiations on theater nuclear forces. 10. Arbatov seemed pessimistic about the prospects for getting the arms control dialogue started again in the near future, though he of course placed all the blame on our side. He said that arms control was only one part of the overall detente relationship and claimed that we had dismantled most other aspects of the relationship. He spoke of our excluding the Soviets from the Middle East peace process, trying to use trade as a weapon to interfere in Soviet internal affairs, and using SALT II as a vehicle for actually increasing our defense spending rather than as a step toward disarmament. All that was left was SALT II, and in its exposed position it also fell victim to what he saw as the anti-Soviet 3 Mohammed Zahir Shah. 4 Indira Gandhi, former Prime Minister of India.
