44
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The SCC meeting was divided into two parts: first, a discussion
of issues involving domestic considerations or with direct domestic
implications; second, a more restricted group to discuss political/mili-
tary issues.2
1. Demonstrations. After a close call yesterday,3 the District of
Columbia has now forbidden any further pro- or anti-Iran demonstra-
tions. There is a need for better coordination between State, Justice and
the White House Counsel’s office to share information and facilitate
decision-making. A joint working group comprising these agencies will
be formed under chairmanship of the Attorney General. State will
explore the possibility of getting the Iranian Government to request
no further demonstrations here. (C)
2. Iranian Students. Justice, State and Cutler will report by Monday
morning specific steps which can be taken in the immediate future.
The most promising approach may be an order requiring all Iranian
students to report to Immigration to verify their status. Such a survey
would be helpful in clarifying the facts and would send a clear signal.
Actual deportation would be a lengthy process.4 The Attorney General
in August issued an order making the departure of Iranians voluntary,
even if out of status. This was done to protect Jewish Iranians and others
from being forced to return to Iran against their will. Congressman
Fish has asked that this be revoked in view of the present circumstances.
The consequences of such a revocation will be reviewed. (C)
2 An unknown hand wrote on Brzezinski’s November 9 log of his activities related
to Iran: “The P. told ZB he would use force, if necessary; ordered the development of
various rescue and retaliatory options. Compartmentalization of SCC approved.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran 2/80)
3 On November 9, approximately 900 Iranian students marched through downtown
Washington for 6 hours, escorted by more than 400 police. Hundreds of angry anti-
Iranian counter-demonstrators confronted them. The original route of the march included
the White House, but the Park Police and Capitol Police revoked the permit for demon-
strations on Federal property. At the insistence of Washington Mayor Marion Barry, the
city permits for the marches remained in place. (Tom Sherwood, “Barry Is Urged To
Limit Today’s March by Iranians,” Washington Post, November 9, 1979, p. A1, and Felicity
Barringer and Judith Valente, “Marching Iranians Cursed, Pelted Here,” Washington Post,
November 10, 1979, p. A1) On a November 15 memorandum from Civiletti to the
President, Carter wrote: “I prefer that we do our best to prevent permits being issued
for pro- or anti-Iranians until hostages are free. Take our case to court if necessary. cc
Cy, Zbig.” (Carter Library, Records of the White House Office of Counsel to the President,
Lloyd Cutler, Box 10)
4 On November 10, the White House announced that the Attorney General would
deport any Iranian students in the United States who violated their student visa status.
(Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, p. 2109)
