22
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Another approach would be to attempt to split the Tudeh Party,
particularly to exploit the deviationist tendencies of which there have
already been indications.
2. Serious Deterioration of the Present Situation.
In this contingency immediate approach should be made to both
conservation and progressive political parties, groups, and individuals
who might be in a position either to regain control of the government or
to establish security in limited sections of Iran. These elements include
the following:
a. Political Factions.
There are many political groups, few of which can be called
parties. All of these should be worked on in an effort to establish a prac-
tical coalition. They include, among others, the Majlis factions called
Iran and Javan, which appear to be moderately progressive in character.
There are also many prominent, intelligent, and influential younger
government officials now affiliated with the Iran group. They have the
ability to work together and are less inclined to the excessive nation-
alism of these leaders who tend to go along with the Mossadeq group.
A new progressive party, under the leadership of Movvagar, was es-
tablished about 1 March and appears desirous of US aid.
b. Ranking Army Leaders.
Many of the heads of departments of the Ministry of War and com-
manders of divisions are definitely pro-US and would welcome any
catalyst which would unite their efforts to prevent disintegration of in-
ternal security. The names of these officers are known to us.
c. Important Religious Leaders.
These include the individuals mentioned in Section 1 above and
also the all-important Shi’a leaders resident at the shrines at Kerbela,
Nejaf, and Semarra in Iraq.
d. Tribal Leaders.
These include the following:
(1) [1½ lines not declassified]
(2) [2 lines not declassified]
(3) [1 line not declassified]
(4) [1 line not declassified]
3. Imposition of a Satellite Government.
In this contingency we cannot assume that any political group will
be willing to oppose the government openly, nor can any early or effec-
tive results be obtained from the encouragement of clandestine political
opposition.
The most effective tactic might be to encourage collaboration be-
tween Iranian Army divisional commanders and local tribal leaders in
