Covert and Overt Operations 797 McHenry has begun that process in New York and will continue. The third step is to propose a resolution. All agreed that State should prepare a resolution comprising those elements of the ICJ decision which were agreed unanimously by the Court.7 Since the timing of such a resolution should be sensitive to events in Tehran and elsewhere, the resolution would not be submitted to the SC until it had been further reviewed by the SCC and the President. All agreed that this matter would be reviewed by the SCC next Tuesday, with the idea of submitting a resolution next week. (C) Approve8 Other 4. Tehran Conference. Developments concerning the Ramsey Clark delegation and the Iranian release of a purported message from General Huyser to General Haig were briefly reviewed.9 (JCS says the text of the message is probably accurate. It is unclear how the Iranians could have obtained a copy, although it is possible Huyser was working through the Iranian generals at some point.) All agreed that we should hold to our present posture of no comment on the Huyser message. The Attorney General supports prosecution of the Americans in the delegation on civil charges, rather than criminal charges, which would 7 McHenry circulated a resolution, a copy of which is attached to a June 16 memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 65, Outside the System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 4/80– 11/80) 8 Carter checked this option and initialed in the right margin. 9 A delegation of 10 U.S. citizens attended an international conference in Iran, “Crimes of America,” June 2–5. They attended in violation of the U.S. Government’s ban on travel to Iran, facing 10 years in prison and a $50,000 fine. The members of the delegation were Ramsey Clark, former U.S. Attorney General; George Wald, 1967 Nobel Prize winner; Mary Anderson, American Friends Service Committee; Kay Camp, President, Womens International League for Peace and Freedom; Rev. John Walsh, chaplain, Princeton University; Rev. Charles Kimball, student, Harvard Divinity School; Rev. Paul Washington, Episcopal minister; Leonard Weinglass, lawyer; Lennox Hinds, professor, Rutgers University; and John Derrase, journalist. (“U.S. group ignore ban, go to Iran,” Chicago Tribune, June 2, 1980, p. 2) Lang summarized the conference proceedings in a June 6 message to the Department of State, attached to the June 7 Iran Update. Lang also submitted the conference’s “Presentation of Work” in a June 6 cable to the Department of State, attached to the June 10 Iran Update. (Both in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update 6/80) According to the Washington Post, the purported telegram from Huyser to Haig, January 22, 1979, released by the Iranian Defense Ministry, was interpreted by the Iranian Government as proof that Huyser had been sent to Iran to mobilize a military coup. (Stuart Auerbach, “Iran Says U.S. General Plotted Coup,” Washington Post, June 3, 1980, p. A1) The telegram in question is recapitulated in telegram 33229, January 22, 1979, from Huyser to Brown and Jones, which is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, vol. X, 1977–1980, Iran: Revolution, January 1977–November 1979.
