International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1125
ical instability or anti-US sentiment, when an active pursuit of en-
hanced women’s rights by the Country Team is not appropriate.
Recognizing these limits, there is still a wide range of opportu-
nities for discussion, action and Country Team planning. I look to you
to assure personally that your staff and relevant members of your mis-
sion consider these proposals in Embassy activities and in preparing
country programs.
A. Summary of general conclusions of post responses
1. In most countries there has been at least modest and, for some,
considerable progress over the last decade in advancing the rights and
status of women. These rights are now widely recognized under law
and by internationally approved instruments. More women are being
educated and are coming to occupy more positions of influence, espe-
cially in the professions and government. New government (or private)
machinery has been established in many countries to address women’s
interests and responsibilities.
2. However, the implementation and enforcement of laws ex-
tending human rights to women are generally lax. In many countries,
the laws themselves fail to provide women with equal civil, political
and economic rights, such as those involving property, divorce, and in-
heritance. Inequitable rates of pay for the same work are universal,
even in highly developed countries. Women everywhere predominate
in menial or lower status jobs. Women are generally under-represented
in such powerful bodies as labor organizations as well as cabinets, par-
liaments, national councils, the higher courts and large business. Even
in highly modernized Western countries, traditions of male dominance
persist. Rural conservatism and even conservatism of the women them-
selves in many countries perpetuate unjust conditions and make
progress painfully slow. These attitudes are not easily eradicated, yet
forces for change are reported at work almost everywhere.
3. The process of modernization, however, often affects women in
adverse ways. In many LDCs women—particularly the low-income
and rural women—are the primary victims of pervasive unemploy-
ment, urban migration, rapidly advancing technology, overpopulation,
and the widening gap between the educated and the illiterate poor. As
Embassy Ankara writes, “pressures associated with the rapid shift to
an urban society have been especially acute for rural women . . . while
the rise of urban middle and upper-class women have masked their
problems.” The consensus is that it will take the constant, informed at-
tention and support of host governments and citizens, of international
and private organizations, to insure that women share equally in the
benefits and not just the burdens of development and modernization.
4. A significant number of US missions have made sustained ef-
forts to advance women’s status. Our joint cirtel has strengthened their
