680
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
252.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 15, 1980
SUBJECT
The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan: Aberration or Symptom?
1. A short time ago we were discussing the implications of the
Soviet move into Afghanistan. We asked whether this was an aberration
which, when behind us, will see the Soviet Union revert to its previous
pattern of behavior; or whether it is a symptom of a new phase of
adventuresome policy to which the Kremlin is already committed.2
Subsequently, I asked our Soviet experts to look at these two possible
explanations for Soviet behavior in Afghanistan. They have written the
attached paper which I believe is very helpful in putting these two
explanations into perspective. [classification marking and handling restric-
tion not declassified]
2. It concludes that Soviet behavior in the future will be quite
contingent on the conclusions which the Soviet leadership draws from
the results of their experience in Afghanistan and US reactions to it.
In short, the Soviets are neither committed to returning to detente nor
to pursuing an aggressive policy on a global basis. [classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified]
3. I would only add a personal comment that I would be a bit
more categoric than the paper in stating that the Soviet behavior in
Afghanistan was not an aberration. I agree that we do not have evidence
that the Soviets are firmly committed to continuing as aggressive a
policy in the third world as was this Afghan example. Yet, I do believe
that the Soviet track record over the past five or six years indicates
a definitely greater willingness to probe the limits of our tolerance.
“Detente” was not a bar to their greater assertiveness in Angola, Ethio-
pia, Kampuchea, and Yemen. It need not be so again, even if we return
to detente. As the paper concludes, how assertive the Soviets will be
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 12, C–367, 01 Jan–30 Jun 80, Afghanistan. Secret;
[handling restriction not declassified]. In a note forwarding the attached memorandum to
Turner, Clarke explained: “Herewith the paper on the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan:
Aberration or Symptom prepared by Horelick, [less than 1 line not declassified]. The paper
was requested from you by Brzezinski. It is solely the product of the NIO/USSR office
and has not been further coordinated. I recommend that you send this on to the White
House.” (Ibid.)
2 For Brzezinski’s analysis on this topic, see Document 243.
