884 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII directions on November 16. That activity continues as this is being drafted and a few high-flying jet fighters and bombers have also been sighted over Kabul. Soviet air transport flights also seem to have increased markedly during this period, but large road convoys have not been observed as often as about a week ago.3 4. The DRA announcement noted that the forces slated for the maneuvers had already left for the listed areas, and our sources confirmed that large military contingents had arrived in several locations by November 15. Two of them said that one contingent had also moved into Wardak Province, though that was not one of the sites specified for the maneuvers. All of these sources reported that the military forces were conducting searches of villages for Mujaheddin and potential conscripts. In at least one case (in Wardak) Soviet forces were shelling a suspected Mujaheddin encampment. Another generally reliable source informed us November 18 that Soviet forces trying for the fourth time to invade the Panjshir Valley had met with the usual stiff resistance for the fourth day in a row. 5. Kabul itself has been slightly more tense since the beginning of the Shia religious mourning month of Muharram on November 8. However, the 10th of Muharram (November 17), a day usually marked by processions of self-flagellating Shias, passed without major incident in the city. The Shia processions were unusually small and none was addressed by leading DRA figures, as had been the practice in preleftist days. Justice Minister Aryan was sent to observe one procession. While he made no speech himself, he ordered attending preachers to include blessings for the DRA in their prayers, after which many participants were heard to grumble loudly about “godless Communists.” 3 [text not declassified] Soviet military leaders in Afghanistan had recently concluded that the “situation in Afghanistan is currently a stalemate.” Despite recognizing that “most” of the country was controlled by insurgents, the Soviets believed the rebels could be defeated eventually. Among the tactics authorized toward that end, the report noted, was an increased use of helicopters. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Country File, Box 91, Afghanistan: 1/80–1/81)
