Chapter 6, June–December 1990 823 six to eight weeks to complete the technical drafting. And on START there are thousands of details that are bound to emerge. Baker: Okay. Well don’t we look at the second half of October and we’ll look for a date and we can meet in Washington or some place in the United States. Shevardnadze: You mean it might not be in Washington. Baker: Well, I don’t know, it could be. But I’d prefer something like Houston or San Antonio. Shevardnadze: Well, alright. The second half of October, we’ll meet. We’ll have a full-­scale ministerial. As for the other meetings, we’ll meet in Europe, possibly in Paris, in November and that’s a part of the CSCE. Baker: Yes, I think that will be November 19. Shevardnadze: Yes, the 19th through the 21st. But that’s just a tentative date. Baker: Does that take care of the scheduling? Shevardnadze: I think so. I think to make the October productive and to complete the work of the START treaty, I would suggest that we discuss some of these issues here—­today or tomorrow. The situation in the talks in Geneva is a difficult one, it’s not simple. We’ve got to think about how we can intensify the negotiating process. Maybe one way to do so on a temporary basis is to set up a small working group—­one led by Bartholomew and Karpov. They can be looking on continuous basis at all the problems in order to prepare for an October meeting and they could begin meeting in either Moscow or maybe Washington now and maybe alternate. We can also keep ourselves involved by having such a working group, because we can each meet with them when they are in our respective capitals. It would also allow us to engage with the military and other people. Now this is not a substitute for talks in Geneva, but it might be an authoritative working mechanism that might make it possible for the two of us to stay involved. And that is more likely to ensure that our subsequent meetings, certainly the one in October, will be productive. Baker: I don’t have any problem with that, but let me suggest an amendment. When you come to New York for the UNGA you might bring some of the right people with you, some people you would need, and you and I could then engage with our experts to give this thing a push. After that, Bartholomew and Karpov could begin working with the people in Geneva to pursue matters until the October ministerial. I am afraid if it’s just a working group of Bartholomew and Karpov, that that will quickly bog down. So if we want to give it a special impetus, why don’t you send me a list of issues that you think can be resolved and I’ll send you my list. We can agree to engage on those issues, we can engage on them in New York and/or Washington, around the UNGA.
