680
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
sumes an increasingly important role, the international monetary
system as a whole should become more stable through minimization of
shifts among various reserve assets.
Main Issues in the Negotiations
The central issues relate to maintaining financial balance in the Ac-
count. The Account can experience losses of two kinds: the interest it
receives from the U.S. Government on its dollar investments may not
be enough to cover the interest it pays on its SDR-denominated liabil-
ities; and it can show a negative “net worth” if the dollar exchange rate
declines relative to the SDR. The question is how these losses are to be
financed. Although other countries entered the negotiations with the
position that the U.S. should bear these costs, it is now generally ac-
cepted that the Account is of potential benefit to depositors and the
system as a whole as well as to the United States, and that any costs
should therefore be shared equitably.
Gold. One approach to financing losses—which is essential if this
key issue is to be resolved, and which appears to have the support of
the major countries—is use of part of the IMF’s gold holdings. As-
suming general agreement to use of some IMF gold, the main question
here is whether the gold should be available to finance all losses by the
Account, or whether the U.S. should be obligated to make special
above-market interest payments to cover part of any interest gap, with
the balance of any losses to be financed with IMF gold.
Some countries are interested in minimizing the need for sales of
IMF gold, and see special U.S. “extra” interest payments as a way of
achieving this objective. Others are less concerned about the modest
gold sales that would be needed to cover interest shortfalls than they
are about assuring—symbolically, for domestic political reasons—that
the U.S. carries a “burden” in connection with the Account’s opera-
tions. We have argued that the U.S. cannot agree to such supplemen-
tary payments over and above market interest rates; that it is politically
impossible for us; that it is unnecessary given the availability of IMF
gold; and that it is unrealistic and inappropriate for others to insist on
such payments for the sake of imposing a symbolic burden.
There is some concern over presentational aspects of using gold for
the substitution account—that it could be interpreted as a step toward
“remonetization,” contrary to U.S. policy and interests. It is difficult to
see how the gap in negotiating positions can be bridged without some
use of IMF gold, but it is at the same time important to minimize such
presentational or image problems. We have therefore insisted, and the
other major countries have agreed, that there must be some provision
for actual sales of gold to meet an interest gap; and that remaining gold
held by the Account would not be valued at the market, but would be re-
