3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
166
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
extent. Although occasional outbursts of protest continue to take place,
the more prominent dissidents have been effectively silenced. Never-
theless, Soviet repression of dissent continues to intensify.
It is true that even now the picture is not one of unrelieved repres-
sion. Two prominent Jewish activists, for example, were recently al-
lowed to emigrate. And Orlov, the key figure in post-Helsinki dissent,
has been charged with the relatively minor offense of anti-Soviet ac-
tivity. There are still some restraints on Soviet behavior toward dissi-
dents; the Soviet leadership has no desire, if indeed it has the power, to
move in the direction of reinstituting the Stalinist terror apparatus.
Nevertheless, the current campaign against dissent in the Soviet Union
has become the toughest of this decade.
This increase in the relative harshness of Soviet policy is to some
extent a natural partner of the more defensive and pugnacious tone the
Soviets have displayed recently in many facets of foreign policy—par-
ticularly regarding the Eurocommunists and the United States. The re-
cent expansion of Soviet actions against dissidents is doubtless thus
partially related to irritation over the lack of progress in other areas of
US-Soviet relations, as well as to the Soviets’ desire to keep dissent
closely controlled during the Belgrade review conference. At the same
time, the exaggerated sensitivity of Soviet policy, both externally and
internally, may also reflect aggravated leadership tensions. A conflu-
ence of policy difficulties, coming at a time when Brezhnev’s health is
uncertain, may have strengthened the arguments of those within the
leadership somewhat less inclined to conciliate the regime’s opponents,
both at home and abroad.
39.
Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research, Department of State1
Washington, undated
SOVIET-US RELATIONS: A SIX-MONTH TRACK RECORD
Despite six month’s trying, the Soviets have as yet failed to come to
grips with the Carter administration. Their perplexity centers on what
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 12, US-Soviet Relations, 1977. Secret. Prepared by Isabel Kulski and approved by
Martha Mautner, both of INR. In the upper right corner of the first page, an unknown
hand wrote, “Advance copy from INR, 8/77.”
