88
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
26.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, May 10, 1951.
SUBJECT
Conversation between Messrs. George McGhee, Burton Berry, and William
Rountree of the State Department, and Allen Dulles and Kermit Roosevelt of
CIA, Thursday, 10 May 1951
1. Mr. Dulles emphasized to Mr. McGhee the urgent importance
that CIA attaches to the Iranian situation. He stated that he felt the time
might come very shortly when the Shah would have to choose between
making a fight for his kingdom and going into exile. If he chooses to
fight, his course of action would probably have to be that of dissolving
the Majlis, replacing Mossadeq as Prime Minister with a man upon
whom he could rely, and governing the country as his father did, by de-
cree. Mr. Dulles suggested that the Shah might require considerable
moral and practical support before he would undertake such a course
and that we should be prepared to throw all our weight where it would
do the most good to preserve Iran from Soviet domination. He went on
to say that he had discussed with DCI this proposition and that DCI
had indicated his desire to do whatever would be helpful in this regard.
Consideration might be given to sending an individual in whom the
Shah had great personal confidence to Tehran to stiffen the Shah’s will
to resist and to assure him of American support. In response to Mr.
McGhee’s question, Mr. Dulles indicated that there seemed to be gen-
eral agreement that Ambassador George Allen2 would be the best pos-
sible person for the job, but that it was recognized that there were very
grave practical difficulties in the way of his use.
2. In subsequent discussion it was agreed that it would not be fea-
sible to send George Allen to Tehran under the circumstances. Various
other individuals were considered in this connection, but most had to
be discarded for one reason or another. Mr. Dulles suggested that
Nelson Rockefeller might quite plausibly visit Iran as well as other
parts of the Near East, and State Department representatives felt this
suggestion had great merit. The names of Colonel Sexton and General
Gerow were also mentioned, as were Mr. Charles Suydam and Dr.
Claude E. Forkner. The latter two were considered to be particularly
promising.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran. Top Secret.
2 George Allen served as U.S. Ambassador to Iran during the Iran crisis of 1946.
