660
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
some cases, leading ultimately to chronic instability. Then too, popula-
tion pressures probably will propel some governments to strive for
greater administrative efficiency, more emphasis on food production
and population control, and labor intensive economic development.
Such movement probably will often be accompanied by more repres-
sive styles of rule on the part of governments already in power and by
the rise of additional authoritarian regimes.
The significance for the US of the destabilizing consequences of
population growth will vary according to how the US defines its for-
eign policy priorities and other national objectives. Instances in which
population pressures directly and immediately involve the US (for ex-
ample, problems related to Mexican immigration) are likely to be few
and far between in the near-to-medium term. In other cases, whether
US interests are affected will depend on how they relate to the partic-
ular actors and circumstances involved, e.g., how concerned the US is
with maintaining political stability and fostering economic well-being
among the LDCs.
Over the very long term, moreover, the impact of population
growth and the need to feed expanding populations could range be-
yond traditional politically defined national security considerations.
F. Ecological and Environmental Factors
The US has a fundamental interest in the health and welfare of its
people and the preservation of their way of life on a planet that might
eventually be physically threatened by the consequences of world pop-
ulation growth.
No one can say for sure how many people the earth can support.
Technological innovation and man’s managerial skills will help deter-
mine the upper limit. It does seem clear, though, that population
growth tends to increase the risk of ecological and environmental
damage in a variety of ways. The long-run impact of the greatly in-
creased use of fertilizer and insecticides on the environment, for ex-
ample, is likely to prove highly detrimental.
The extent to which the US will be able to insulate itself from the
adverse environmental and ecological consequences of population
growth will of course depend on how pervasive and intense the
damage becomes. This will not necessarily correlate precisely with in-
cremental population increases, but the cumulative impact of close to
15 billion people on earth would almost certainly be considerably
greater and potentially more dangerous than that of 8 or 10 billion.
Population growth is likely to impede international cooperation on
matters such as resource conservation and pollution abatement. Na-
tions with pressing needs to provide food and jobs for their people will
tend to be less concerned about the long-run consequences of their agri-
