accepting the resignation of the Cabinet en bloc. With the exception of such
government as the military administered, there was no semblance of
authority in Peking from this date until May 1. The military were aided by
an unofficial Committee of Safety with Dr. W. W. Yen as Chairman. This
committee functioned for some time after the advent of the Allied soldiers.
On May 13 Dr. Yen assumed office as Premier and Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs in a so-called Regency Cabinet. In the meantime efforts had
been made to restore Tsao Kun to the position of Chief Executive but he
declined all overtures and elected to remain in semi-seclusion at Tientsin. In
addition to the rapid and sudden changes of government and the constant
activities of military rivals, there was an almost complete collapse of
railway transportation in February, March and April. For several weeks in
February and March, and in the early part of April, there were no trains in
or out of Peking, except those operated by the military. This brief resume of
the events which constantly retarded and disorganized the work of the
Conference will indicate to the Department the insuperable obstacles which
have been constantly arising to make the Conference abortive.
Almost from the beginning of the Conference the political condition in
Peking has been such that the Chinese Delegates could not exercise a free
and untrammeled course on any question. They have been constantly
harrassed by opposing political and military factions and their lot has been a
most unpleasant one. It is a great tribute to the courage, the perseverance
and the patriotism of Dr. W. W. Yen and Admiral Tsai Ting-kan, the only
two remaining Chinese Delegates, that they have weathered the storm and
remained steadfast in the purpose to achieve something for China.
The American Delegation shares the disappointment that all the other
Delegations, both Chinese and foreign, must feel that so little has been
accomplished thus far towards the fulfillment of the terms of the
Washington Treaty.
 
The Delegation desires to express its appreciation of the services rendered
by the Technical and secretarial staffs and to say that more detailed
comment in this regard will be sent in a separate despatch.14
