646  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
regard. Our September 10 agreed announcement draws no distinction 
whatever between those Americans in prison and those denied exit per­
mits for one reason or another. We both well know that at time we issued 
September 10 announcement only Americans in your country of whom 
we had knowledge desiring return and being prevented from doing so 
were those in prison. It was in this context our statement drafted, agreed 
upon and released. Unless unequivocal words of that statement and our 
discussions leading up to it are entirely without meaning with respect to 
this group Americans, they most definitely are covered by September 10 
agreed announcement, and my government absolutely rejects any efforts 
now to allege this is not case.
C. I again must most seriously call to your attention fact that by 
no stretch of imagination or interpretation of plain meaning of words 
can it be considered Americans imprisoned your country are being 
permitted exercise their right expeditious return US in accordance 
terms that announcement. I have repeatedly pointed out failure fully 
implement this agreement during increasing passage of time cannot 
but have increasingly serious effect on success our discussions of 
other subjects here.
D. I now refer to questions raised your letters December 28 and 
January 5 concerning implementation by my government of agreed 
announcement.
E. Immediately upon receipt your December 28 letter my authori­
ties looked into situation of Liu Yung-­ming. Liu has been hospitalized 
at public expense since 1949 with serious case chronic schizophrenia. 
Although he was not yet completely recovered, it was determined he 
was able to travel and arrangements were made by my authorities for 
him depart January 8 for Hong Kong by steamer President Wilson.
F. With respect to persons mentioned your letter January 5, I can 
assure you none of them are being prevented from leaving US. In addi­
tion, I again assure you there are no obstructions to Chinese leaving US. 
Furthermore, any Chinese who feels he is being obstructed in proceed­
ing your country is entirely free communicate with Indian Embassy. 
Thus far Indian Embassy has not brought to attention of my govern­
ment any such case.
58. Wang replied in extemporaneous statement that he glad learn 
Liu Yung-­ming on way home. However he must note that from this 
case it could be seen US has not been carrying out agreed announce­
ment very well.
59. Wang said next as to question of American nationals residing 
in China and Americans in prison for offenses in China, PRC side 
expressed its position definitely and clearly in course our discussions. 
Any ordinary American resident in China free leave country any time 
upon application. Even in cases Americans who have violated law in
