578  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Following Mr. Sol’s eloquent presentation, the entire party left the 
President’s Guest House for the White House to meet with President 
Eisenhower.
ES–6.	
Memorandum of Conversation by the Assistant Secretary 
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
 
Washington, March 11, 1959.
SUBJECT
Call on the President by President Lemus of El Salvador
PARTICIPANTS
The President; President Lemus; the Acting Secretary; Foreign Minister Ortiz 
Mancia; Minister of Economy Rochac; Minister of Public Works Parker; Economic 
Adviser Jorge Sol; Ambassador Castro; Ambassador Kalijarvi; Mr. Rubottom; 
­Lieutenant Colonel Vernon Walters.
The President, after greeting President Lemus and his colleagues, 
acknowledged that his visitor had an engagement to speak before a 
joint session of Congress and suggested that, in view of the time factor, 
President Lemus raise any matters of substance which he might have 
on his mind.
President Lemus said that there was one subject of special interest 
to him, i.e. how to increase the economic strength of his nation as well 
as others. The President then inquired as to whether there was a proj-
ect for a Central American regional market. President Lemus replied 
in the affirmative, pointing out that El Salvador for several years had 
been convinced that there was too much economic compartmentation, 
as well as overdependence on one or two products.
The President responded by pointing out that the problem of bor-
ders was not limited to small countries, since the United States and 
Canada, even though a common geographic and security bloc, had 
to contend with the political and economic problems created by the 
division at the frontier. He mentioned specifically the problems of 
lead and zinc, petroleum, wheat, and goods manufactured by wholly-­
owned U.S. companies in Canada. President Lemus, while recogniz-
ing the problem between the United States and Canada, said that their 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential.
