Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
633
240.
Draft Message From the U.S. Government to the Iranian
Government1
Washington, April 4, 1980
I telephoned the gist of your early-morning report2 personally to
Secretary Vance and he asked me to send Ambassador Brunner and
you his deep personal thanks for your most timely responses and your
analysis. Then, I took the full text to Assistant Secretary Saunders.
Following conversations in the State Department, I want to pass
on to you my reading of the situation in Washington.
The Americans remain prepared to cooperate fully in a series of
reciprocal steps including the transfer of the hostages to the full custody
and protection of the government and their early release. The Ameri-
cans do not wish to humiliate Iran and want very much for the crisis
to end in a way so that gradually they can begin to build with Iran a
new relationship of mutual respect and equality. They realize that the
alternative could be very harsh for Iran and could give the USSR greater
opportunities in Iran, but U.S. larger interests could require the pursuit
of such a course if Iran remains intransigent.
The Americans recognize that members of the Revolutionary Coun-
cil in Tehran are making persistent efforts to achieve the transfer of
the hostages to government custody, but the Americans are reaching
a point where they doubt whether the authorities in Tehran have the
ability to do what they say they will do. Because of the pressures
mounting in the United States as a result of repeated inability in Tehran
to act as promised, the U.S. Government will have little choice but to
take decisive steps in the very near future and to press other govern-
ments to follow these steps.
At the same time, the steps which they deferred taking on April
1 could put them on the road to even graver measures. If the crisis
continues to drag on, the U.S. will be obliged to take sterner measures
which will have the inevitable effect of causing hardship to many
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 7. Secret. Sent via the Swiss ostensibly as
a message from the Swiss Ambassador in Washington, Raymond Probst, to Lang. In an
April 4 covering memorandum to Carter, Aaron wrote: “Attached is the draft message
to the Iranians which Cy has prepared. It incorporates all my comments.” On another
copy of this draft, an unknown hand wrote: “cleared by pres 1900.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran
[Retained 4/80]) Villalon told Precht the United States should send a firm message laying
out the U.S. position and the gravity of the situation to eliminate any doubt of U.S.
willingness to go forward. If the message were oral, he suggested sending it through
Lang. (Memorandum of conversation, April 4; ibid.)
2 See footnote 3, Document 239.
