766 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Secretary Gates pointed out that a real policy change is being urged. He would not say that the State Department was urging a new policy change, but some people were.2 The President then reviewed the history of the deployment of nuclear weapons to American forces abroad. He felt that no large forces should be deployed without nuclear weapons. Secretary Herter stated that he had no objection to this conclusion. There was further discus­ sion about the delegation of authority matter. Secretary Herter then raised the question about the non-­nuclear capability our forces would have. He was glad to hear what Secretary McElroy had said that we were continuing to develop better conven­ tional weapons. The President said that perhaps some slight change in words was needed, but he did not know. He repeated that “formed units” must have defensive nuclear capability. Both Secretary McElroy and Admiral Radford jumped in to make sure by “defensive” the President did not mean to rule out weapons systems to take out strike bases deep in China. Mr. Gray said that the State Department wanted to increase our limited war capability. The President stated his understanding that we had a good conventional capability. Secretary McElroy said that that was true in cases involving ranges up to 2,000 yards. In the case of 15–20 miles, we will lack conventional fire power. The President asked him if we had thrown away all of our artillery. Secretary McElroy indi­ cated that this would be the case soon. The President expressed some doubt as to the wisdom of this course. The President pointed out that we may be called on for aid by the OAS. He felt that with one present-­ day American division with its conventional arms, it could handle any Western Hemisphere problem. He recognized that we are in a transi­ tional stage, pointing out that the day of very small nuclear weapons was not very far away. When one gets down to .02 kiloton weapons, the distinction we are talking about now would no longer have reality. Mr. Gray said that the proponents of a policy change wanted to change the emphasis somewhat away from strategic bombing capabil­ ity. The President expressed the belief that our military units should be given good training in conventional weapons. He stated that it had taken years for the cross-­bow to become obsolete. We should organize our forces to use the weapons we have. There was more discussion of the delegation problem. Secretary Herter then read an excerpt from the Summary Statement of Foreign Policy Requirements which proposes that nuclear weapons 2 At a meeting after the President’s meeting between McElroy, Radford, Gates, Gray and Smith, Smith made it quite plain that the State Department was proposing a real change. [Footnote is in the original.]
