National Security Policy 113 people sick and accordingly unfit to work. A dose of 200 Roentgens, on the other hand, would cause disabling sickness. Admiral Strauss commented that the natives on some of the islands in our Pacific proving grounds, and some of our own U.S. personnel there, had undergone much larger doses than 75 Roentgens without serious ill effect. The President inquired how one could distinguish the degree of contamination from radioactive fallout in a given area at a given time. Mr. Shafer, of the FCDA, explained that it was proposed to distribute instruments for this purpose immediately after a nuclear detonation. The National Security Council: Noted and discussed an oral briefing by the Federal Civil Defense Administration, concurred in generally by the Atomic Energy Commis­ sion, on the hazards of radioactive fallout and on the relative effective­ ness of types of protective shelter. 2. SOVIET CIVIL DEFENSE AND AIR-RAID SHELTER CONSTRUCTION (NSC Action No. 1842–­f; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated March 14, 1958) Having done a lot of hard work on this intelligence estimate, the intelligence community, explained Mr. Allen Dulles, was still of the opinion that the Soviet Union did have a program of civil defense and of air-­raid shelter construction. It was not easy to pin down and describe this program, but Mr. Dulles said that he would be glad to invite skep­ tics into his office to see the enormous mass of evidence of the existence of such a program in the Soviet Union. Incidentally, he added, the pres­ ent estimate had been concurred in by all of the agencies of the intelli­ gence community. Mr. Dulles then went on to cite certain specific evidence from train­ ing manuals, Soviet Red Cross reports, and other sources. Weighing all the evidence, Mr. Dulles then summarized his conclusions. First, that a minimum of from 10 to 15 million people of the Soviet Union’s urban population are now afforded some degree of protection, and that the effort to provide more is a continuing effort in the Soviet Union. All this was true despite much uncertainty as to the precise character and size of the Soviet program. When the Director of Central Intelligence had concluded his remarks, General Cutler informed the Council that when it was pro­ duced before the Planning Board, this estimate on the Soviet program had been received with a certain amount of skepticism, particularly in view of two sentences—­one in paragraph 2, reading “It is impossible
