114
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
5. Economic Assistance—No cuts were proposed in development
assistance for FY ’77 because of human rights violations. Christopher
testified on this issue in the Senate.11 There has been little controversy.
6. Sakharov Letter and White House Meeting with Bukovsky—You are
better informed on this than I, my impression is that these decisions
were made entirely within the White House.12
7. UN Human Rights Commission Meeting in Geneva—The US dele-
gation was headed by Allard Lowenstein. I don’t know who was re-
sponsible for his appointment, but it was a good one, notwithstanding
Brady Tyson’s remarks on Chile (Lowenstein did not see or approve
Tyson’s remarks).13 Lowenstein took the unusual course of not as-
suming at the beginning that our efforts would be doomed to failure,
and succeeded remarkably well in energizing the meeting and
changing its tone. There were two votes on which even such traditional
clients as Cuba and Syria refused to support the Soviet position lim-
iting human rights investigations. Lowenstein has real potential in this
area. He is completely unfettered by the pervasive defeatist attitude at
State and is both deeply committed and realistic. His talents should be
made use of.
8. Planning for ECOSOC and the 1977 UNGA—So far only State has
been involved. Their proposals center on trying to avoid a reversal on
issues which we won at Geneva and to begin efforts to enact the Presi-
dent’s proposals made in the UN speech.14 State has developed a pro-
11 See footnotes 4 and 6, Document 28.
12 Reference is to an exchange of letters between Sakharov and Carter; see footnote
2, Document 18. Telegram 3046 from Moscow, March 7, reported that the Embassy had
received another letter from Sakharov addressed to the President and transmitted the
text. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, N770001–0766) Bukovsky
met with Carter, Mondale, and Brzezinski in the Roosevelt Room of the White House on
March 1 from 3:30 to 3:37 p.m. Clift, Eisele, Levitsky, and Krimer also attended this
meeting. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No record of
this conversation has been found. See also Bernard Gwertzman, “Carter and Mondale See
Bukovsky, a Soviet Dissident,” The New York Times, March 2, 1977, p. A–1.
13 During a March 8 session of the UN Human Rights Commission meeting, Tyson
asserted that the U.S. delegation would be remiss not to “express our profoundest re-
grets” for the role U.S. officials and others had “played in the subversion of the previous
democratically elected Chilean Government that was overthrown by the coup of Sept. 11,
1973.” The Department of State responded, indicating that Tyson’s statement was unau-
thorized and did not reflect the official views of the United States. (“U.S. Official Ex-
presses ‘Regrets’ For Role in Chile but Is Disavowed,” The New York Times, March 9, 1977,
p. A–1) Carter addressed the issue during his March 9 press conference, commenting that
the remark “made by the delegate concerning our past involvement in Chilean political
affairs was inappropriate. I didn’t know about it ahead of time. It was a personal expres-
sion of opinion by that delegate.” (Department of State Bulletin, April 4, 1977, pp. 305–06)
14 Tuchman, in the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s April 5 evening report to Brzez-
inski, noted: “The State Department feels, for a variety of reasons, that the major thrust of
the forthcoming ECOSOC meeting may be a concerted effort on the part of certain na-
tions to undo the relatively modest gains we made on this issue in the recent Geneva
