Peru 1089 U.S. banks.10 its efforts to maintain purchasing power and consumption in the face of this worsening of the terms of trade led to a progressive depletion of Peru’s foreign exchange reserves—­a downward trend accelerated by a weakening of the position of the Peruvian sol and a consequent flight of capital. By the end of 1958 official gold and foreign exchange reserves had fallen to less than half of the $67 million on hand at the end of 1956, and by mid-1959, when Peru halted its borrowing from the IMF, reserves were reportedly down to $20 million. Although Peru still had $25 million in unused EXIMBANK credits, the availability of all but $5 million was contingent upon restoration of Peru’s credit with the IMF. 26 Meanwhile, the government and most private employers were forced to yield to labor demands for higher wages to counter increasing living costs. Inflationary pressures were further increased by the liberal credit extended by the banks in an effort to maintain business momentum and by the fact that the government, faced with increased costs and lowered revenues, increased its borrowings from the Central Bank. Although the government made some efforts to check these inflationary trends, it made little headway in the face of continuing heavy demands for private credit and the government’s need to pay its own bills. 27. With the appointment of Beltrán as Prime Minister and Minister of Finance in mid-1959, Peru is now committed to a far more vigorous attack on these problems. Emphasizing the need to balance the government’s budget, stabilize prices, and restore Peru’s international credit and exchange position, Beltrán has called for the cessation of government borrowing from the Central Bank, more rigorous tax collection, the restoration of the 18 percent legal reserve requirements for commercial banks, and other measures to curb inflationary private lending. He has already embarked on some curtailment of government payrolls and military purchases abroad, has removed costly food subsidies, and has permitted increases in prices for petroleum. Previous low ceilings had contributed to a decline of oil production in recent years to a level little over that of domestic requirements. Longer range objectives
