Peru  1089
U.S. banks.10 its efforts to maintain purchasing power and consumption 
in the face of this worsening of the terms of trade led to a progres-
sive depletion of Peru’s foreign exchange reserves—­a downward trend 
accelerated by a weakening of the position of the Peruvian sol and a 
consequent flight of capital. By the end of 1958 official gold and foreign 
exchange reserves had fallen to less than half of the $67 million on hand 
at the end of 1956, and by mid-1959, when Peru halted its borrowing 
from the IMF, reserves were reportedly down to $20 million. Although 
Peru still had $25 million in unused EXIMBANK credits, the availabil-
ity of all but $5 million was contingent upon restoration of Peru’s credit 
with the IMF.
26 Meanwhile, the government and most private employers were 
forced to yield to labor demands for higher wages to counter increas-
ing living costs. Inflationary pressures were further increased by the 
liberal credit extended by the banks in an effort to maintain business 
momentum and by the fact that the government, faced with increased 
costs and lowered revenues, increased its borrowings from the Central 
Bank. Although the government made some efforts to check these 
inflationary trends, it made little headway in the face of continuing 
heavy demands for private credit and the government’s need to pay 
its own bills.
27. With the appointment of Beltrán as Prime Minister and Minister 
of Finance in mid-1959, Peru is now committed to a far more vigorous 
attack on these problems. Emphasizing the need to balance the govern-
ment’s budget, stabilize prices, and restore Peru’s international credit 
and exchange position, Beltrán has called for the cessation of govern-
ment borrowing from the Central Bank, more rigorous tax collection, 
the restoration of the 18 percent legal reserve requirements for com-
mercial banks, and other measures to curb inflationary private lending. 
He has already embarked on some curtailment of government payrolls 
and military purchases abroad, has removed costly food subsidies, 
and has permitted increases in prices for petroleum. Previous low ceil-
ings had contributed to a decline of oil production in recent years to a 
level little over that of domestic requirements. Longer range objectives 
10 In 1954 Peru obtained an IMF and U.S. standby credit of $25 million. In February 
1958 the IMF agreed to increase Peru’s borrowing capacity from $12.5 million to 
$25 million on the basis of the latter’s acceptance of certain monetary and fiscal require-
ments laid down by the Fund. Peru also obtained a $17.5 million U.S. Treasury com-
mitment, and another $17.5 million credit from three U.S. banks. With the subsequent 
agreement of the EXIMBANK to provide $40 million for balance of payments support, 
Peru had $100 million in stabilization assistance available. However, by September 1959, 
all but $25 million of the EXIMBANK credit had been exhausted, and of this $20 million 
cannot be touched until the IMF permits further borrowings. [Footnote is in the source 
text.]
