International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 401 energy and inflation, British and French agreement (along with the other Summit countries) on sensible trade policies, and German and Japanese efforts to improve their growth, to the extent feasible without adding to inflation. Each of these elements of the package depends on the others being present. More specifically, significant action by Germany to promote growth is an indispensable part of any coordinated set of measures, since it will largely determine what other European countries are able to do to increase growth in their economies, and whether they would be willing to reduce their barriers to wider trade. The scale of German action will be important; Schmidt is probably thinking in terms of expansionary measures that would add ½% or less to GNP. The US view is that a stimulus on the order of 1% of GNP (i.e., DM 12 billion) would be a more appropriate policy. When Schultze suggested such a stimulus, the German member of his group did not object, although he may not have reflected Schmidt’s thinking. In any event, we wish to cast the Summit discussion in terms not of numerical growth targets but of the need for a significant improvement from current prospects, which are well below the earlier forecasts for both Germany and Japan (which were 3.5% and 7%, respectively). 5. Talking Points. You might organize your discussion of economic issues with the Chancellor around the main components of a Summit package: a. US Action on Inflation and Energy: It is important to stress the priority that the US is giving to dealing with inflation and, even more importantly, to persuade Schmidt of your willingness to commit yourself at the Summit to get US domestic oil prices up to world market levels over a very short period. This is crucial from his standpoint. b. Trade: You might stress your support for international efforts to keep an open trading system and to prevent the spread of subsidies and other measures to prop up unviable industries, and indicate that we will work at the Summit and otherwise to bring the French and British into agreement along these lines. c. Growth: You might point out that it will be easier for you to take the politically difficult actions that Schmidt wants, particularly on energy, if they are balanced with actions by others that will also contribute to world economy recovery. You might mention Fukuda’s recent expression of willingness to announce further Japanese stimulus at the Summit, if this proves needed to achieve Japan’s own growth objective, and mention your hope that Germany will be able to do the same. You might indicate your understanding of the delicate political problem that Schmidt faces; your recognition of his desire to avoid “stop-and-go” policies, and your agreement on the need to promote long-term sustainable growth. You might suggest that a substantial German expansionary move at this time could pave the way for steady
