Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
703
As a practical matter, however, the US ability to sustain its re-
straint policy depends, in part, on the demonstration of progress
toward restraint by other suppliers, including the USSR. Without inter-
national cooperation, the prospects for continuing US restraint are
uncertain.
The United States believes that US-Soviet cooperation in restrain-
ing arms transfers is as important as the most important other items on
our arms control agenda; further, that talks on controlling the arms
trade fall within the spirit and context of the mutual obligations we as-
sumed when our two countries signed, at the highest level, the “Basic
Principles of Relations between the US and the USSR,” on May 29,
1972.2
Our common interest in restraining arms transfers has been dem-
onstrated in the past when situations developed in which our respec-
tive supply of arms to opposing sides in local conflicts led to tensions in
our own relations, and adversely influenced the political climate for
progress in other arms control negotiations. Other important common
stakes in arms transfer restraint include:
—Prevention and/or limitation of regional conflicts: unrestricted
arms transfers could help spark dangerous and destabilizing local con-
flicts, perhaps drawing US inadvertently into unwanted and danger-
ous confrontations.
—Assisting efforts to stem nuclear proliferation: unrestrained
transfers of conventional military technology might gradually under-
mine our cooperative efforts to stem nuclear proliferation, through
states opting for nuclear weapons to offset changes in local balances of
conventional military forces resulting from arms transfers.
—Avoiding manipulation by recipients: the US and USSR should
aim to avoid situations in which recipients of our arms might be
tempted to play us off against one another.
—Reducing supplier uncertainties: future policies of our arms re-
cipients are not predictable, arms supply relationships often prove to
be of only limited political value.
—Reducing costly and unnecessary weapon acquisitions: the US
and USSR should encourage the use of scarce financial resources in the
third world for more constructive purposes than arms acquisitions.
—Encouraging other suppliers to restrain arms exports: any US-
Soviet understandings on restraint cannot be fully effective without
parallel action by other suppliers. Yet, as the two largest suppliers, our
cooperation is necessary as an example to others.
MUTUAL APPROACHES TO RESTRAINT
The United States believes that common acceptance of the fol-
lowing criteria would constitute a first step toward cooperation:
2 For the complete text of the Joint Declaration see Department of State Bulletin, pp.
899–902.
