Eastern Europe Region 103 the Soviet Union, assert policies that are opposed by other Pact members and assume an independent international role. Since the early 1960s the Romanians have gradually established political and economic ties to the United States, Western Europe, the non-aligned movement and other independent communist entities—especially Yugoslavia, China and the Eurocommunists—as a counter to Soviet leverage. In the process Bucharest has pursued a number of independent positions, inter alia: —willingness to conclude a trade agreement with the U.S. and comply with the Jackson-Vanik amendment; —opposition to economic integration within CEMA and military integration within the Warsaw Pact; —non-participation in the Czechoslovak invasion; —support for the rights of all communist parties to pursue their own course; —membership in such organizations as the IMF and participation in the “Group of 77”; and, —retention of diplomatic ties with Israel and playing an intermediary role in regional crises, most notably in the Middle East, where Ceausescu helped facilitate Sadat’s visit to Israel. 23. In 1978 Romania strengthened its ties to those states which are perceived as major counters to Moscow. The most dramatic part of this campaign was the unprecedented visit of Hua Kuo-feng to Bucharest. The Hua visit set the stage for a heightening of Soviet-Romanian tension, which culminated in Ceausescu’s public criticism of Moscow in the aftermath of the November Warsaw Pact summit. In five major speeches, Ceausescu indirectly rebuked the Soviet Union for seeking increased military expenditures by Pact members and for attempts to improve Pact command and control mechanisms that would negate Romania’s sovereign control over its armed forces. Couching his critique in highly nationalistic terms, Ceausescu sought to rally the population behind him once again in defiance of Moscow. 24. Appeals to Romanian nationalism and independence are used by Ceausescu both to counter Soviet designs and to offset public disenchantment with Romania’s standard of living and authoritarian political system. Foreign policy independence has been effective in bridging some of the gap between the population and the regime. POLAND 25. Poland was the first among the Warsaw Pact countries to develop a positive relationship with the U.S. and to resume cultivation of traditionally close ties with such Western countries as France, Britain and Italy. This has led to a Western presence in Poland which far
