Negotiating Channels 174. Draft Message From the Department of State to the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1 Washington, February 3, 1980 1. We would be grateful if Ambassador Lang could deliver the two separate messages contained in this telegram to Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh and to President-elect Bani-Sadr or his associate, Salamatian. We very much hope this will give Ambassador Lang occasion for direct meeting with Bani-Sadr himself. 2. The first message is a statement of the U.S. position which was communicated to Secretary-General Waldheim by Secretary Vance for Ambassador Farhang early in January.2 We are uncertain whether the statement reached Tehran. The last point in the statement would appear to be responsive to Iranian desires for an expression of the attitude of the U.S. towards the revolutionary government. (In the meeting with Bani-Sadr, Ambassador Lang might make specific reference to paragraph 6 in relation to Bani-Sadr’s call for a U.S. expression of views towards Iran during his American TV interview on February 3.)3 Begin text: (insert from attachment) End text. 3. The second message presents information on Soviet military deployments relating to Iran. Begin text: In the current circumstances of tension in the Middle East and combat in Afghanistan, the American Government has tried to keep thoroughly abreast of the disposition of Soviet forces in the region. Besides following Soviet moves related to Afghanistan, there has been high interest in the status of Soviet ground and air forces adjacent to Turkey and Iran. Until January, Soviet units in the Transcaucasus were essentially quiet with no change in their normal state of very low readiness for action. During January this changed. Steps have been started to raise manpower and readiness levels for all of the approximately one dozen Soviet divisions stretched out between Tbilisi and Baku. A number of these units have begun training 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
