Negotiating Channels
457
174.
Draft Message From the Department of State to the Swiss
Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1
Washington, February 3, 1980
1. We would be grateful if Ambassador Lang could deliver the
two separate messages contained in this telegram to Foreign Minister
Ghotbzadeh and to President-elect Bani-Sadr or his associate, Salama-
tian. We very much hope this will give Ambassador Lang occasion for
direct meeting with Bani-Sadr himself.
2. The first message is a statement of the U.S. position which was
communicated to Secretary-General Waldheim by Secretary Vance for
Ambassador Farhang early in January.2 We are uncertain whether the
statement reached Tehran. The last point in the statement would appear
to be responsive to Iranian desires for an expression of the attitude of
the U.S. towards the revolutionary government. (In the meeting with
Bani-Sadr, Ambassador Lang might make specific reference to para-
graph 6 in relation to Bani-Sadr’s call for a U.S. expression of views
towards Iran during his American TV interview on February 3.)3 Begin
text: (insert from attachment) End text.
3. The second message presents information on Soviet military
deployments relating to Iran. Begin text: In the current circumstances
of tension in the Middle East and combat in Afghanistan, the American
Government has tried to keep thoroughly abreast of the disposition of
Soviet forces in the region. Besides following Soviet moves related to
Afghanistan, there has been high interest in the status of Soviet ground
and air forces adjacent to Turkey and Iran.
Until January, Soviet units in the Transcaucasus were essentially
quiet with no change in their normal state of very low readiness for
action. During January this changed.
Steps have been started to raise manpower and readiness levels
for all of the approximately one dozen Soviet divisions stretched out
between Tbilisi and Baku. A number of these units have begun training
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Box 8, Swiss Channel.
Secret. Attached to a February 7 Summary of Report from Ambassador Lang on his
meetings with Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, drafted by Precht. (Carter Library, Records
of the White House Office of Counsel to the President, Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 2) The
text is the cable as approved for the Swiss Embassy in Washington to transmit to the
Swiss Embassy in Tehran. All subsequent messages to Lang went by this channel.
2 Attached; printed as Document 137.
3 Bani-Sadr appeared on CBS’s “Issues and Answers” on February 3. No transcript
of this interview has been found, but it was summarized in Graham Hovey, “Bani-Sadr
Firm on Iran Demands,” New York Times, February 4, 1980, p. A6.
