494
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
the wish of the Imam and the people of Iran regarding a study and
investigation into the past interferences of the U.S. into the internal
affairs of Iran through the regime of the deposed shah and with a
view to establishing a tribunal to determine their treason, crimes and
corruption has been accepted” the Commission was accepted. (Saun-
ders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, page 129)
As Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs Harold Saunders later recalled, Waldheim’s Chef de Cabinet
Rafi Ahmad had called him at 1:30 a.m. on February 20 to relay the
Iranian message and to alert the Carter administration to the deviation
from the agreed-upon text. Saunders then called Acting Secretary of
State Warren Christopher, who consulted by telephone with Secretary
of State Cyrus Vance in Bonn. Vance urged that the United States
require Iran to stick scrupulously to the script. Saunders and Christo-
pher relayed this information to President Jimmy Carter at a 5 a.m.
meeting in the Oval Office at the White House. (Sick, All Fall Down,
page 310; Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in
Iran, page 129; Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) Saunders
recalled that Carter decided that the United States would accept the
Iranian message and the Commission (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pres-
sure,” American Hostages in Iran, page 129) The original language, how-
ever, was reiterated in a White House statement, in which the United
States agreed to the fact-finding Commission of Inquiry to hear Iran’s
grievances, to allow an early solution of the crisis, and to speak with
each of the hostages. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, page 356)
The appointed members of the Commission of Inquiry were
Mohammed Bedjaoui, the Algerian Permanent Representative to the
United Nations and former Minister of Justice; Andres Aguilar, the
Venezuelan Ambassador to the United States, Permanent Representa-
tive to the United Nations, and former Justice Minister; Adib Daoudi,
former Syrian Ambassador to India and the Benelux and key political
adviser to Syrian President Hafez al-Assad; Louis-Edmond Petitti of
France, a member of the International Commission of Jurists and a
judge of the European Court of Human Rights; and Harry Jayewardene,
member of the United Nations Subcomission on the Prevention of
Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities and close adviser to his
brother, Sri Lankan President J.R. Jayewardene. Bedjaoui and Aguilar
served as co-chairmen. (The UN Commission of Inquiry on Iran, Febru-
ary 29; Carter Library, White House Office of Counsel to the President,
Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 2)
The Commission members gathered in Geneva where they
remained for 3 days as Iranian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sadegh
Ghotbzadeh sorted out technical arrangements. They arrived in Tehran
February 23. Meanwhile, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini proclaimed
