Yugoslavia
803
9. During the visit we should:
—Listen with respect to Tito’s thoughts on the world scene (we
might even learn something), give him a clear picture of what is on
our mind, and seek to influence him on specific problems where he
and Yugoslavia have significant influence, e.g., disarmament, the
Middle East, Korea. Tito rightly considers himself a world figure and
statesman and we ought to let him know we share his high opinion
of himself. President Carter’s letters have had an enormously positive
impact and he should indicate that the practice will continue.
—Recognize Yugoslavia’s role as a leader of the nonaligned and
use the opportunity of this visit to demonstrate US understanding of
the strength and importance of that movement. At the same time, we
should underline that: (a) recent shifts in U.S. policy on a number of
issues of central importance to the nonaligned warrant, even more than
before, a more positive and balanced attitude on their part toward the
United States; b) as consultation between us grows, so can there be a
growing degree of cooperation in resolving Third-World issues and in
fostering economic development.
—Give him and his advisors a sense that we are trying our best
to resolve the few bilateral issues (Krsko and ExIm guarantees) that
stand between us, while at the same time reminding them that compro-
mise is a two-way street.
10. All of the above is important in setting the stage for post-visit
progress on the development of ties that link Yugoslavia more closely
with the United States. Foremost among these is substantial room for
a mutually profitable expansion of trade and investment. The Yugo-
slavs are anxious to reduce their heavy reliance on the Soviet Union
and to compensate where they can for their serious trade imbalance
with the Common Market. They see the US as their most promising
alternative, and we should do all we can to encourage and foster a
shift in our direction.
11. Of almost equal importance, but far less amenable to easy
solution, is the development of improved U.S. defense cooperation
with Yugoslavia—particularly arms sales. Over the past several years
our sales have been virtually nonexistent; our contacts with the Yugo-
slav military (a critical element in the post-Tito transition period) only
slightly better. President Carter’s decision to permit a “modest” expan-
sion of our sales program, and Secretary Brown’s subsequent visit to
Belgrade, marked a new phase in the relationship—one which has
already led to some new sales and a marginal improvement in our
relations with the military. But the program is still plagued by bureau-
cratic inertia and distrust on both sides—factors which a successful
visit should make it easier to resolve.
12. And finally, the visit can give a major impetus to the develop-
ment of contacts between political leaders of both countries. The Repub-
