January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1235
positions for both teams and perhaps this can permit them to find
common ground once the discussions resume.
3. It is worth noting that there were three potential breakdown sit-
uations, and after each of them the parties came together in good spirits
and apparently with a determination to try to find a basis for agree-
ment once a particular issue had been resolved. It seemed clear that al-
though neither was disposed to give ground easily, both were un-
willing to face a breakdown at Herzilya.
4. The Israeli negotiating team moved in a cumbersome and hog-
tied fashion. Each point went through several steps: First, a position by
Burg; second, an endless discussion and ultimate endorsement by the
full Delegation of Ministers (including that great apostle of moderation
General Sharon); and third, the telephone call to Jerusalem for the scru-
pulous scrutiny and ultimate grudging approval of Begin. (It is note-
worthy that a couple of times Begin initially refused to approve a par-
ticular point but was later prevailed upon by Shamir and Burg to go
along.)
5. For their part, the Egyptians were acting strangely. Khalil was
impatient, hard-nosed, and uncharacteristically rough. Burg sensed
this and seemed to be making a real effort to meet Khalil’s concerns. A
couple of times I thought that Khalil had made up his mind to search
for a reason to suspend the negotiations, but then when he finally ac-
ceded I concluded that he was adopting his position in order to try to
eke out some concession from the Israelis.
6. We played a central position in the negotiations, shuffling from
one party to the other and helping them overcome differences. We also
surfaced several position papers as agreed,7 including draft of Heads of
Agreement; Water paper; Land paper; and Security paper. I gave
copies of the Water and Land Papers directly to Begin and also dis-
cussed with him the draft of the Heads of Agreement point by point. At
Sadat’s suggestion I turned over to General Ali papers on Water and
Land. It is perhaps significant that both the Israelis and the Egyptians
focused on our Heads of Agreement paper and each presented written
comments, suggestions and amendments. We are going to try to use
these to put together a revised paper which may perhaps bring us
closer to agreement. For the moment, however, the differences are
wide. We have not yet had any significant reaction to the papers on
Water and Land, although the Israelis have indicated that they find our
water ideas very interesting.
7 See footnote 11, Document 363.
