348
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
ject the British claim should a tanker be willing to take the legal risk of
lifting Iranian oil.
6. The question of compensation due the AIOC is far from settled.
The gap between the joint US–UK proposals and Dr. Mosadeq’s unoffi-
cial counter-proposals is very wide. It is the conclusion of NEA political
observers that Dr. Mosadeq will not come forward from his position
enunciated on September 7 unless he is so instructed definitely by Par-
liament. It may even be that he does not wish to settle the oil dispute
with the British except on terms of absolute capitulation by the British
to his extreme terms. Therefore, if the British hope to gain any compen-
sation or desire to remain in the market for Iranian oil they will have
capitulated. It is quite true that they have a legal position to maintain,
but there would seem to be little satisfaction in maintaining a legal po-
sition at the expense of losing Iran or at least Iranian oil.
7. It is pertinent here to make an estimate as to the danger and im-
minence of a communist rise to power in Iran. The communist organi-
zation is growing stronger and its natural opponents are growing
weaker. The Shah, who above all else has been anti-communist has lost
most of his political influence. The Army is to some extent demoralized
and was thoroughly cowed in the July 21 riots, at least in Tehran. The
old line senior officers in the Army have recently been purged by Dr.
Mosadeq and it is not yet apparent what type of officers will appear in
senior positions, whether political appointees under Kashani–Qashqai
influence or officers of military quality and forceful character definitely
anti-communist or at least essentially nationalist in motivation. Social
unrest is increasing as are economic difficulties in Iran. Opportunities
for successful action by the communist organization are widening and
if the nationalist leadership splits into antagonistic factions or if the
communists can establish some form of popular front, with leftist na-
tionalists, Iran may have passed a point of no return in its relations with
the communist world. In the estimation of NEA officers, the commu-
nists will probably move slowly, consolidating newly acquired posi-
tions as they move forward. In all likelihood they would prefer to infil-
trate and pervert the nationalist movement rather than risk a head-on
collision. Time, therefore, plays into communist hands so long as the
economic situation continues to deteriorate without oil revenue and so
long as there is continued political instability in Iran. Therefore it is a
conclusion of NEA observers that so long as Mosadeq does not dispair
of selling his oil to the West in some way and so long as he can squeeze
money out of the National Bank, currency inflation and from recently
imposed taxes to pay his civil servants and armed forces, neither he nor
his nationalist colleagues will deliberately bring the communists into
an alliance. Based upon these psychological, political and financial as-
sumptions, it can be estimated that a nationalist government will nei-
