54
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Minister Begin expressed appreciation for US efforts to reason with the
parties involved, but he proposes that President Carter also send a
letter to Assad immediately proposing a cease-fire and stand-fast in the
weeks ahead. He asked that we get an urgent response to his proposal
so that the participants at Camp David would not all be distracted by
worries over Lebanon. End summary
2. I met for an hour Wednesday morning with PM Begin, FonMin
Dayan and DefMin Weizman. Col. Tehila5 and Elie Rubenstein were
also present. As anticipated, the subject on their minds was Lebanon.
The atmosphere was serious but the participants did not seem particu-
larly tense.
3. PM Begin led off the discussion. His remarks were brief and to
the point. The Lebanese situation is nearing a grave crisis, he said. The
Syrian Army has turned its tanks and guns against the civilian popula-
tion. Israel wants a successful Camp David, he said, but it needs US
help over the next few weeks to contain the situation in Lebanon. The
Syrians are now trying to crush the Maronites and to take over control
of the country. They are attempting to take advantage of the period be-
fore Camp David to do this because they believe Israel will be reluctant
to act strongly in Lebanon at this time.
4. The GOI cannot permit this course of development to continue,
the PM said. It has a moral commitment to prevent the massacre of a
national religious minority. No one else is helping the Christians and it
is an intolerable thought that they be wiped out.
5. The Prime Minister said that, in view of the above, he wanted to
make a request of the US Government. He proposed that there be an-
other American representation in Damascus as soon as possible de-
manding an immediate cease-fire in Beirut and elsewhere. If this can be
arranged, the participants can go to Camp David “with a clear head”
and not have to worry every day about what is going on in Lebanon.
6. Defense Minister Weizman said that he would like to emphasize
the security part of the Lebanese equation. Until ten years ago, when
the PLO arrived, Lebanon was quiet. Today there is not only an attempt
to destroy the Maronites and impose the Syrian will on Lebanon, but
Syrian occupation of Lebanon threatens the northern frontier of Israel.
If Iraq’s appreciable force, which can be moved to the area on short no-
tice is added, Israel can find itself encircled on the northern front. Israel
cannot tolerate the occupation of Lebanon by Syria.
7. Until recently, Weizman continued, IDF aircraft had flown over
Lebanon on reconnaissance missions uncontested by the Syrians. In the
last two weeks, however, there have been two attempts by Syrian MiGs
5 Ilan Tehilla, military aide to Weizman.
