With respect to the Austrian postal, telegraph and telephone administration, the Department finds in its files a statement that the estimated deficit in 1927 was 80,000,000 schillings. It is desired to know whether this figure is exact, and also what estimate has been made as to the effect of the loan in removing the deficit and creating net revenues sufficient to carry the interest and amortization of the part of the loan proceeds that would be applied to investment in those services. With respect to the Austrian Federal Railways, the only available report is that for the year 1925, which was published in June, 1927. It is understood that the budget of the Austrian Government for 1928 provides for an appropriation of 26,400,000 schillings to cover the excess of current expenditure over current revenues of the Federal Railways. Of 414,000,000 schillings total capital investment in the Federal Railways which it is stated will be required from 1928 to 1932, it is indicated that 190,000,000 schillings are required for electrification. Reports such as that in the Vienna correspondence in the London Economist of December 24, 1927, refer to doubts as to the economic wisdom of electrification of the Federal Railways in view of the present coal situation. The Department of State would be glad to receive such data as are available bearing upon the desirability of electrification, taking particular account of the current experience as to electrification in Austria. Such pertinent data as are available are also desired as to the “urgently necessary station equipment and other capital outlay” to which the remaining 224,000,000 schillings investment in the Federal Railways would be devoted, and as to the productivity of such investment. With respect to the contemplated investment under the heads “other railways and tobacco”, it is stated that “the demands are of the same kind as the actual requirements of the last few years”. The Department of State would be glad to receive further data regarding these requirements and also regarding the productivity of the investment. Since no information is available regarding “other capital outlay” of the “central administration” and “monopolies and other concerns”, the Department of State would be glad to have further data regarding this proposed investment and its productivity.
