Chapter 4, February–April 1990 537 state visit and perhaps try to make some accommodation with regard to the NATO Council meeting. Shevardnadze: Good. I recognize you will need some time to consider this. Baker: I will let you know as soon as I can. Shevardnadze: Regarding our ministerial visits. We are set for Washington, D.C. We will arrive on April 3rd. You and I will have a meeting the evening of April 4th and then we will have our full set of discussions on April 5th and 6th. That is really convenient timing for me and I am pleased we will have a chance to have a full discussion. The Washington D.C. meeting, I believe, will be of great importance and I will, of course, appreciate the chance to meet with President Bush as well. Baker: I think that meeting is set for Friday3 at 10:00 but I will have to confirm that with you. Shevardnadze: I would like to make a tentative suggestion about your visiting the Soviet Union. We need to have one last meeting before the Summit to complete our work. As I have said to you before, we are considering the possibility of holding the meeting outside of Moscow. You would meet President Gorbachev in Moscow and then we would have the ministerial outside of Moscow. For now, I would like to keep the venue a secret but in terms of timing, I would like to suggest that it be in mid-May. Baker: If we have an early June Summit, that sounds fine with me. As I look at my calendar, I can see that we have a state visit every week but I am prepared to just leave and go and have our meeting. Shevardnadze: Well, I hope you will consider a mid-May time. Baker: I will come up with some specific dates to suggest you in the middle of May. Shevardnadze: The first ten days of May are not good for us. We have holidays and we are really not in a position until May 9th. So any time after that would be okay. Baker: Well, how would May 16, 17, 18 and 19 be for you? I think that would be okay for us and that would be three weeks before the Summit. Maybe before we leave Namibia I can give you a definite response. Shevardnadze: That would be good. That would give us some time to plan. In any case our main task is to prepare the Summit well. And that is not an easy task. I cannot say yet that we have a good degree of readiness for the Summit. Maybe today we can agree that we should 3 April 6.
