744
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
time after the convening of Parliament, there will not be clear lines
between parties, personal alliances, or political strategies. At that
moment, a determined and effective leadership might be able to push
through a well-planned solution to the crisis. It is thus important that
we seek to engage Iranian authorities in a productive dialogue on how
the release of the hostages might be presented so as to win positive
support in the new parliament.
4. This time we will want to broaden our approach to work with
three separate but related leadership elements: Bani Sadr, who will be
responsible for putting before the Majlis a program to end the crisis
with the U.S. as part of his overall program; with Ghotbzadeh, who is
our most helpful collaborator; and, more than we have before, with
the clerics, who must be prepared to follow Bani Sadr’s lead or at least
not to resist it and make a solution impossible. The failure of our last
effort to achieve a negotiated settlement resulted from rivalries between
the lay leadership and the clerics. We need to find a way, through a
combination of carrots and sticks, to persuade the clerics to accept the
outlines of a settlement that the government could push through the
Majlis when it meets.
5. In designing our approach, there may be advantage, in some of
our communications, in broadening it to reach beyond the hostage
issue. With Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, as well as in seeking help from
our allies, we could focus on the consequences of widening the crisis
for the future of Iran and for the future of Europe. We could concentrate
on the kind of U.S.-Iranian relationship we might aim for. However,
with the clerics, who believe that a reasonable U.S.-Iranian relationship
is impossible or undesirable, it will be necessary to paint more specifi-
cally the consequences for their own leadership if the crisis continues.
6. The U.S. position on the elements of a settlement—which might
be useful in dealing with the allies and with Bani Sadr—remains that
described in the six points passed to Waldheim in January (Tab 1),2
with one possible addition. It may be desirable to elaborate on these
points to make clear that we would forego retaliation against Iran if
the hostages are released safely under honorable circumstances.
Near-Term Objectives
If these propositions are accepted, three specific objectives should
be discussed:
—To encourage progressive improvements in the conditions of the
hostages—beginning with regular visits and messages for families—
with the purpose of working toward a more active official Iranian
2 Tab 1 is the undated paper prepared by the National Security Council Staff printed
as Document 137.
