December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 651 but do not say that is unconditional, then the treaty would depend on carrying out the autonomy, so the treaty could be annulled. President Carter: If we report the results of these talks to Sadat and there can be no further progress on the treaty, would you be willing to negotiate on the autonomy before concluding the treaty with Egypt? Prime Minister Begin: I cannot give an improvised reply. I would suggest that we not accept. We are not committed to do this by Camp David. We should not start with the autonomy. President Carter: Camp David says nothing about the sequence, as far as I can see. Prime Minister Begin: It is not a coincidence that we decided to start with the treaty. President Carter: We are looking at the possibility, at the probability, that a Sinai agreement cannot be achieved. If that happens, rather than ending the process and going back to animosity, would you consider shifting to negotiations on the West Bank? Sadat is concerned that Israel does not intend to go forward with autonomy for the West Bank. He sees more of a possibility of progress in Gaza. If the Palestinians don’t cooperate, West Bank autonomy will be difficult. Because of his influence in Gaza, and with Israel’s help, there would be a better chance. Rather than have everything end, would you consider this? Prime Minister Begin: My colleagues in the Cabinet have already raised this. I said no. There are serious reasons. The majority of the Cabinet rejected this approach. We have to negotiate with Egypt, but we cannot then tell what the results will be of the talks on autonomy. Meanwhile, the great revolutionary change in the area would be the treaty between Egypt and Israel. President Carter: I am just looking for a way to get the Camp David Agreements moving simultaneously. This would not cancel out what we have achieved on the treaty. We would try to have both negotiations simultaneously. Prime Minister Begin: The way it is now written, it would be almost simultaneous. We would start the negotiations for the autonomy one month after the treaty is signed. President Carter: But you must see that the possibility of the whole peace process could break down. I want to avoid that. Prime Minister Begin: I will take this idea to the Cabinet. Two of my colleagues have suggested it. I opposed it. It is not a healthy development. It is not the sequel envisaged at Camp David, but I will take it to the Cabinet. President Carter: It says nothing in Camp David about negotiations starting one month after the treaty. A goal was set to conclude the treaty negotiations in three months and you said it could be in two.
