848 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 258. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, September 26, 1978, 9:45–11:05 a.m. SUBJECT Secretary Brown’s Plenary Meeting with Yugoslav Defense Secretary Ljubicic PARTICIPANTS Yugoslavia Federal Secretary for National Defense, General of the Army Ljubicic Ambassador to the US Belovski ColGen Kadenic, Chief of Center of High Military Schools LtColGen Kadejevic, Chief of the Department for Education and Training MajGen Popovic, Chief of the Department for Procurement of Armament and Military Equipment Col Popovic, Interpreter Col Vuckovic, Military, Air and Naval Attache US The Secretary Under Secretary for Policy Resor Assistant Secretary (ISA) McGiffert Deputy Assistant Secretary (Eur & NATO) Siena LTG Graves, Director, DSAA MG Bowman, Director, European & NATO Affairs RADM Hanson, Military Assistant to the Secretary Mr. Babione, OUSDR&E Mr. Bader, Deputy Director, European & NATO Affairs Col Roche, Defense Attache, Belgrade Mr. Guild, DSAA Assistant for Yugoslavia Cdr McVadon, ISA Assistant for Yugoslavia After warmly renewing acquaintances, Secretary Brown asked General Ljubicic to assess the last year of the relationship and suggested that this was also a time for progress. General Ljubicic said he welcomed this visit, his first to the US; and characterized Brown’s 1977 visit to Belgrade as contributing not only to military cooperation but also to all fields of US-Yugoslav relations.2 (During his toast at dinner that evening he invited Brown back to Belgrade.) He said the visit by General Jones in May was very helpful and visits like it permit US officers to see the “Yugoslav reality” and to meet senior Yugoslav officers. Ljubicic recalled that he and Brown said in Belgrade that the military relation- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: Military: 11/77–12/78. Secret. Drafted by McVadon on October 2; approved by Siena on October 10. The meeting took place at the Pentagon. 2 See Document 246.
