932  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
that if we build heavy forces for Europe, they will meet any third world 
contingency. But this has not been a sound assumption. We should 
instead build lighter and more flexible forces. They would have a major 
impact. We are putting so much emphasis on Southwest Asia, that I 
believe that you will want your successor’s successor to have the capa-
bility to deal with Mozambique, Nicaragua, and any other such contin-
gency, not just reinforcement of Europe. We need to get off the kick that 
Europe is first priority. (S)
Brown asked Turner what he meant by mobility. Do you mean 
mobility to get there? Or after they get there? Turner replied that he 
meant both. Easy lift to the third world but also good mobility after 
forces arrive. Because we have built the wrong kind of aircraft car-
riers, that is, large nuclear powered ships, we cannot afford to risk 
one of them in the Persian Gulf. To lose one there will be a catastro-
phe. If we had built small carriers, we could put them there. We need 
smaller and more mobile forces. Brown replied that our forces must 
be prepared to fight against Soviet forces and, therefore, not simply in 
Mozambique. (S)
The President returned to what we would want to do differently. 
He said he thought we were doing most of what Turner suggests. 
Brown said yes, this is true. We decided last year to put more prior-
ity on non-European contingencies. McIntyre recalled the debate last 
year about our “heavying up” our divisions. The President said that 
if we have modified our strategy, we need to write that down. If we 
have not, we need to write down in a Presidential Directive what we 
are doing. (S)
Brown said that the JCS proposal to move Europe to second prior-
ity and to put the emphasis on the Persian Gulf is new. Dr. Brzezinski 
added that vertical and horizontal escalation are also new. (S)
The President turned to Muskie for his comments. Muskie had two 
points. First, the paper shows what we have been attempting to do by 
putting priority on the threat in the Southwest Asia region. Second, it 
shows that events could affect us very adversely in that region. Now 
with the crisis in Poland, we are shifting our attention back to Europe. 
Against this background we must avoid laying down a policy we have 
not supported and not followed in the past. It is important to spell out 
what we are doing. We may also indicate future directions and identify 
underlying risks that we face. But we should not confuse what we have 
done with the new directions and the attendant risks, especially if we 
have not addressed those risks with our actions in the past. A second 
part of a policy could spell out the responsibilities of the allies, what 
their share of the burden is. We did that to a considerable extent this 
past year. The allies are very reluctant to make a defense effort outside
