176 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement American Government had this desire. Agreement on announcement would show both sides sincerely working for this goal. To talk much about sincerity in reaching settlement but refuse to come to agree­ ment does not give appearance real sincerity. He said only because of real sincerity, PRC has reviewed cases of airmen who according Chinese legal procedure could not have left for very long time. Chi­ nese in making review took into account improvement of relations and act was one of leniency and not part their juridical procedures. Airmen released out of consideration for success of talks. Therefore improvement relations between two countries will make it easier for remaining cases to be settled. This is a lenient policy their part and they link this action with agreement in order to show their sincerity. If no such sincerity present he saw no reason for his side to continue taking unilateral lenient steps. 24. I said he had spoken frankly and I would do the same. He had indicated there was relationship between release of Col. Arnold’s group and holding of these talks. He had also clearly indicated relation between return of those Americans whose cases had been reviewed and our reaching an agreement here. I did not now know what relation­ ship there might be between release remaining Americans and what­ ever future agreements his side might wish to have made. I wanted to say bluntly I did not come with intent to and would not trade fate of Americans in his country prevented from returning for political agreements or concessions he might desire. I was willing discuss each problem on its own merits. I did not ask for nor expect concessions of that nature from his side in return for actions we took regarding Chi­ nese in US. I had also indicated willingness enter into arrangement on assistance to Chinese in US who wish to return. I was not and could not enter arrangement unless we had clear understanding between us as to what action would be taken concerning Americans. I could not consider statements he made regarding action proposed by his side as being satisfactory. I had come long way meet his position and hoped and expected he would be able come a little way to meet mine. 25. Wang returned argument Chinese in US had not committed crimes and although announcement made restrictions lifted they still encountered difficulties in fact whereas no restrictions on Americans in China. He concluded that if I asked whether measures had been taken to speed review of cases Americans to permit their return, answer was “yes”. If I asked for understanding on time it would require, answer was “no”. 26. He indicated willingness close meeting at this point and I agreed. Usual end of meeting fencing omitted. Gowen Note: Advance copy to Mr. McConaughy (CA) 5:45 p.m. 8-25-55 CWO/FED
