738 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 38. Wang said as matter history, Taiwan and offshore islands belonged China and been part Chinese territory long before US emerged as a state. Chinese island of Taiwan has been subjected number times in history to occupation by foreign imperialists. However, all those impe­ rialist occupations Chinese island of Taiwan have always ended even­ tually in downfall imperialist rule and Taiwan always returned to arms of China. It highly insulting to Chinese people to claim that Taiwan and offshore islands not belong China. 39. Wang said it served no purpose in this conference room to reit­ erate such claims. On their part, they never had asserted New York not part US territory. Nor asserted US of today still British colony. They not think any such assertions would serve any useful purpose. 40. Wang said I had also set forth position US as having so-­called treaty relations with Chiang Kai-­shek regime. As he repeatedly had pointed out, regime Chiang Kai-­shek long been overthrown by Chinese people, long been discarded by Chinese people, and it had no right sign any treaty with any foreign country. All such excuses with regard treaty obligations toward regime Chiang Kai-­shek were no more than vain attempts argue away untenable position of occupation by US of Taiwan, which Chinese territory. This situation which now facing reminds them of what Japanese imperialists had done in asserting they had treaty relations with puppet regime in Manchukuo and with pup­ pet regime Wang Ching-­wei. 41. Wang said such treaty relationships have never been recognized by Chinese people and to insist in such recognition is greatest farce in eyes people world. Neither puppet Pu Yi or traitor Wang Ching-­wei in past, nor Chiang Kai-­shek regime of today, can ever be considered as a state. US attempt to justify occupation of Taiwan by excuses of having treaty relations with Chiang Kai-­shek regime is something like drown­ ing man grasping at straws. 42. Wang said I had stated that making of declaration would lead to abandonment of US position. As he had indicated above, such posi­ tion of US cannot be considered as proper position at all. Wang asked if we could find any clause in UN Charter as justifying one country’s seizing territory of another country? 43. Wang said their position as he had said had always been that we, in atmosphere of calm and peaceful discussion, and without hos­ tilities, and with conciliatory attitude, should both sides together try reach solution. If we should demonstrate ill feeling these talks, did not see how we could succeed. 44. Wang said I might recall that proposal for making such decla­ ration made by US, not by their side. And they accepted this proposal of US and agreed with necessity for making such declaration. They also recognized that making of such declaration would be useful. It would
