Options Identified
305
117.
Memorandum for the Files1
Washington, December 25, 1979, 4:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of Conversations with Clerical Delegation and Bruce Laingen
In two conversations this afternoon with the clerics and one talk
with Bruce Laingen after his two hour conversation with them the
following paragraphs summarize their activities to date.2
The clerics spent five hours in the compound and in three separate
services believe they saw 43 individuals (Howard saw 21 persons,
Coffin 16, Gumbleton/Duval 6). The persons whom they saw and
whom Bruce Laingen could identify are listed in the first column of
the attached.3 The clerics also received from the captors 33 personal
messages. Where these messages identify other Americans, they are
listed in the second column. In our last conversation with the clergy,
they had not yet completed their analysis of the names and lists and
so the information on the attached is necessarily incomplete.
The clergy asked that we not pass any messages to dependents
about their contacts with the hostages. Instead, they would like this
information to come from the New York office of the clerical group.
The clergy also asked that we not refer to our contacts with them in
press briefings.
The clerics will attempt in subsequent contacts with the students
to clear up the discrepancy between 50 and 43 hostages.4 They will
1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-
tary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update Dec 1979. Secret. Drafted by
Constable. Attached to the December 27 Iran Update memorandum from Newsom and
Saunders to Vance sent on December 26.
2 The clerical delegation was composed of Rev. William Sloane Coffin, Rev. William
M. Howard, Jr., Bishop Thomas C. Kelly, and Bishop Thomas Gumbleton. (David Pearce,
“State Dept. ‘Welcomes’ Move To Allow Visit by Clergy,” Washington Post, December
22, 1979, p. A18) The clergy, who left for Iran on December 23, were invited by the
Iranian Government to meet with the hostages for Christmas services. (“Three Clergymen
Invited To Visit Hostages,” Chicago Tribune, December 23, 1979, p. 2) In Iran they were
joined by Cardinal Etienne Duval, the Archbishop of Algiers. (Doyle McManus, “4
Clergymen Meet, Pray with Hostages,” Los Angeles Times, December 25, 1979, p. OC1)
For the statement issued by the clergy on their departure from Tehran, see New York
Times, December 26, 1979, p. A16.
3 Attached but not printed.
4 The seven hostages not seen by the clergy were “tentatively” identified as Belk,
Metrinko, Queen, Blucker, Ahern, Daugherty, and Kalp. (Memorandum for the Record,
prepared by the interagency working group, December 26; Department of State, Official
Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85,
Iran Update Dec 1979)
