274
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
A third basic issue underlying North-South economic relations is the
need to expand LDC participation in the management of the world economy.
One of the major drives behind the new international economic
order is Third World desire for greater political participation in the
global economy. The developing nations want not only a larger slice of
the global pie, they want to be at the table when the pie is sliced and
have a voice in its apportionment.
We are convinced that it is essential to widen the circle of interna-
tional decisionmaking. We believe that the economic system must be
fair, and equally important, it must be seen as fair. But going from prin-
ciple to practice presents us with difficult issues.
• First, there is the question of how broadbased global economic
management can be. While we live in a world of sovereign nations, it is
also a world of states which are unequal in their ability to influence the
system, for good or bad. Thus it is exceedingly difficult for the interna-
tional community, including developing countries themselves, to select
which developing countries should play the largest role.
• There is also the practical question of which management ar-
rangements and institutions should be expanded. Should the most ad-
vanced developing countries be invited to join the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development? Would they want to?
Should their voice and vote be enlarged in international financial insti-
tutions, and if so, are they willing to undertake commensurate obliga-
tions? Should we make a special effort to incorporate LDC’s into insti-
tutions which have yet to be created—such as for energy or the oceans?
These are some of the issues we are addressing now.
To summarize, I think it is fair to say that despite the increasing
complexities of North-South relations and the conceptual as well as
practical problems we face, the Administration has made considerable
progress in formulating a set of positive development policies.
• We are intent on making substantial increases in our foreign
assistance, while emphasizing the focus on meeting basic human
needs.
• On commodities, we reversed the policy of previous years and
have accepted the principle of a common fund to facilitate buffer
stocks.
• We have agreed to an expansion of World Bank activities, also a
reversal of previous policy.
• The Administration has agreed to the expansion of International
Monetary Fund lending and is now seeking congressional agreement.
• In the trade negotiations, we are willing to reduce trade barriers
on products of special interest to LDC’s.
