National Security Policy  465
Within industry, furthermore, increased demands for investment in 
raw materials may require machine-­building, upon which the modern­
ization program depends, to get along with less. Apart from invest­
ment problems, inherent difficulties in getting new machinery first 
into large-­scale production and then into use continue to plague Soviet 
industry. The productivity gains from modernization, therefore, while 
contributing substantially to industrial growth, are likely to fall short of 
the USSR’s high expectations.
60. The Khrushchev regime has laid great stress on another means 
of raising productivity, by improvement of general economic adminis­
tration and plant management. The major innovation in this field is the 
replacement of most industrial ministries with 105 regional economic 
councils. Basically, the new structure attempts to distinguish between 
those decisions which define national policy and those which concern its 
detailed execution and, while maintaining Moscow’s monopoly in the 
first sphere, to leave the second to officials on the spot. We do not believe, 
however, that the reorganization itself will make much contribution to 
industrial growth. The inevitable period of initial confusion will perhaps 
last longer than anticipated. Even over the long run, while many sources 
of inefficiency will be eliminated, the regional system promises to breed 
its own bureaucratic excesses and perhaps, because of its greater sus­
ceptibility to local interests and consumer pressures, to deform central 
policy itself. A net gain will probably result, but this is likely to be rather 
small unless the reorganization is followed by other reforms which are 
at present only in the discussion stage, such as expansion of managerial 
rights, a more realistic pricing system, and improved criteria for eco­
nomic performance.
61. During the coming five years, large-­scale transfers of labor from 
agriculture in order to compensate for productivity shortfalls in indus­
try will be much more difficult to carry out than in the past. Agricultural 
employment, which declined steadily during Stalin’s later years, has 
risen with the higher priority which his successors have attached to 
this sector. While one of the ultimate aims of the agricultural program 
is to resume the flow of labor into industry, the immediate goal is to 
increase output. During the next five years, prospective agricultural 
programs seem as likely to increase labor requirements as to reduce 
them. Khrushchev will be loath to reduce the agricultural labor force 
until production successes are achieved.
62. Therefore, it appears that the lag in production of basic mate­
rials and the relative stringencies in labor and especially in investment 
funds available to industry will result in a somewhat slower growth 
of industrial production than in the past. Against a very large increase 
estimated at 65–75 percent during the Fifth Five-Year Plan, we believe 
that the gain from 1957 to 1962 will probably be about 50–60 percent.
