Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
133
58.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, April 7, 1980, 1917Z
91540. Subject: Meeting of Assistant Secretary Vest With Soviet
Minister Counselor Vasev, April 4: ASAT, SALT.
1. C—Entire text.
2. Summary: Soviet Minister Counselor Vasev called briefly on As-
sistant Secretary Vest April 4 to provide notification of the simulta-
neous launch of two Soviet ICBM’s on April 5. Vest took the occasion to
urge the Soviets not to conduct a test of an anti-satellite interceptor.
End summary.
3. Soviet Minister Counselor Vasev asked to see Assistant Secre-
tary Vest on April 4. He read and handed over following message:
“Guided by good will and in order to avoid any misunderstanding
we deemed it necessary to inform the US side that a planned simulta-
neous launch of two strategic ballistic missiles within the national terri-
tory of the USSR will be conducted on April the 5th in the Soviet Union.
The impact area of reentry vehicles is Kamtchatka Peninsula.”
Vest expressed appreciation for the notification and noted that the
US has provided notifications of ICBM test launches to the USSR.
4. Vest used Vasev’s call to draw in general terms on talking points
in para 5 regarding apparently imminent test of Soviet anti-satellite in-
terceptor. Vasev replied that in the course of exploratory ASAT negoti-
ations “all indications from the US side” were that the United States is
not seriously interested in them. Vasev noted a “spate of reports” since
the start of the negotiations, including official records of the Congress,
showing that the function of the planned US space shuttle is “60 per-
cent military”. Vest reiterated our continuing interest in the negotia-
tions and said that we are seriously studying the remaining unresolved
issues. Vasev said he would report Vest’s comments to Moscow.
5. ASAT talking points:
—Both sides stated at the Vienna summit that we would “continue
actively searching for a mutually acceptable agreement” in the ASAT
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800174–0742.
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to USNATO. Drafted by McClean;
cleared by Mark Palmer (PM/DCA), William Shinn (EUR/SOV), and Suzanne Butcher
(S/S–O); and approved by Vest.
