January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1237
Egypt and his role as well as that of the Cabinet. When I met with him
he was exhilarated and confident that his ideas would be of immense
help to Egypt economically as well as politically. He regards his May 14
speech as a landmark.
10. At this juncture the prospects for significant achievement by
May 26 are obviously not good. Assuming that the heads of delegation
and Ministers reconvene around May 21 or 22 (as we had earlier
agreed) then we will have about four or five days to come up with an
acceptable agreement or at least significant and encouraging progress.
Unless there is a complete breakdown, however, Sadat does not indi-
cate any desire to terminate the negotiations, believing that ultimate
agreement will have to await new elections both in Israel and the
United States.
11. On this next trip, in about ten days, I would seek to accomplish
the following:
A. Try to get agreement on Heads of Agreement or Points of
Agreement which might be publicized as indicating acceptable
progress. For reasons indicated, this is clearly problematical at this
juncture.
B. Try to get agreement on paper on Water and, if possible, on
Land.
C. Try to get agreement on one or more of the major legal is-
sues now before us—Source of Authority, Residual Powers, and
Jurisdiction.
D. Try to see what progress can be made with the Gaza First idea if
it is clear that we cannot make any sufficient headway on the broader
points.
12. If by May 26 there has been no progress worth talking about,
then Sadat will, I believe, come down quite hard on Begin and will
probably call for a suspension of the talks though he would refrain
from terminating them. His attitude with reference to the European Ini-
tiative12 is still uncertain, but I tried to make clear that his and our in-
volvement in such moves at the United Nations would prejudice fur-
ther negotiations under Camp David. Quite clearly Sadat presently
intends that the Autonomy Negotiations go forward during the
months ahead but he does not anticipate any real agreement before the
end of the year.
Sincerely,
Sol M. Linowitz
12 See Document 382.
