711.0012Anti-War/137: Telegram
[Document 110]
The Minister in Portugal (Dearing) to the Secretary of State
LISBON, August 3, 1928—8 p.m. 
[Received August 4—10:45 a.m.]
31. The Minister for Foreign Affairs called at the Legation this afternoon
and expressed the keenest interest in having Portugal invited to sign the
peace pact in Paris the last of this month. He showed me a notice to the
effect that Primo de Rivera is expected to go and sign on behalf of Spain
and said it would cause a very painful impression in Portugal if Spain were
invited to sign while Portugal, an ally, a signatory of all the Paris treaties,
the third colonial power of the world, and a country with which we have
never had a war but have always been friendly and at peace should merely
be left to adhere. He pointed out the extent and important location of the
colonies, the constantly growing market our country is finding in
Portuguese dominions and the potential advantage to us of the various
colonial possessions, the fact that Portugal is a better market than
Czechoslovakia, which is to sign, and so forth. He indicated that the
Portuguese Minister at Washington had been instructed to approach the
Department of State but said he wished me to know what great importance
Portugal attached to the treaty on account of its character and significance
and to being associated in the signing of it instead of merely being lending
adherence. He declared it would vastly benefit our relations with Portugal,
that he felt sure the French would welcome their presence at the signing and
that it would give general satisfaction. He said he could think of no quarter
in which an invitation to Portugal could cause any hard feeling, referred
again to Spain and said he could not see why Spain should be invited to
sign in view of her war record while Portugal was left merely to adhere. He
also mentioned Rumania’s efforts to be included in the signing and said he
thought Portugal had the better right.
I told the Minister I was in sympathy with his desire to share in signing the
pact to outlaw war and that I would at once report what he had said and
