September 18–December 16, 1978 403 endorsement of the draft has been widely attributed, in part selfservingly, to this decision. In reaction to the Cabinet pronouncement, initial public and press reaction in Israel for the principle of expanding the settlements has been almost universally favorable. At the same time, the Labor opposition and some of the press have criticized the public announcement of the decision as needlessly provocative of the U.S. and the Egyptians, as well as its reported applicability to the Samarian Highlands rather than to the “defense line” in the Jordan Valley. Gush Emunim, on the other hand, has condemned it as being pitifully inadequate. 5. Strategy: We assume that Begin took this decision fully aware of the storm it would trigger in the U.S. We are also certain that it will now be virtually impossible, for domestic Israeli political reasons, to get him to rescind the decision or to forego its implementation completely. If he reversed himself, he could precipitate several resignations from his Cabinet, face a severe undermining of this parliamentary majority, and shatter Herut. The personal effect of this on Begin would be enormous. We therefore believe that our maximum objective in the short run is to prevail upon him to limit implementation of the decision to the smallest number of people in the fewest places over the longest period. Further, we should try to extend this restraint into a de facto prolongation of the moratorium on new settlements beyond expiration of the ninety-day freeze that Begin accepted. 6. No Israeli Government will under present circumstances renounce its right to establish new settlements or to add families to existing ones. Indeed, we believe that a GOI decision even to defer new settlements beyond three months will require that Begin be convinced that such cessation is essential to avoid grave damage to the U.S.-Israeli relationship. And even this may not be enough to deter him from implementing life-long beliefs concerning Jewish rights to Eretz Yisrael, especially since these views are shared by some of his closest associates in the Cabinet. 7. If there is to be any hope of moving Begin, our policy on this issue in the weeks ahead will have to generate virtually irresistible domestic political pressure on the GOI to avoid a prolonged crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations. Even then, the most we are likely to achieve would be a personal and private commitment by Begin to the President to slow down and minimize thickening of existing settlements and postpone new settlements during negotiations to set up the selfgoverning authority. Less desirable would be a de facto Begin decision which would be acknowledged neither to us nor to the Israeli public, but he would have great difficulty sustaining this for very long without admitting to his Cabinet and the public at large that such a de facto
