September 18–December 16, 1978
403
endorsement of the draft has been widely attributed, in part self-
servingly, to this decision. In reaction to the Cabinet pronouncement,
initial public and press reaction in Israel for the principle of expanding
the settlements has been almost universally favorable. At the same
time, the Labor opposition and some of the press have criticized the
public announcement of the decision as needlessly provocative of the
U.S. and the Egyptians, as well as its reported applicability to the Sama-
rian Highlands rather than to the “defense line” in the Jordan Valley.
Gush Emunim, on the other hand, has condemned it as being pitifully
inadequate.
5. Strategy:
We assume that Begin took this decision fully aware of the storm it
would trigger in the U.S. We are also certain that it will now be virtu-
ally impossible, for domestic Israeli political reasons, to get him to re-
scind the decision or to forego its implementation completely. If he re-
versed himself, he could precipitate several resignations from his
Cabinet, face a severe undermining of this parliamentary majority, and
shatter Herut. The personal effect of this on Begin would be enormous.
We therefore believe that our maximum objective in the short run is to
prevail upon him to limit implementation of the decision to the
smallest number of people in the fewest places over the longest period.
Further, we should try to extend this restraint into a de facto prolonga-
tion of the moratorium on new settlements beyond expiration of the
ninety-day freeze that Begin accepted.
6. No Israeli Government will under present circumstances re-
nounce its right to establish new settlements or to add families to ex-
isting ones. Indeed, we believe that a GOI decision even to defer new
settlements beyond three months will require that Begin be convinced
that such cessation is essential to avoid grave damage to the U.S.-Israeli
relationship. And even this may not be enough to deter him from im-
plementing life-long beliefs concerning Jewish rights to Eretz Yisrael,
especially since these views are shared by some of his closest associates
in the Cabinet.
7. If there is to be any hope of moving Begin, our policy on this
issue in the weeks ahead will have to generate virtually irresistible do-
mestic political pressure on the GOI to avoid a prolonged crisis in
U.S.-Israeli relations. Even then, the most we are likely to achieve
would be a personal and private commitment by Begin to the President
to slow down and minimize thickening of existing settlements and
postpone new settlements during negotiations to set up the self-
governing authority. Less desirable would be a de facto Begin decision
which would be acknowledged neither to us nor to the Israeli public,
but he would have great difficulty sustaining this for very long without
admitting to his Cabinet and the public at large that such a de facto
