382
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
dollars, and serious questions of Congressional attitudes regardless of
the legal position.
—Finally, there are political overtones and potential systemic im-
plications that we need to test carefully. (For example, some may point
to the fact the proposal is receiving serious consideration as evidence
that the U.S. has mismanaged its affairs—we may hear some of that in
the Fowler Committee.)
Even if we were to decide that Witteveen’s proposal were attractive to the
U.S., our best tactical negotiating position might be one of skepticism and re-
luctance. For the time being certainly, I think we should be skeptical, but
willing to look at the proposal and hear the views of others. We should
not be in the position of demandeur.
127.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 17, 1978, 2:27–2:47 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation between the President and
Prime Minister Callaghan
The following is a paraphrase of the conversation:
The President: Jim, how are you?
Callaghan: Fine.
The President: It’s a great pleasure to talk with you.
Callaghan: I called just to exchange thoughts after the Neutron
bomb decision.2 How was Camp David?3
The President: Very good. It was the first time we’d done it. We
reassessed the first fifteen months of the Administration, and the
problems in an administrative sense. We also discussed several themal
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President: 4/78. Secret; Sensitive. While the memorandum indicates
that Carter spoke to Callaghan from the Oval Office, the President’s Daily Diary states
that the call took place in the Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
2 On April 7, Carter announced his decision to defer production of the neutron
bomb; for the text of the statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I, p. 702.
3 Carter met with select Cabinet members and senior advisers at Camp David on
April 16 and 17. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
