Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX the moment, Dolanc’s career has evidently met a check, and this (at least temporarily) has favored Mikulic, but neither can be counted out (or, for that matter, in) over the long run. 13. Yugoslav-Soviet relations: Since late 1976 serious strains have developed in Yugoslav-Soviet relations. They arise out of three broad, interacting processes: A) Widening policy differences over Africa, the International Communist Movement, NAM, and other issues; B) Yugoslavia’s rapidly expanding relations with China; and C) Yugoslavia’s growing economic and political interest in expanded ties with the West and particularly the US. 14. Over the past year, despite the Brezhnev-Tito summit in May, policy differences have sharpened. Soviet support for the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, increased tensions with Bulgaria over Macedonia, and continuing Cuban attempts to maneuver NAM into an informal alliance with Moscow have reinforced Yugoslav perceptions of a Soviet challenge to basic Yugoslav interests. Thus, the LCY has reportedly issued guidance identifying Moscow as “enemy number one”, and officials have expressed concern about “Soviet expansionist tendencies” and the possibility of Bulgaria becoming a “Balkan Cuba” or “Balkan Vietnam”. 15. Reinforcing these strains lie deep and growing Yugoslav anxieties over the post-Brezhnev future, the impact of the Soviet succession on the Yugoslav succession, and the possibility that a new, untested, and unsure Soviet leadership could behave in dangerous and unpredictable ways. Despite these apprehensions, Yugoslav options appear limited; Yugoslav-Soviet relations are likely to remain a shifting blend of cooperation and confrontation. Their essentially adversary relationship will continue to be tempered by heavy military supply dependence on the Soviet Union (unless we can do something about this), a burdensome trade deficit with the West, and a consequent increase in trade with the East, residual ideological sentiment, and a prudent geographic and political interest in minimizing tensions where possible. 16. US-Yugoslav relations: In this context, Yugoslavia has increasingly looked to the US to provide balance, diplomatic support, and an alternative source of trade and military supply.4 This, as well as the perception of a more favorable US attitude toward the NAM, parallel interests on broad international issues (NAM, Cambodia, China, to some degree Africa), and our own interest in creating a web of relationships which will ease an inevitably difficult transition period, have led 4 On November 16, the Embassy provided briefing materials on the status of U.S.- Yugoslav military cooperation. (Telegram 8556 from Belgrade, November 16; National
