156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II treaty.16 This has been part of the developing strategy for ratification for the United Nations covenants and conventions and the OAS Convention on Human Rights, which the President signed this week.17 While the balance sheet is still in our favor and a cooperative and friendly attitude has dominated the process, there is growing questioning among some sectors of the Congress with regard to the vigor of our human rights policy. This was most apparent in the IFI legislation in the House but has recurred on several security assistance matters. Closer coordination by D/HA and H with the more outspoken advocates on the Hill should take place. There remains a basic receptivity to our policy if a greater number of specific actions can be cited, even privately, to these Congressmen and Senators. D/HA has been meeting with the human rights organizations in Washington on an individual basis and participated as well in NGO activities. 7. Multilateral Diplomacy a. The United Nations In response to the Deputy Secretary’s previous memorandum and in keeping with the PRM, IO is working actively on “an agenda for U.S. action on Human Rights at the United Nations” and has engaged in efforts to seek the appointment of a UN Human Rights Commissioner and to strengthen the UNHRC. b. The Organization of American States (OAS) Preparations are well underway for efforts to strengthen the Inter- American Human Rights Commission at the upcoming General Assembly including efforts to obtain budgetary increases, increasing the number of visits, more adequate debate and broader educational programs. ARA also is preparing papers in other ways to strengthen OAS human rights activities. 16 Reference is to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1948, and entered into force on January 12, 1951. (A/RES/260(III)A) President Truman submitted the Convention to the Senate in 1949. Although the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had favorably reported the Convention, the Senate as a whole had not given its advice and consent as of early 1977. In a May 23 message to the Senate, the President urged ratification of the Convention, noting that ratification “would be a significant enhancement of the human rights commitments of this nation, demonstrating again to the world in concrete fashion our determination to advance and protect human rights.” Carter’s message is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 27, 1977, p. 676. Christopher testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on May 24, asserting, “There is no valid moral, political, or legal argument against U.S. adherence to the genocide convention. There are strong moral, political, and legal reasons why we should become a party.” (Ibid., p. 678) 17 See Document 47.
