238
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
especially in the Soviet Union and especially toward minority areas
such as Muslim regions.
Program content. The popularity and credibility of RL/RFE in recent
years has been due to their high caliber reportage of news from within
the Soviet-dominated world, which is “looped back” in radio programs.
As currently constituted, the radios are not information organs of the
U.S. government in the sense that VOA is. They have a special mandate,
and the operative constraint is that their programs are not incompatible
with the aims of U.S. policy.
As evidence of the awesome outward thrust of Soviet power accu-
mulates, the question now arises as to whether the program content
of RL/RFE should pay greater attention than now to matters directly
related to East-West relations. Soviet domestic propaganda, since the
Afghanistan war began, more than ever has sought to place the blame
for increased international tensions on the West, and the U.S. in
particular.
Last year, for example, East-West relations were discussed only .8
percent in Russian and 4 to 10 percent in other languages. Nearly all
news and discussion focusses upon intra-bloc events in the Communist
world. The value of this emphasis is undeniable: the radios provide
reportage on current reality in the world which the listener knows first
hand; they offer a means to make an enlightened comparison between
open and closed societies; they demonstrate through individual experi-
ence the hypocrisy and unreliability which are hallmarks of official
communication in a communist state. In particular, they provide a
crucial feedback look for Samizdat communications without which dis-
sidents would remain hopelessly isolated.
The question now is whether these invaluable functions of the
radios should be supplemented by a more vigorous exploitation of
East-West relations, to countervail Moscow internal propaganda. (This
question is not unrelated to the question of whether current VOA
broadcasts to the U.S.S.R. have been (as Solzhenitzyn and others have
charged) vapid and inconsequential.)
Oversight. Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty for twenty years
were separate and largely supported by the Central Intelligence
Agency. Now they are funded by Congress and governed by a Board
of Directors composed of private citizens. This board, in turn, has been
overseen since 1973 by a five-member Presidentially appointed Board
for International Broadcasting.
This clumsy structure has been an invitation to struggle for the
privilege of supervising the Radios. The reason for this Rube Goldberg
arrangement originally was that, on the one hand, a private board
would enhance the credibility of the Radios, in assuring listeners that
