First Responses Secretary Brown noted that it was probably not impossible to evacuate him physically; we did medical evacuation all the time. However, it was a real political problem. The President asked what the Shah had agreed to. Secretary Vance said that the Shah had agreed to have his doctors talk to Iranian doctors about his medical state but not to see him. The President said that the instructions were all right with the one deletion. Secretary Vance went on to note that the Pakistanian Ambassador went to Qom today to see Khomeini. The Algerians are probably willing to weigh in as well. He also noted that there was a man named Hosan ala Hosani in Lebanon who was reputed to be very close to Khomeini. [1 line not declassified] Although they could also approach him through Sarkis. Stan Turner said it would be better to go through Sarkis and the State connection since he would have to have a Presidential Determination to do it. The President noted that he could have a Presidential Determination in fifteen minutes. Dr. Brzezinski noted he had just received a report that Mr. Valeriani of NBC has a story about the emissaries going to Iran which he planned to use this evening. Hodding Carter was trying to dissuade him of using it. Secretary Vance noted that Valeriani was a good man who would listen to reason. The President said that Hodding Carter and Jody Powell and Secretary Vance if necessary should talk to him to try to stop the story. He wondered if other networks had the story as well. Everyone agreed that the indications were that they did not. Secretary Vance went on to brief that the Pakistanis had been very helpful and that their Ambassador would go to Qom to talk with Khomeini. The Turks had chickened out. They were unwilling to offer their Embassy as a refuge for our Chargé. The UN Secretary General is calling in all the Islamic Ambassadors to indicate the seriousness of the international implications of the Iranians’ actions. Stan Turner gave a brief report on the group holding the hostages. They are called the Tunidi Islami. They were originally Islamic fanatics totally devoted to Khomeini. In more recent times they have been infiltrated by the leftists to a considerable degree though they have retained Khomeini support. Recently they got into the Radio Tehran broadcast and criticized the talks that Brzezinski had in Algiers with Bazargan and Yazdi. They are clever and well organized and their objective seems to be to try to bring down the moderates in the govern-
