506ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1955ŌĆō1957, Volume III, Supplement
correspondents who said American delegation had said something and 
reporters asked for comments. He had never made any reply to such 
inquiries.
24. After October 27 he requested assistance NCNA correspondent 
in tracing leak, but reporter responsible for information refused dis┬Ł
close source. It was thus groundless to charge origin of leak was on his 
side.
25. Wang said concerning November 8 New York Times story he 
did not regard it as objective attitude on my part to presuppose ori┬Ł
gin of story without having read it. Writer of story attributed it to ŌĆ£US 
officialsŌĆØ. It could not be concluded that these officials were staff of 
London Daily Worker.
26. I asked him whether he intended issue statement.
27. Wang replied that distorted reports make it necessary consider 
this step.
28. I asked whether this constituted notification statement would 
be issued.
29. Wang said the matter was under consideration.
30. I asked whether I would be notified prior to any statement.
31. Wang said he could not say at the present moment.
32. I said that I did not intend to issue a statement unless he did, in 
which case I reserved my right to make a reply.
33. Wang next presented a prepared statement on renunciation 
of force. He said two months had passed since agreement on agenda 
item one. Following agreement his side had introduced two subjects: 
embargo and higher level meeting. In view of our raising question of 
renunciation of force, he had submitted on October 27 a draft agreed 
announcement recommending settling disputes between China and 
US without threat or use of force in accordance with provisions of UN 
Charter. In order to materialize this principle draft proposed convening 
conference of Foreign Ministers to settle through negotiation question 
of relaxing and eliminating tension in Taiwan area.
34. Wang said after repeated efforts on his part my response so far 
had not been satisfactory. At last meeting I had raised question whether 
his draft incorporated renunciation of force to achieve national objec┬Ł
tives, as I had proposed. Such general term as national objectives con┬Ł
fuses internal with international disputes.
35. Wang said in practical terms renunciation of force to achieve 
national objectives constituted demand his side renounce sovereignty 
and recognize status quo of US interference internal affairs and occupa┬Ł
tion ChinaŌĆÖs territory of Taiwan.
36. Wang said in regard to Taiwan, ChinaŌĆÖs national objective is to 
liberate island. This lies within framework of ChinaŌĆÖs sovereignty and
