348  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
(PRC Section)
“2. The Government of the United Kingdom will be invited to 
assist in the return to the United States of those Americans who desire 
to do so as follows:”
Enclosure No. 1 shows the wording of this sentence proposed by 
each side during the course of the negotiations.
It is readily apparent from a perusal of these successive propos­
als that each side clung consistently to its point of view throughout 
the negotiations, at least up to the time that the final wording was 
agreed upon. The Chinese side sought a wording which either stated or 
implied that the PRC would entrust India with the function of assisting 
the return of Chinese from the United States, to which the United States 
would agree. In like manner, the United States would entrust to the U.K. 
the function of assisting the return of Americans from China, to which 
the PRC would agree. We consistently opposed this wording, proposing 
instead a statement to the effect that the United States would authorize 
India to act in the United States, while the PRC would authorize the 
U.K. to act there. Nothing was said in the United States texts or in my 
statements to Wang concerning the action to be taken by the PRC with 
respect to India or the U.S. with respect to the U.K.
These apparently irreconcilable positions were held to tenaciously 
by both sides until the crucial 12th meeting of August 31. It was at this 
meeting that the compromise wording was agreed on, whereby we 
agreed to drop the word authorize as well as the specific mention that 
the action would be taken by the U.S. and the PRC and Wang agreed 
to drop the words entrusted and agrees. The compromise word agreed 
on was invited—“India (or the U.K.) will be invited . . .”, without speci­
fying except by implication who was to do the inviting. Wang retained 
in his Chinese text the word wei t’o, which he had formerly translated 
entrust, but which, he explained, also meant to invite.
It seemed to me and to my advisers at the time that this was an agree­
ment on wording rather than a full meeting of minds on substance. Each 
side could interpret the new, somewhat ambiguous wording in its own 
way and neither was compelled to retreat from its basic position. Each 
side was left free to approach both the U.K. and India and describe these 
actions in terms appropriate to its own interpretation of Paragraph 2.
I feel sure that in accepting the compromise wording, Wang was 
not under any illusion that we had abandoned our position. The fact 
that he chose to retain a Chinese word in his text which means entrust 
and only very imperfectly translates the English word invite clearly 
suggests that he had accepted the idea that each side would interpret 
Paragraph 2 in its own way.
Thus, it appeared, following the August 31 meeting, that once the 
Agreed Announcement was issued each party would take the action
