1206  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
President’s visit to Venezuela, so should responsible Venezuelans make 
every effort to play down the fact that we had admitted Perez Jimenez 
and Estrada. Dr. Santaella agreed that it might be worthwhile to do so, 
but said it would be political suicide for him or any other prominent 
person to attempt to explain publicly why Perez Jimenez and Estrada 
had been admitted to the United States, since everything concerning 
the two men had political dynamite. Mr. Rubottom recalled the state-
ments made by the Vice President at his press conference in Caracas, 
pointing out that no request had been received from Venezuela for the 
extradition of the two men, and that it was up to Venezuela to make the 
next move. Dr. Santaella replied that he would do all he could to expe-
dite the legal process necessary to transmit a request for extradition.
Although he characterized political problems as being paramount, 
Dr. Santaella also described the oil import problem as most serious. 
He had discussed the problem at some length in Venezuela last week; 
some thought the restrictions the United States had imposed were 
good for Venezuela, since it enabled her to conserve her oil resources. 
Mr. Rubottom agreed that there was much validity to that point of view, 
since oil did not deteriorate if left in the ground, moreover, the pro-
gram also protected the price Venezuela received for her oil. It would 
not benefit Venezuela if the flood of oil in the United States market 
increased to such an extent that a higher level of Venezuelan exports of 
oil failed, through a decline in price, to produce a comparable increase 
in the total revenue received by Venezuela.
Although the Ambassador could see the logic of this argument, he 
did not agree with it. He had talked last week to several leading indus-
trialists in Venezuela, all of whom felt that the Venezuelan Government 
should provide them with greater protection against imports from the 
United States to compensate for the protectionist policy implemented 
by the United States against imports of Venezuelan oil. Mr. Rubottom 
expressed the hope that nothing would be done to negate the 
Supplementary Trade Agreement, which benefitted Venezuela no less 
than the United States. As the head of the United States team which 
had negotiated the agreement in 1952, Mr. Rubottom said he recalled 
vividly the difficulties that had to be overcome to obtain permission to 
go below the peril point to reduce the duty from 10.5 to 5.25 per cent on 
high gravity oil. With the surge of protectionism in the United States at 
the present time, he felt that if the agreement were reopened for nego-
tiation it would not be possible to provide an equivalent concession 
on imports of petroleum. Dr. Santaella seemed to appreciate this, but 
thought some formula could be evolved under the agreement to pro-
vide Venezuela with compensation for the action taken by the United 
States in restricting oil imports. He admitted that he did not know of 
any formula that would accomplish this.
