Arms Control and Disarmament 1371 24. The Commission has reiterated its policy of taking the initia­ tive to assure that desirable and necessary power reactor prototypes are built as justified and permitted by the status of pertinent technology, if such projects are not undertaken by industry on its own or through cooperative projects with the Commission. To this end, funds have been requested for construction of an experimental prototype gas-­cooled, graphite moderated reactor using slightly enriched uranium and for further design effort on a heavy water moderated reactor of sufficient size and proper design to be operable on natural uranium fuel. It con­ tinues to be the policy of the Commission to give industry every oppor­ tunity to participate and bear or share the cost of these projects. 25. Contracts have been negotiated for construction of the Sodium Graphite Reactor at Hallam, Nebraska, one contract being with Atomic International for construction of the reactor and one with Consumers Public Power District for other parts of the plant and for operation of the total plant. 26. Design and construction of this plant depend upon data derived from experimental operation of the Sodium Reactor Experiment at Santa Susana, California. Initial difficulties with the SRE having been largely overcome, it now appears that design work on the Consum­ ers plant may proceed. Accordingly, in February, an architect-­engineer (Bechtel Corp.) was selected to perform preliminary design. 27. In addition to its positive steps to assure timely completion of plants for which it has assumed primary financial and technical respon­ sibility, such as the PWR and the Hallam Plant, the Commission takes a positive interest in expediting construction of plants being built as cooperative projects or as entirely privately financed plants. In these cases, Commission action must take the form of expediting research and development supporting or pertinent to individual projects, assuring adequate liaison and flow of information, and prompt hand­ ling of matters related to the Commission’s regulatory and licensing responsibilities. 28. Prior to the advent of nuclear fission, naturally occurring radioisotopes were scientific curiosities whose scarcity and expense limited their usefulness to such things as radium therapy and lumines­ cent watch dials. Today, with the potential availability of tremendous amounts of radioisotopes of all the elements, these materials are rap­ idly taking their place as one of the more important tools of industry, medicine and agriculture. 29. The strides which have already been made in the utilization of radioisotopes are evidenced by the fact that it is conservatively esti­ mated that industrial uses alone are resulting in annual savings in this country of greater than five hundred million dollars. When this is con­ sidered in conjunction with the immeasurable benefits that even now
