September 18–December 16, 1978 505 President Sadat: As I told you, I am in control and everything will go smooth. President Carter: I look forward to that and I will be very pleased to get your assessment. President Sadat: I shall also tell you about what happens between me and Fahd. President Carter: I need to know that. President Sadat: The Vice President met with him today. He sent me a message and I shall be sending you everything. President Carter: That’s good. Let me add one other comment. All of us were very favorably impressed with Vice President Mubarak. President Sadat: I am happy to know this. President Carter: He did an outstanding job for you. I think you can be very, very pleased with him. President Sadat: Thank you, Mr. President. President Carter: Good day and good-bye, my friend. President Sadat: Thank you very much and good-bye. 144. Editorial Note On November 29, 1978, Senate Majority Leader Robert C. Byrd met with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat in Cairo. Appointed as a presidential emissary by President Jimmy Carter on November 15, Byrd stopped in Egypt as part of a 16-day trip to the Middle East. (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, page 2059) A full report of Byrd’s mission, which included talks in Israel, Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey and submitted to Carter upon the completion of the trip, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 55, Middle East: Senator Byrd Report on Trip, 12/78. Byrd urged Sadat to accept the draft treaty as it was written “with the condition that this is contingent upon reaching an acceptable resolution of the West Bank/Gaza linkage issue,” noting that he “had never seen President Carter as determined as he is on this issue.” Moreover, he noted, Carter was “fully committed to continue working with Sadat” to resolve the remaining issues, including Egyptian problems with other Arab states. Sadat replied that he “saw no purpose in accepting a treaty which would be overturned within a year by the weight of Arab opinion,” observing the treaty “can not stand because it is not accepted at all.” Sadat rejected Byrd’s suggestion that Egypt had allowed Israel a
