14  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
He pointed out that the long-­range strategic plan makes little 
sense because it attempts to project 12 years into the future. He thought 
things might be improved if Operation Deputies were located near the 
Chairman JCS and be available on a continuing basis.
General Bradley, on suggestion of Secretary McElroy, commented 
that the service chiefs do not have enough time to do their work, that 
they are always behind trying to stay ahead of both their service and 
JCS duties. He said he knew of no remedy. He added that he had seen 
times when there was too much emphasis on strictly service views 
in JCS deliberations, but again, he said, the remedy he did not know. 
It was his opinion that it would be very difficult to have the opera­
tional deputies working with the Chairman because the service chiefs 
would not take well to this arrangement. He thought the chiefs need 
to be together more and did not see how this could be accomplished 
while they remain chiefs of individual services. He thought that the 
Chairman needed no greater authority than he now has as long as the 
chiefs remain service chiefs. He pointed out that the Chairman’s leader­
ship and personal direction provide adequate authority.
As for the Joint Strategic Survey Committee, General Bradley men­
tioned that the Rockefeller Committee gave close attention to this activ­
ity and concluded that it must be strengthened in order to do its job 
properly—­especially, that it should have outstanding officers assigned 
to it at the end of their periods of service and also that scientists should 
participate. He said that how and where to bring scientists into this 
process still is not clear. General Bradley concluded that while the JCS 
is a wonderful organization and is doing a good job with few disagree­
ments, still it can and should be substantially improved by executive 
action and by law.
Admiral Radford commented on scientific advice available to the 
JCS, referring to the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group. He pointed 
out that this process is now on a contract basis and that the Joint Chiefs 
get excellent results from this Group. General Twining pointed out 
that this Group can go straight to the Secretary of Defense if it feels it 
receives inadequate or improper action from the JCS, and he confirmed 
that the Group is doing excellent work.
Secretary McElroy then asked the views of General Twining. The 
General stated the opinion that the elimination of the committees 
would improve JCS action—­an opinion, he said, he had not held before 
becoming Chairman of the JCS. He said, however, that eliminating 
these committees might not get the unanimity that the Joint Chiefs now 
have. He strongly endorsed the suggestion that operational deputies 
be brought closer to the Chairman and suggested that these men be 
separated from the actual operation of the operation divisions of each 
of the services.
