1955 231 178. Letter 12 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 12 Washington, September 9, 1955 Dear Alex: Events are moving so fast that this letter is sure to be out of date when you receive it. Either the Agreed Announcement will be issued tomorrow, or the Chinese Communists will make some new move which will change the complexion of the negotiation. Today we have the difficult task of making complete preparations for the possible issuance of the Agreed Announcement tomorrow, while keeping everything on an extremely closely held, need-to-know basis. There is strong pressure from Cooper in New Delhi and Butter­ worth in London to be given the full story to date. Also USIA feels that the VOA and their Public Affairs officers around the world need to be given guidance in advance on a secret basis, so that they will not be caught flat-footed if and when the story breaks. But the Department is resisting these pressures because it is strongly felt by both Walter Robertson and Herman Phleger that any leak which might expose an assumption on our part that agreement on Saturday is likely or indicate that we put a quite limited interpretation on the scope and significance of the Agreed Announcement, might well endanger both the prospects of the 28 Americans in jail and the continuation of the talks. When the stakes are so high, not even a remote chance of a slip can be taken. Hence we are prepared to incur the displeasure for the time being of various people who understandably feel they have a legitimate right to know more than they are being told. Nothing is now being sent to London, nothing to New Delhi (except the routine acknowledgment of the Indian Government’s Note of August 18, repeated to you as the Department’s 702), and no advanced guidance is being given to USIA or our P area. The text of the proposed Agreed Announcement and the backgrounder talking paper have been sent to Hagerty at Denver. We have a carefully blocked out schedule of actions to be taken tomorrow if the Agreed Announcement is issued. The whole thing would be triggered by a green light from you. In case the Agreed Announcement is issued tomorrow, both WSR and HP feel that you can keep Wang fully occupied for some time in talking about the implementation of the Agreement. You should endeavor to keep him so busy reporting on the progress of the departure of Americans and telling him about the Chinese who wish to return to 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­Informal.
