After the approval of the preamble and articles Colonel Peel again inquired
as to the exact meaning of the word “likin” and the chairman replied that
likin included all taxes of a transit nature, whether they came under that
name or not and on inquiry of Mr. Teichmann, one of the British technical
advisers, by Mr. Strawn, Mr. Teichmann replied that his definition would be
that contained in Article VIII of the Mackay Treaty, which referred to likin
and other dues on goods at the place of production, in transit and at
destination. Mr. Strawn considered this the best definition he had heard and
later he and Colonel Peel emphasized the necessity of having a clear
definition of the word “likin” in order to guard against a misunderstanding
of the meaning of the term. The chairman remarked that the Chinese
Delegation had already defined likin as all duties of a transit nature, but
their definition seemed too vague and Mr. Oudendijk, Mr. Strawn and
Colonel Peel expressed the opinion that there should be a definition of
“likin” in exact terms.
The following draft Resolution, or Declaration, was read and unanimously
adopted for presentation to the full Committee:
“The Delegates of the Powers assembled at this Conference
resolve to adopt the following proposed article relating to tariff
autonomy with a view to incorporating it, together with other
matters, to be hereafter agreed upon, in a treaty which is to be
signed at this Conference:
“The Contracting Powers other than China hereby recognize
China’s right to enjoy tariff autonomy; agree to remove the tariff
restrictions which are contained in existing treaties between
themselves respectively and China; and consent to the going into
effect of the Chinese National Tariff Law on January 1st, 1929.
“The Government of the Republic of China declares that likin
shall be abolished simultaneously with the enforcement of the
Chinese National Tariff Law; and further declares that the
abolition of likin shall be effectively carried out by the First Day
of the First Month of the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of
China (January 1st, 1929).”
