724 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 5. The timing of the statement suggests its purpose is to take the heat off Kabul at the Islamic Conference meeting starting today in Islamabad and running through May 21.4 The DRA is doubtless aware of the intent of Conference Secretary General Chatti to introduce at the meeting a “new” neutrality proposal along the lines of the Carrington plan previously shrugged off by Moscow.5 The Soviets may also intend to push the new Afghan formulation at the Warsaw Pact meeting. 6. Press guidance—Following press guidance is being used by the Department: Q. What is your reaction to the Afghan Government’s proposal that it hold talks with Pakistan and Iran regarding the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan? A. We have seen press reports of the proposal. Our initial assessment is that it is not substantially different from previously articulated positions, is aimed at the legitimization of the Babrak regime rather than anything else, and is obviously timed to attempt to influence discussions at the Islamic Conference. 7. We regard this initiative as a propaganda device designed to affect the outcome of the Islamic Conference and prevent condemnation of the Soviet action and the actions of the puppet Babrak government. While we think it important to downplay this new proposal and Soviet efforts to describe it as a means of reaching an acceptable political solution to the problem of Afghanistan, we recognize the importance of allied support for our position. This is particularly true regarding the French, British and Germans who have been discussing possible neutrality proposals with us. We suggest the following talking points which could be used with key Islamic countries by ourselves and allies who have been in touch with attendees at Islamic Conference. 4 The Conference of Islamic Foreign Ministers, which met May 17–22 in Islamabad, adopted a resolution that condemned the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and established a committee to consult with all concerned parties and resolve the situation on the basis of Soviet troop withdrawal; recognition of the Afghan people’s right to choose their own form of government; respect for the independence, integrity, and non-aligned status of Afghanistan; and creation of conditions that would allow the refugees to return. (Marvine Howe, “Islamic Conference Ends; Afghanistan Talks Proposed,” New York Times, May 23, 1980, p. A10) An article in the President’s Daily Brief, June 11, reported that the USSR “quickly rejected” the proposals on Afghanistan arising from the conference. The brief characterized the proposals as calling for the formation of a “broadbased” government that could still be headed by Karmal, followed by Soviet withdrawal to be monitored by an international force; and selection of a national committee of tribal leaders to determine the future form of Afghan government. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—June 1980, PDBs) 5 See footnote 4, Document 225.
