48 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with the Palestinian question. The Israeli Government has also added to the obstacles by denying any Jordanian right in the West Bank and refusing to admit that it is occupied Jordanian territory. It is more necessary for us now to have a clear and unambiguous indication that as a result of the process of negotiation Israel would end its occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and the other territories occupied in June, 1967 and allow a process of self-determination leading to the resolution of the Palestinian problem along lines outlined and with reciprocal guarantees for future mutual security to Arabs and Israelis alike. I am convinced that under such circumstances it would be within our ability not only to participate actively and positively in constructing peace on a solid and lasting basis but also to influence our Arab brethren to participate in the peace process on the basis of the formula you suggested earlier for Geneva or a similar collective framework. —I do hope and pray that your brave initiative in arranging the forthcoming talks in Camp David would result in the necessary breakthrough. I am sure that you are determined to achieve substantive progress. Permit me, however, to point out that it is feared here in Jordan that the inability to achieve such genuine progress in the talks, as a result of Israel’s proven intransigence, might prompt the participants to issue a vague and uncommiting document of principles aimed at de-emphasizing the differences and inviting other participants. It would be unhelpful to move along such a course and, consequently, expose potential participants such as Jordan to unjustified international and local conflicting pressures. It would be unfair and unrealistic to expect Jordan and other Arab parties to shift their stands on principles on such grounds in the absence of genuine indications of an Israeli positive attitude on the substantive questions. —I wish to assure you, Mr. President, that Jordan remains ready and willing to participate in all peace efforts that have a credible chance of progress and a productive conclusion. We are committed to the ideal of peace in our region and the hope of a just settlement. After the talks in Camp David I hope that we would reopen close consultations regarding the situation. I shall conduct consultations with my Arab partners in this spirit and for the reactivation of the atmosphere of collective search for peace and positive action. I have already conveyed my country’s views to President Sadat and I am sure that he understands and appreciates them. —I wish to thank you again for your confidence and friendship. I hope I can reciprocate and that my country would remain the strong friend and partner to your great country as it has always been and a factor for stability and a force for the preservation of the identity of the area and for honorable peace here and in the world.
