1000 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Paraguayan unless there is also visible and tangible economic progress. The Minister pointed out that, by using due-­bills, or IOU’s, the rural folk can and do manage somehow without any currency at all. The Minister said that there should be no doubt in the mind of anyone that Paraguay stands solidly on the side of the United States and the West. He said that President Stroessner fully recognizes the fact that the United States is a friend of Paraguay and has helped her in many ways; but, in his anxiety to see his people enjoy better times, the President constantly asks his advisors why the United States is not willing to do more. The Minister said the President wanted him to repeat in Washington what he had said many times before: Paraguay would give the United States of anything she has, including air bases. (At this point, Ambassador Plate remarked that when he is asked about Paraguay’s position in world affairs today, he replies, “Paraguay is the aircraft carrier of the Americas”.) The Minister said that Paraguay’s anti-­communist policy works against her. It is becoming increasingly difficult to explain to Paraguayan business people why they are not allowed to trade with communist countries. For example, an Asunción hardware merchant wishes to buy farm machinery from the United States, but cannot pay cash in dollars. A Polish manufacturer hears about this, and sends a letter offering a hundred tractors at an extremely low price, and on easy, long-­term credit terms. What a blessing it would be if the merchant could get such attractive offers from the United States. Mr. Rubottom wondered about the good faith of the Polish offer; and the Minister seemed to agree that it might be questionable. Mr. Rubottom indicated that it is not the practice of the United States to tell her friends among other sovereign nations whether they should or should not trade with the Sino-Soviet bloc. He suggested, however, that to his mind two important considerations are involved: (1) a nation’s principles and (2) the question of whether relations with the communist world are in that nation’s best self-­interest. The Minister nodded assent, and pursued the matter no further. The Minister then said he was constrained to mention Bolivia. Whereupon, he produced and read a telegram which President Stroessner had sent him urgently. The President noted that he had just learned with dismay that on the day after the Bolivian Government announced the United States would provide aid of $26 million, a large part of which would be an outright grant, the Bolivian parliament approved a motion recommending that the government establish diplomatic relations with Soviet Russia. Paraguay, said the Minister, found it most difficult to understand this sort of thing. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that there is no comparison between the current situation in Paraguay and Bolivia. He said that present day Bolivia has been likened to a cancer in the body of America; and that
