Afghanistan 709 263. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Pakistan1 Washington, May 3, 1980, 1557Z 117572. Subject. Letter From President Carter to President Zia. 1. S—Entire text. 2. Following is text of letter from President Carter to President Zia dated April 30. [Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.] Begin quote: Dear Mr. President: Thank you for your letter following the visit of Dr. Brzezinski and Mr. Christopher.2 I welcome the personal attention you have given U.S.-Pakistan relations, and I hope that strengthened cooperation between our two nations will help to show the Soviet Union how seriously we view their ruthless and unprovoked aggression in Afghanistan. I was deeply impressed by the reports of my emissaries of your country’s determination to counter the Soviet challenge. Your leadership at the Islamic Foreign Ministers’ Conference in January was vital in putting the Islamic world on record condemning the Soviet seizure of a neighboring Muslim country. I hope that Pakistan will exercise equally firm leadership at the Islamic Foreign Ministers’ Conference in May to demonstrate that the Islamic world remains united in its condemnation of Soviet actions. One particularly effective way to demonstrate opposition to the Soviet invasion is to boycott the Olympics, and I was pleased to learn privately of your government’s decision not to go to Moscow. Making your position public before the beginning of the Islamic Foreign Ministers’ Conference would increase the likelihood that the moral weight of the Conference will remain behind the boycott. The struggle of the Afghan people against the Soviet occupation forces is one of the most stirring events of our time. I attach the greatest importance to this struggle and know that you share my admiration for the Mujahidin. Not only does their bravery deserve recognition, their ability to continue their resistance brings home the cost of aggres- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800220–0942. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Hornblow (NEA/PAB), cleared in S/S–O, IWG, NEA, S/S–S, and S/S (by phone); and approved by Saunders. 2 Zia’s letter to Carter, February 7, is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia. For Brzezinski and Christopher’s visit, see Documents 193, 194, 195, and 198.
