778  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
military assistance program. Third, pursuant to Sections 141 and 142(a) 
of the Act, the recipient nation must agree to the undertakings which are 
specified by Section 142(a) of the Act and normally included in the con-
ventional military assistance agreement. Fourth, under Section 511(c) 
of the Act, any nation receiving military equipment or materials on a 
grant basis must make arrangements for the return to the United States 
of any such equipment and materials when no longer required for the 
purposes for which furnished.
The first condition has been satisfied. In the President’s message 
on the Mutual Security Program of February 19, 1958,5 the necessary 
findings were confirmed as to countries for which military assistance 
was then proposed, Haiti being among such countries.
The second condition requires a Presidential determination under 
Sections 105(b) (4) and 451(a) of the Act to permit the proposed program. 
While the military assistance proposed to be furnished is designed 
to bolster Haiti’s capacity to resist external aggression, the types of 
equipment, materials, and services to be furnished would consequen-
tially strengthen the internal security capability of the Haitian armed 
forces and could be used for internal security purposes. Therefore, it 
is considered desirable to waive the first of the two above-­mentioned 
requirements of Section 105(b)(4) of the Act and make the determina-
tion required by the third sentence of Section 105(b)(4).
The third and fourth conditions have been satisfied also by a 
military assistance agreement signed with Haiti on January 28, 1955. 
However, this military assistance agreement does not apply to the assis-
tance here in proposed, namely, the furnishing of military equipment, 
materials and services to assist Haiti to maintain its legitimate self-­
defense, without reference to Western Hemisphere defense missions. 
Therefore, a further agreement will be sought with Haiti to satisfy the 
conditions required by Sections 141, 142(a) and 511(c) of the Act with 
respect to the assistance here in proposed.
5 For the text of the President’s message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the 
United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958 (Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
1959), pp. 160–168.
