1570  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
57. Although some additional nations will probably obtain nuclear 
weapons in one way or another, there will almost certainly continue 
to be strong moral and political inhibitions on their use. Indications 
are that the people of Western Europe would approve their use in the 
defense of vital interests, particularly to defend against local or gen­
eral Communist attacks in the European area. But we believe that fears 
of the consequences of nuclear war are so deep and profound that no 
European government would actually accede to the use of nuclear 
weapons in local conflicts anywhere until efforts at a negotiated settle­
ment had clearly failed or a critical blow to Western security appeared 
imminent or had actually been struck.
58. It is possible, however, that development of extremely low-­
yield weapons might bring, in time, a substantial shift in public atti­
tudes so that use of such weapons would be viewed as proper in local 
conflicts. But we do not foresee an early lessening of the political and 
psychological restraints on the use of nuclear weapons.
422.	 Telegram Secto 9 From London1
London, February 5, 1959, 3 p.m.
Secto 9. Re Secto 7. Secretary this morning discussed with Lloyd 
and Ormsby-­Gore, and subsequently with Macmillan, tactics in nuclear 
test negotiations. The Secretary noted our “basic charter” on controls 
matter is as President had expressed it to Macmillan, that central issue 
is whether Russians will accept a real controls system, and re duration 
that we can accept in principle that ban on tests would be indefinite, 
withdrawal from or suspension of treaty being possible if controls sys­
tem not being installed on schedule or not being operated properly.
Although Ormsby-­Gore initially suggested US and UK commit­
ted to introducing duration article, and failure to do so might permit 
Russians to evade discussion on controls, Secretary read Supnu 243 as 
indicating we are not, repeat not, so committed.
Reviewing language of draft duration article Secretary and 
Lloyd agreed it questionable whether necessary to specify right of 
1 Source: Account of John Foster Dulles’ discussions with Ormsby-­Gore and 
Lloyd on nuclear test suspension talks. Secret; Niact. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 
700.5611/2–559.
