750  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
the need for a Klein-Saks type mission2 and referred to Prescott Carter 
as a possibility. Such a mission might strengthen the Haitians and still be 
outside the USOM mission. He asked whether the Artibonite cost survey 
had been completed. Mr. Kimball replied that this had not been done.
Mr. Harley queried whether the Haitians would be willing to 
accept outside advisors. Mr. Rubottom replied that we would use the 
“carrot and stick” approach.
Mr. Wieland pointed out that there were two forces struggling 
within the Haitian government; one-­pro-American and the other 
anti-American. The latter headed by Blanchet, were attempting to 
sabotage relations with the United States. As things are now, it looks 
as though the pro-American force might win and they need our help, 
especially when Duvalier is leaning in their direction.
Mr. Atwood mentioned that the situation seems to be similar to the 
one in Bolivia. Mr. Wieland said what was needed was a concrete pro-
grams to present to Duvalier. Mr. Harley asked what was the “carrot” 
that we intended to use. Mr. Atwood mentioned that the IMF, Artibonite 
financing, and technical assistance could be used as the “carrot”.
Mr. Dennison doubted whether the Haitians could stand any more 
debt burden since they were again in default with the Eximbank. The 
Eximbank, he said, did not want to put any more money into Haiti to 
complete the Artibonite project.
Mr. Rubottom said that he thought that we could work out a suc-
cessful program. Mr. Pollack mentioned that there existed a Haitian 
nationalization program and he thought that we should use our influ-
ence to see that it was to our benefit. Mr. Snow elaborated on the elec-
tric power problem and the attitude of the Haitian toward the Island 
Light and Power Company. Mr. Dennison said he understood that 
Marc Charles and Arthur Bonhomme wanted to nationalize the Power 
Company.
The Artibonite, Mr. Wieland said, was the immediate problem 
facing us and all efforts should be made to put it into production. 
Mr. Atwood mentioned that the Eximbank held $300,000 of ICA money, 
part of which could be used for the costing of the remainder of the work 
on the project. Mr. Snow believed that the Artibonite should be com-
pleted and that full consideration should be given to private power in 
developing the water resources. Messrs. Snow, Conover, Dennison and 
Warner agreed that the cost survey should be initiated immediately.
2 The United States firm, Klein-Saks, Inc., provided financial and economic counsel-
ing to several Latin American governments. In December 1958, the Haitian government 
contracted the services of Klein & Saks, Inc. and Lehman Brothers, Inc. Documentation 
concerning the negotiations of these contracts and subsequent discussions between 
Department of State officials and representatives of the two firms is in file 838.00.
