900
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. The administration is pressing for enactment of legislation
creating a 4 million ton food security reserve.4 The reserve would back-
stop our 4.47 million ton annual food assistance pledge under the new
Food Aid Convention5 and would be stocked almost entirely by the
wheat intended for sale to the Soviet Union. To be used solely for food
aid purposes, the reserve would be drawn upon when existing supply
does not allow us to honor our food aid commitments. The existence of
this reserve will prevent the recurrence of situations such as the early
1970s when crop shortfalls reduced our food aid programs. The pas-
sage of this legislation is by no means assured and prospects for its pas-
sage would be diminished by discussion at this time about future uses
for the food security reserve other than that in the proposed bill.
3. In addition, the President has approved a dollar 100 million sup-
plemental PL 480 request for both FY 80 and 81.6 The incremental food
aid amounting to about 450,000 tons equivalent in each year, will
largely be programmed for humanitarian and refugee purposes and
will be composed of grain made available by the suspension of agricul-
tural trade with the USSR. Some of the FY 81 supplemental food aid
may be available as incremental stocks for soundly conceived food
storage projects in LDCs.
4. While the Venice Summit agenda is pending future discussion
with our Summit partners, internal preparations include measures
bearing on world food security which contain elements of your sug-
gested initiative. Under consideration are an expression of intention by
the Summit members to establish food aid reserves and an affirmation
of support for proposed World Bank investment of dollars 1 billion in
the 1980’s to expand the food storage and distribution capacity of the
poorest developing countries.
5. Donor held food aid reserves would isolate internationally com-
mitted food aid stocks from the market and assure the ability of donors
to meet their food aid commitments even during global crop shortfalls.
The IBRD-financed LDC storage program would alleviate a funda-
mental food security problem of lack of indigenous food storage ca-
pacity that was identified by the developing countries during the nego-
tiations for a new International Wheat Agreement. Donor held food aid
reserves and enhanced LDC storage capacity may create a basis for
overcoming some of the obstacles to a viable international food reserve
system.
4 Presumable reference to H.R. 4489, the Food Security Act of 1979; see Document
260.
5 Signatories approved a new Food Aid Convention in London on March 6, which
replaced the FAC negotiated in 1971, as part of the International Wheat Agreement
(IWA). See footnote 7, Document 236.
6 See Document 265.
