530  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
consonant with existing military assistance program objectives, but that 
it would give favorable consideration to a request to purchase primary 
trainer aircraft of a type which would be suitable and available. We 
noted that in her present difficult fiscal situation Ecuador might be bet-
ter advised to devote her limited resources for military expenditures to 
support of T-33 aircraft which she already had and F-80 aircraft which 
we were committed to supply her in the near future. We also noted 
that Ecuador had been unable to liquidate outstanding accounts for the 
transportation of personnel of the United States Army and Air Force 
Missions, which exceeded $300,000. We stated that in view of Ecuador’s 
fiscal situation we would be reluctant to approve the request for T–34’s 
even on a cash basis. We understood that four T–34’s and spare parts 
for one year would cost as much as $250,000. However, we requested 
that the Defense Department, if it considered that Ecuador had a mil-
itary requirement for primary trainer aircraft, suggest a type which 
would be suitable and would be available at a lower cost to Ecuador.
With regard to the lighting equipment, we understood that it was 
to be used in connection with activities of the International Geophysical 
Year in which the United States would participate. We noted that if our 
understanding was correct it would be in the interest of the United 
States for Ecuador to obtain the equipment. Therefore, we started, if 
the Defense Department considered that credit should be extended 
to cover this purchase, we would concur in a recommendation to the 
International Cooperation Administration that an appropriate credit be 
established.
It was not until shortly before the receipt of your letter of 
January 17 that we received a reply from Defense on the above matters.4 
Defense indicated that the T–34 would be suitable for the intended 
use by Ecuador and that no other suitable trainer would be available. 
Furthermore, four T–34’s would cost about $178,000 and would be eco-
nomical to operate. Defense approved sale of the four T–34 aircraft and 
the lighting equipment to Ecuador on appropriate credit turns under 
Section 106(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended.5
The various areas of the Department which have an interest in this 
request have concurred in principle to the sale of this equipment on 
appropriate credit terms and steps are being taken now to work out 
details for approval by Mr. Dillon6 prior to obtaining the concurrence 
4 Reference is to a letter from John L. Holcombe, Director, Office of Programming 
and Control, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 
to Robert G. Barnes, Special Assistant for Mutual Security Affairs, Department of State, 
January 8, 1958. (ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 75, “Ecuador: Sale of Arms, Munitions, and 
Equipment”)
5 For text of the Act, Public Law 665, approved August 26, 1954, see 68 Statue 832.
6 C. Douglas Dillon, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs. 
No record of his action on this request was found in Department of State files.
