March 27–December 31, 1979 963 there are USG–PLO contacts, particularly in Vienna, and at Arafat’s request Hussein was prepared to advise PLO on how he might handle the situation. Secretary said he had to clarify one point: Vienna contacts have been casual and not at all substantive. There are no substantive USG–PLO contacts. Hussein said he had the impression there were. Secretary said there definitely are not. 5. Secretary asked if Arafat is serious about confederation and, if so, how does King see it. Hussein said Arafat appears serious about seeking real cooperation with Jordan, including the peace process. In this respect in response to Arafat’s request for his views on the future relationship between the PLO and Jordan King had said he wanted Arafat to provide a detailed proposal which Jordanians could study. Secretary said that confederation idea is not inconsistent with what we, Egypt and Israel are now doing and, indeed, is fully consistent with long-standing USG position that some kind of formal relationship between Jordan and West Bank/Gaza seemed to us to be most workable final arrangement. In context of discussion on subject, Hussein suggested Jordan and the PLO might be able to come to agreement on future relationship between Jordan and West Bank/Gaza by the time of the Arab summit planned for the end of the year. (Sharaf later noted the timing of the summit might slip). 6. Secretary then expressed his thanks for Jordanian role in delaying the vote on Palestinian rights resolution and turned conversation to Lebanon. He said we have gone to Israelis in strongest possible terms and, so far, ceasefire is fragile but holding. We have told Dayan and Weizman of our concern, and spent a great deal of time discussing it with them during their recent visit here. It is critically important that we move situation beyond ceasefire to real truce and build on truce to achieve some improvements on the ground. Saunders explained that we have a series of steps we intend to take toward this end. We do not have one grand design but a number of packages of steps to put forward over a number of months, perhaps beginning in a week or two. Saunders said Lebanon deserves this attention on its own merits— what is happening there is difficult for all of us to live with—and because of its inevitable effect on the peace process. Hussein agreed that help for Lebanon is critical and Arab summit on Lebanon is being considered. (Later Jordanians said Lebanon would be one item on agenda of summit expected in November or December). First, however, there needed to be some Arab agreement on what should be done. He said he is pressing hard for this and has raised issue with Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrians. Veliotes asked if discussion with Syrians had included idea of timetable for Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon. Hussein did not respond directly but said Assad wanted to get out of Lebanon and would do so under the right conditions, and that such a timetable would be needed eventually.
