62  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
(3) It puts the onus on our adversaries. By making clear that we 
would initiate use of nuclear weapons only for defensive purposes, it 
highlights the fact that only Soviet (or North Korean or Chinese) aggres-
sion could ignite the nuclear powder keg. By giving our adversaries the 
“last clear chance,” it throws the burden of nuclear responsibility onto 
them.
(4) It does not detract from deterrence. Such a declaratory strategy 
does not constitute any concession that could be exploited in scenar-
ios of crisis or escalation, since it does not really differ from our action 
policy, and because there are no plausible scenarios left uncovered in 
which we would want to use nuclear weapons first.
Its major disadvantage is that it doesn’t mean much. Precisely 
because of the last point, the pledge would seem to signify no change 
or compromise in our policy. Thus it could be beneficial in terms of the 
reactions of the uninformed, but to others it might seem to be empty 
rhetoric, at best, and a cynical ploy at worst.
A4. No-First-(or otherwise) Use Against Non-Nuclear Weapons States
The US could adopt the position that it would not use nuclear 
weapons against non-­nuclear weapons states. This would maintain 
the deterrent against the SU and China and hence not upset our major 
allies. It might give some encouragement to Kim Il Song to be nasty and 
to President Park to wonder about his own nuclear needs. But presum-
ably the likelihood of our actually ever using nuclear weapons in Korea 
has never been all that great. As our current policy [1 line not declassi-
fied] to defend South Korea against North Korea without recourse to 
nuclear weapons. A pledge of this sort would also reap certain public 
relations advantage. In addition, of course, it would in general tend 
to bolster rather than to undermine our efforts to discourage nuclear 
proliferation. On the other hand, the probability that we would again 
use nuclear weapons against a non-­nuclear weapons state has not been 
very great for many years, and consequently this option also suffers the 
disadvantages of the previous one in being seen as a somewhat crude 
public relations ploy.
In general, no-­first-­use declarations if meaningful are undesirable 
and if desirable are not meaningful.
B. Bilateral Versions of the Above
Conceivably the US and the SU could jointly adopt one of the pos-
tures identified above. Since the adoption of any no-­first-­use posture 
involves some self-­imposition of restraints, the benefits to the US of 
adopting any particular posture on a bilateral basis with the SU would 
generally be greater than going it alone. In addition, the bilateral adop-
tion of a particular posture would furnish a commendable example 
of declaratory restraint on the part of the superpowers and would be
