Czechoslovakia 297 relations will come out of the conference. The initial reports from the US delegation is that that is the spirit on both sides. 8. Chnoupek said the Secretary’s position was also the Czechoslovak position in substance. Czechoslovakia sees the Final Act as a comprehensive whole and does not want to extract individual sections, such as human rights, for debate. If that happens, there will be a big battle. He spoke of his years in propaganda work and the different views on both sides on this matter which would make it impossible to speak of a constructive dialogue. He referred to his sharp discussion on human rights with Netherlands Foreign Minister Van der Stoel earlier this year. Chnoupek concluded that the Czechoslovak delegation at Belgrade is prepared for a constructive discussion. Chnoupek said they had made a good beginning and the Secretary said he hoped to see Chnoupek again. Christopher 100. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Czechoslovakia1 Washington, October 19, 1977, 1611Z 250945. Belgrade for USCSCE Del, Munich for Gilmore. Subject: Major Charter 77 Figures Reportedly Convicted and Sentenced. Ref: Munich 2963.2 1. According to Reuters reports received here, trial of major Charter 77 activists (Vaclav Havel, Frantisek Pavlicek, Jiri Lederer, and Ota Ornest) on charges of anti-state activity, subversion, and contact with such exiles as Pavel Tigrid and Jiri Pelikan began on October 17. Defendants were originally apprehended for, inter alia, assisting in the distribution in the West of Czechoslovak literature banned by the regime. Reuters states that sources close to the defendants report that 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770384–0432. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Glenn; cleared in substance in EUR and cleared by Kornblum, Brody, Schmidt, Nimetz, and Shulman; approved by Luers. Sent for information Priority to Munich. Sent for information to Belgrade for the USCSCE delegation. 2 Telegram 2963 from Munich to Prague, October 7, reported that RFE management had informed the Consulate that four Charter 77 activists (Havel, Pavlicek, Lederer, and Ornest) were to be tried for anti-state activities in Prague starting October 17, and requested that reporting on the subject also be sent to Munich for information. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770366–0499)
