Nicaragua 851 NI–10. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, November 26, 1958. SUBJECT Our attitudes toward a possible U.S. visit by President Somoza In connection with Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa’s recent approach to Dr. Eisenhower concerning the desire of President Somoza to receive an invitation to make a formal visit to the United States next spring,2 it is the recommendation of OAP that no such invitation be extended. Despite President Luis Somoza’s trend towards a more democratic type of Government and public declarations that he will not succeed himself in the presidency, he is still viewed by many Latin Americans as part of the dictatorial “Somoza Dynasty”. Undoubtedly if he were to receive such an invitation from President Eisenhower, Latin American liberals would accuse us of favoring a dictatorship or the remnant of one. Such accusations would probably be fanned by communist elements, and the end results of such an invitation might well prove detrimental, at this time, to our efforts to assure the Latin American people that the United States has a real interest in improving their welfare. On the other hand OAP has no objections to informal arrangements being made for President Somoza to see President Eisenhower, should he come to the United States for a medical checkup. In view of his recent illness3 it would not appear unusual for Somoza to come to the United States for a medical examination. The fact that while in the United States he called on the President and other Government officials, should not lend credence to any accusations that the United States favors the “Somoza Dynasty,” as might be the case if he were to receive a formal invitation to make such a visit. In view of the constant support we have received from Nicaragua in the UN and the OAS, the official informal visits of Ydígoras and Echandi prior to their inaugurations as Presidents of Guatemala and Costa Rica respectively, and the forthcoming official formal visit of
