Dominican Republic 489 Pawley interjected that one political fact was Dominican people for most part were for their chief. Outside world did not understand government by parties was not possible here under circumstances because Dominicans desired one party. Generalissimo agreed saying he had invited formation opposition parties but invitation had not been accepted—­not only had he done this recently but also at other times in past. De Moya pointed out next national election for President would come in 1962 and that popular surge had already begun for Generalissimo to be candidate latter nodded and remarked he had refrained from saying he would or would not run. Pawley then brought up subject of recent wave arrests here and called attention to strong effect this having in other countries against Dominican Republic particularly in press. He suggested that those apprehended for plotting against GODR had proved be misguided youths and they should not be treated as hardened criminals. United States and many other countries would not understand their being treated as such. Generalissimo remarked those held were being tried according to Dominican judicial system. He stated that they would have right of appeal and that until action in legal channels had been completed he would not feel free to intervene. Pawley interposed he knew Dominican juridical system to be excellent and to be much like our own except there was no jury trial. Senator Smathers said he knew nothing about judicial process here but if this so he was making proposal that in order convince outside world justice being done in Dominican courts some distinguished jurist such as District Attorney Envin of Florida be asked come to Dominican Republic to witness trials. Generalissimo said he would welcome such jurist in Dominican Republic for this purpose. Pawley at first opposed this suggestion on ground no other government would permit such thing but withdrew in face reply by Smathers that other governments had better press than GODR and part of problem was to convince press GODR was dealing justly. Generalissimo then told stories about two past Dominican Presidents who had been killed by persons whom they had trusted and favored. With this in mind he confessed he was motivated by desire not to be killed. Following interview Generalissimo ushered all present to Chapel on Palace grounds and with usual skill at such operations managed have pictures taken being godfather to dozens of babies while accompanied by Smathers and United States Charge d’ Affaires. Considering that obvious purpose was to publish pictures showing Trujillo, United States and Catholic Church as happy triumvirate and considering this scene somewhat less than accurate as Department will appreciate from Embassy’s previous reporting this is one I preferred to duck but there was no escape.
