144  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
the nationalized mines which account for about 70 percent of total output.5 
Efficient operation of the nationalized mines is hampered by the high cost of 
social benefits and of surplus labor, and it will be politically difficult to elim-
inate or reduce these problems. Accordingly, the best short-­term prospect 
for increased metal production may be through additional investment in 
the private mines. However, because of world oversupply, expansion of tin 
production would not provide any substantial increase in revenues. Export 
quotas, imposed by the International Tin Council, will limit Bolivia’s exports 
in the first quarter of 1958 to about 5,500 long tons—a drop of almost 20 per-
cent from the average quarterly level of exports in 1956. Further, the threat 
of increased U.S. tariffs on lead and zinc, combined with falling demand for 
metals generally, will tend to retard foreign capital investment.
14. The government is placing great hope on the exploitation of 
petroleum resources as an eventual means of increasing foreign exchange 
earnings. Petroleum output has gradually risen to over 3 ­million barrels 
of crude in 1956 and Bolivia is now a small net exporter. Refinery capac-
ity has increased to about 12,000 barrels per day. The government petro-
leum agency (YPFB), entirely responsible to date for this development, 
lacks sufficient capital to increase production substantially. However, the 
Bolivian government is encouraging foreign private investment under 
the 1955 petroleum code,6 which is considered to be as favorable to pri-
vate capital as any in Latin America. Foreign oil companies, including 
Gulf and Shell, are active in exploration YPFB, partly with Gulf financing, 
is constructing a pipeline through Chile to the Pacific Coast which may 
be in operation in late 1958. While these developments may contribute 
greatly to the country’s eventual foreign exchange earnings, production 
on a large scale cannot be expected for perhaps five years. YPFB has so far 
cooperated fully with foreign private firms, but its future attitude may be 
conditioned by prospects for maintaining a satisfactory level in its own 
operations, which will in turn require additional financing.
POLITICAL TRENDS
The Regime and its Support
15. The austerity measures adopted by the government under the sta-
bilization program and the emphasis on a freer economy were opposed 
by the leftist factions of the MNR and the labor movement, led by Juan 
Lechin, Executive Secretary of the Bolivian Workers Federation (COB), 
and by Vice-President Nuflo Chavez. Their challenge was accepted by 
President Siles, whose reputation for selfless dedication to duty had won 
for him and his program considerable popular support. The attempt to 
5 See Annex for Table on Production and Export of Principal Metals. [Footnote is in 
the source text.]
6 Under the terms of the code, Bolivia excludes foreign government enterprises. 
Because of this provision, Brazil’s petroleum monopoly cannot participate in exploitation 
of a large and promising area in Bolivia now covered by a joint concession under a 1938 
agreement between the Bolivian and Brazilian governments. [Footnote is in the source text.]
