“The sums referred to will be paid in Peruvian silver soles or in Chilean silver coin of the kind that circulated at the time when the Treaty of October 20, 1883, was signed. “Article XVI. The total products of the customhouse at Arica are assigned for the payment of the indemnity mentioned in the preceding article.” As there is no apparent reason for adopting a basis of a different sort, the Arbitrator holds that the payment of the ten millions should be made in the following amounts and at the following times: One million within ten days after the proclamation by the Arbitrator of the result of the plebiscite; A second million within the year following; and Two millions at the end of each year of the subsequent four years. These sums shall be paid in Peruvian silver soles or in Chilean silver coin equivalent to the kind in circulation on October 20, 1883. The total revenues of the Custom House at Arica are assigned as security for the above payments. THIRD—THE BOUNDARY QUESTIONS—TARATA AND CHILCAYA The remaining questions relate to the boundaries of the territory to which Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon refers. The Article describes that territory as follows: “The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, bounded on the north by the River Sama from its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of Boliva to its mouth at the sea, on the south by the ravine and River Camarones, on the east by the Republic of Bolivia, and on the west by the Pacific Ocean, shall continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean laws and authority during a period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date of the ratification of the present treaty of peace.” THE NORTHERN BOUNDARY—TARATA Immediately after the signing of the treaty, a dispute arose as to the northern boundary and the controversy has continued ever since. Chile contends that the treaty established a river line, that is, the River Sama from its source to its mouth and that this line should be defined and followed as the northern boundary irrespective of any Peruvian provincial lines. According to Chile’s contention, the territory in question would
