1188 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement UR–17. Memorandum of the Conversation1  Washington, September 20, 1960. SUBJECT Meeting Between Sr. Haedo, Member of the National Council of Uruguay and Forthcoming President of that country2 and President Eisenhower, September 20, 1960. PARTICIPANTS United States

Uruguay President Dwight D. Eisenhower

National Councilor Haedo Ambassador Robert F. Woodward Ambassador Carlos A. Clulow Mr. C. A. Boonstra, ARA Mr. F. vanReigersburg, LS The President at 11 a.m. welcomed Councilor Haedo and mentioned the painting, on a chair in the office, by Manuel Rosé entitled, “Sunset in the Sierra de Minas” which the Councilor had sent as a gift to the President. After being seated, Councilor Haedo opened the conversation by remarking jocularly about Uruguay’s reputation as a country in which all sorts of radical movements flourished such as Castroism, Peronism, and Communism. In fact, he said, this is not the case. Uruguay is a small and stable country, but in common with other countries it has a need for improved internal security. To enhance this, he suggested that it may be a good idea to hold a meeting of police experts from all of the Latin American countries in Montevideo, “something like an Interpol meeting”. This could provide an opportunity for a discussion of police measures needed to improve internal security. To the extent possible such a meeting should be without publicity. At the same time it is becoming necessary to consider in Uruguay the provision of small arms for the police. In this connection he referred to the program of military assistance and suggested that present regulations both for military assistance and for the Uruguayan military forces should be interpreted more broadly so that the necessary small arms could be provided to the police. Even above these conditions, however, the Councilor said that he wished to emphasize the basic importance of financial security. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 733.00/9–2060. Confidential. Co-drafted by Clarence A. Boenstra, Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs, and Fernando A. Van [illegible in the original] of the Division of language Services. Information on the [illegible in the original] was approved in the White House on September 23. 2 Councilor Haedo visited Washington before traveling to New York to head the Uruguayan delegation to the U.N. General Assembly, scheduled to begin its fifteenth regular session on September 29, 1960.
