1104 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX having delivered the decisions and almost immediately focused in on President Carter’s decision to offer Egypt F–15 aircraft. He stated that the F–15 impact was definitely political in that the decision to offer to Egypt would have great impact throughout the entire region. He stated that “for the first time, we are in balance with Israel.” On the F–15, “The time will come when we will ask for it. Now you have offered us many variants (options) so now we must decide.”4 [Omitted here is discussion of the U.S. Rapid Deployment Force, area and regional military concerns, and McGiffert’s recent trip to China.] 4 McGiffert repeated Carter’s decisions to Mubarak in a Febrary 23 meeting between them, stating “the President’s decisions were final for this budget cycle and that he [McGiffert] was not in Egypt to bargain.” Mubarak “told Mr. McGiffert that the United States must set the numbers of F–15s that will be made available. Mr. McGiffert pointed out that within the financial constraints of the President’s decisions, the choice was Egypt’s, but that Egypt should understand that these prices were only estimates. The Vice President then exchanged views with Mr. McGiffert on the psychological and political impact of the F–15 issue. He stated that Egypt cannot be left to appear militarily weak in front of ‘all these people, ’ i.e. Libya, Saudi Arabia and Israel” and appealed for “more equipment and faster deliveries.” (Memorandum of Conversation, February 23; Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–81–0446, DEM Memcons/Reporting Cables) 344. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 28, 1980 SUBJECT UN Settlements Resolution: VBB (U) Following a Vance-McHenry meeting this morning,2 the issue of our vote on the UN settlements resolution3 has now come immediately to the fore. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 55, Israel: Settlements: 7/79–7/80. Confidential. Sent for action. 2 A record of this meeting has not been found. 3 The proposed draft resolution (S/13827), drawing upon the reports of the United Nations Security Council Commission created on March 22, 1979, to examine Israeli settlements in the territories occupied in the 1967 war (see footnote 2, Document 273), con-
