1658  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
If Washington decides that we should go along with Macmillan 
approach we will need to know what kind of initial quota would be 
acceptable. Recommend thinking on this point be urgently undertaken.
Villard
465.	 Memorandum From Panofsky to Killian1
Washington, May 1, 1959
SUBJECT
Preliminary Findings of the Working Group of the Panel on High Altitude Detection
At a meeting on 1 May 1959, a Working Group of the Panel on 
High Altitude Detection considered the problem of identifying nuclear 
explosions in the region between 50 and 100,000 kilometers. This region 
was chosen since it was believed this would eliminate the problems of 
both fallout and communications disturbances.
The Working Group came to the following preliminary conclusions:
1) Detection of unshielded bombs of low yield at distances of 
100,000 kilometers is possible with high confidence from terrestrial sta­
tions by means of both direct emission of light and fluorescence of the 
upper atmosphere induced by bomb x-­rays. Cloud cover will probably 
not reduce this capability substantially.
2) Identification should involve signals arising from some other 
effect than thermal radiation alone. Of the various possibilities, radar 
backscatter may be particularly significant since it does not necessarily 
depend on the thermal x-­rays emitted from the bomb as do most of 
the other effects. Other identification aids are: a) magnetic field per­
turbations, b) modification of the Van Allen radiation as measured in a 
­satellite, c) ionospheric perturbations, and d) direct radio signal.
3) Special problems exist in the very low altitude range (50–200 kilo­
meters) where only one ground station might “see” (line of sight) the 
explosion. Consideration will be given to this problem.
4) Current judgment is that concealment of direct light emission 
is difficult but that concealment of the x-­rays which give fluorescence 
radiation and ionospheric disturbances could be effective.
1 Source: Preliminary findings of the working group on high altitude detection. Secret. 
2 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of 
the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament-­Nuclear-­Hi-­Alt-­Misc.
