484  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
5. Targeting of the Soviet [5 lines not declassified] A high priority effort 
should be undertaken to identify and target [3 lines not declassified] We 
should continue to have an option to withhold attacks [4 lines not declas-
sified] should receive further study on a high priority basis along with 
[less than 1 line not declassified] (See Issue #5)8
6. Targeting of Soviet [2 lines not declassified] This attack should be 
designed so as to minimize collateral damage to population [less than 1 
line not declassified] consistent with achievement of the attack objective. 
It should be possible to carry out this attack [1 line not declassified]
Second, [4 lines not declassified] by the US during and after the war.
We recommend that the US continue current policy with respect to the 
targeting of population, in which population, as such, is not an objective tar-
get. At the same time, we recommend continuing to plan. [2 lines not 
declassified] Unless Soviet civil defense becomes far more effective than 
presently estimated, there will be substantial population at risk in any 
such large scale attack, as is the case now. We find no reason to believe 
that targeting population per se, would be a more effective deterrent 
or a more useful objective in general war than targeting the specific 
economic objectives suggested above along with the control apparatus 
and military power which the Soviets appear to consider of high value. 
Furthermore, targeting population would require substantial addi-
tional allocation of weapons if we assume that the Soviet civil defense is 
implemented and effective, and therefore would divert weapons from 
other objectives. However, estimates of population fatalities will con-
tinue to be an important criterion for any decision maker contemplat-
ing the use of nuclear weapons. Our data and methodology for making 
such estimates should continue to be improved. We should also keep 
under continuous examination the feasibility and the implications for 
other targeting objectives of adjusting our targeting so as to be able to 
attack some defined portion of Soviet population even if it is evacuated 
and/or sheltered. Whether we should have a specific target set for use 
in such a case remains an unresolved issue.
7. We should continue to plan a Secure Reserve Force (SRF) as part of the 
strategic reserved forces. Our long run objectives should be to assure that 
reserve forces in a prolonged nuclear war at any stage of that conflict 
would be superior or at least comparable in capability to the forces of 
the Soviet Union. A principal objective of the Strategic Reserve Force 
would be to deny the Soviet Union the possibility of changing the cor-
relation of forces. We need to consider the role of theater-­based forces 
in a secure reserve concept and the possibilities for augmenting forces 
during a crisis or after a limited attack. We need to develop capabilities 
that would permit flexible retargeting of the reserve force for we see 
8 Issue #5 in the report is titled “Targeting Soviet Control Apparatus.”
