Czechoslovakia
291
98.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Czechoslovak Claims/Gold Issue
In response to your question, here is a history of the Czechoslovak
claims/gold issue.2
Except for East Germany, Czechoslovakia is the only East European
country with which the United States has not concluded a claims agree-
ment providing for compensation for the nationalized properties of
U.S. citizens.
Two previous agreements, negotiated and initialled ad referendum,
have not come into force. Under the more recent agreement in 1974,
Czechoslovakia would have paid $29 million (40¢ on the dollar on
outstanding principal) to U.S. nationals. This figure would include $8.5
million credited as paid in 1953 and compares favorably to agreements
reached between the U.S. and Poland, Romania, and Hungary and to
agreements reached between other Western governments and Czecho-
slovakia. The U.S. would have consented to the return to Czechoslova-
kia of 18.4 tons of Nazi-looted gold held pursuant to the Paris Repara-
tion Agreement of 1946 by the Tripartite Commission (U.S., U.K.,
France). (The U.S. holds 8.7 tons of this with the rest in London.)
Senator Long, as Chairman of the Finance Committee and floor
manager of the Trade Act of 1974, was responsible for the rejection of
this more recent agreement. The Trade Act’s Section 408 (introduced
by Senators Long and Gravel) requires that the claims agreement be
renegotiated and submitted to the Congress for approval before the
gold can be returned. Senator Long has vocally expressed dissatisfac-
tion with the State Department’s handling of this matter although a
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 18, Evening Reports (State): 7/77. Confidential. The memorandum was attached to
a July 12 Evening Report from Vance to Carter. President Carter wrote the following
instructions for Vance at end of the memorandum: “Try to let me know what the Czechs
will now accept. Then let me talk to Long. J.”
2 In an Evening Report dated July 6, Vance informed Carter that the Department
had approached Senator Long on June 28 in order to obtain his “blessing” for resuming
negotiations with the Czechoslovak Government on the claims/gold agreement. Vance
informed Carter that Long was opposed to a settlement figure of $32 million and was
strongly in favor of vesting the gold. Vance concluded: “In view of Long’s opposition
and recent unfriendly Czech behavior, at this point we plan to do no more than look
into the legal avenues open to us.” Carter wrote on the memorandum: “Give me a brief
(2 page) memo on history.” (Ibid.)
