would certainly withdraw and would spare no pains to make her
reasons for withdrawing known to the world. She would feel that
we had treated her unjustly and it is difficult to believe that she
would be in a mood to accept any negotiations. It will be difficult
to draw Peru into any negotiations at all unless United States
takes part in ultimate treaty and does something to guarantee
result. If she feels that we have treated her unjustly in this
plebiscite, it is unlikely that she will be interested in our good
offices.
(4) If Peru withdraws, either the Arbitrator must call off
proceedings on his own initiative or I must go on and hold
farcical one-sided plebiscite. If Arbitrator should, on his own
initiative, call off plebiscite, I do not know on what he would base
his action; but if one-sided plebiscite were insisted on, I should
have to vote against accepting result. It seems to me that
Arbitrator would have to sustain my position, and then Chile
would be much more disgusted with our action than she would be
were proceedings to be terminated now.
(5) Chile seems to have made up her mind fully to fact that
plebiscite will not be carried out, and according to present
Chilean member of Commission, Mr. Claro,24 she prefers
alternative of terminating now rather than to continue plebiscite
with foregone conclusion that result would be declared null and
void. My resolution for terminating proceedings is very restrained
and I believe Chile will accept it without too much clamor.
Undoubtedly Peru will be satisfied with fact of termination. Door
will be left open for further negotiations, and cause of the
plebiscitary proceedings will have been carried to logical and
legal conclusion.
(6) I desire to repeat that it is profound conviction of myself and
of all my advisers that course advocated by Department can lead
only to antagonism of one and possibly of both the parties; that
we have worked out and have furnished you with a logical
solution of impasse which will be accepted with relief by both
