Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
777
313.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Assessment of US Arms Transfer Policy (C)
Cy and Harold have forwarded an assessment of the arms transfer
policy established in PD–13 (Tab A).2 They conclude that the policy
should be retained, since it supports our national objectives in arms re-
straint and has resulted in a coordination process that ensures a wide
range of factors are taken into account in all major arms transfer
cases. (C)
However, the Secretaries do note that, despite measurable re-
straint on the part of the US, the total volume of worldwide transfers
has not diminished. As a result, they intend to recommend in the near
future that no further unilateral reductions be made in the current arms
transfer ceiling unless there is progress in our multilateral restraint ef-
forts. They also caution that a number of decisions may be required
shortly involving exceptions to PD–13. (S)
I agree with the Secretaries’ assessment. Given the high political
stakes involved, now is not the time to step away from the policy, or to
conduct a fundamental policy review. However, you could suffer do-
mestic and international political damage if you continue to be per-
ceived as consistently withholding US arms from markets that the So-
viets and other suppliers are quick to fill. The fact of higher sales
worldwide since the issuance of PD–13 makes it appear that the end re-
sult of US unilateral restraint is the encouragement of increased sales
by other countries. (C)
Therefore, without abandoning PD–13, we need to take steps that
will signal to the Soviets and others that we are reaching the limit of our
patience with their total lack of cooperation in global arms transfer re-
straint. You will receive a series of follow-on memoranda suggesting
specific steps that might be taken, beginning with the Secretaries’ forth-
coming memorandum on the FY 80 ceiling. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Secu-
rity, Box 2, Conventional Arms Transfers. Secret. Sent for information. In the upper
right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig—I won’t be eager to change the policy. J.”
2 See Document 312. On September 11, Brzezinski sent a letter to Brown and Vance
informing them that Carter had read their memorandum. He wrote “You should be
aware that he [Carter] added a note to me, ‘I won’t be eager to change the policy’.” (Li-
brary of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 78, 1977 Arms
Transfer/FMS Policy)
