Summaries of Compilations  LIII
State ownership of Bolivia’s natural resources was a central tenet 
of the governing party, the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement. It 
was politically difficult for President Siles’ government to meet foreign 
demands for full compensation for expropriated properties, and it was 
correspondingly difficult for Bolivia to attract new foreign capital to 
develop such assets as unproven oil reserves while maintaining the 
principle of public ownership. As a result, the Bolivian Government 
pressed the United States repeatedly for development loans to the state-­
run companies which managed the Bolivian mining and oil industries. 
(BL–8, 26, 33) The U.S. response was to point to the continuing compen-
sation problem in the mining industry, and to defer to private sources 
of development funds, such as Gulf Oil in the oil industry, and the 
German Salzgitter firm in the mining industry. (BL–8, 34)
In 1960, however, the Soviet Union offered to build tin mining facil-
ities and to provide oil drilling equipment and technicians in exchange 
for the establishment of full diplomatic relations between Bolivia and 
the Soviet Union. (BL–28, 35, 37, 43) Faced with the danger of expand-
ing Soviet influence on the South American mainland, and the possi-
bility that anti-American sentiment and an economic crisis might lead 
in the direction of another Communist government in Latin America, 
policymakers in Washington altered their strategy and offered direct 
loan support for Comibol, the Bolivian state-­owned mining company, 
and for Yacimentos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos, the state-­owned oil 
company. (BL–26, 29, 40, 41)
U.S. Concerns Over Bolivian Political Stability
The Eisenhower administration was, in fact, sensitive through-
out the period to the danger that political instability, exacerbated by 
economic problems, might lead to a more radical, anti-American gov-
ernment in Bolivia. The uncertain prospects for the ruling party were 
highlighted by an unsuccessful coup attempt in October 1958, and 
anti-American sentiment was underscored by violent anti-American 
demonstrations in March 1959. (BL–14, 18) It was in the U.S. interest, 
therefore, to try to shore up the Siles government, and the successor 
government of Victor Paz Estenssoro, which took office in August 1960. 
To that end, the United States provided Bolivia with substantial eco-
nomic aid, amounting to $26 million for FY 1959. (BL–12)
Aid and the Stabilization Program
United States relations with Bolivia were colored, however, by the 
fact that economic assistance was provided with conditions attached. 
Policymakers in Washington recognized that the Bolivian Government 
would prefer to receive unqualified assistance for development proj-
ects, but the conviction underlying U.S. policy was that assistance to
