Afghanistan 125 The Soviets clearly are concerned about setbacks to the Afghan communist regime, and have airlifted military equipment to help shore it up. Soviet media also has accused Pakistan, Egypt and the U.S. of supporting the insurgency. The attitude of the Government of Pakistan (GOP) is crucial in considering most CA options. Recently, the GOP has signaled to us that it may be much more forthcoming than we previously believed. President Zia, in an 11 March interview in the Saudi magazine Ukaz, implied that Islamabad would like to support the anti-communist, pro- Islamic dissidents, but has not because of Soviet support for Kabul, which might “burn Islamabad’s fingers,” and doubts as to the real strength of the Afghan dissidents. Zia also said Pakistan cannot act in isolation; it must be backed by other countries in any such move. The Director of the Pakistan Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate (ISID) requested a meeting on 28 March 1979 with the Chief of Station, Islamabad to discuss possible assistance to the Afghan insurgents. He said that the Afghans badly need small arms and ammunition and that the U.S. “surely could find a way to provide some assistance.” He added that he would guarantee that anything provided the Peshawar-based rebels would be put to good use. He said it is current GOP policy not to support the rebels “without a firm commitment from the U.S., Pakistan could not risk Soviet wrath.” In a separate development, the head of the Saudi Arabian Intelligence Service raised the Afghan question [less than 1 line not declassified] and noted that there was a real possibility that the Soviets would suffer a setback in Afghanistan. He said the Saudi Government was considering officially proposing that the U.S. aid the rebels. This approach indicates the possibility of trilateral U.S.-Pakistan-Saudi cooperation in this area. At a minimum, the Saudis could be expected to provide funds and also use their influence with the GOP to encourage Pakistan assistance to the dissidents. Other countries, probably including China, could be expected to provide at least tacit support for our programs. Soviet response to various options should be carefully gauged. We already have been falsely accused of aiding the rebels in Soviet media, and such accusations could be expected to intensify as we move forward with various programs. The Soviets easily can resupply the Afghan armed forces and they undoubtedly will step up their military aid to counter guerrilla successes. While the Soviets could provide additional “advisors,” pilots, etc., we believe they are unlikely to introduce regular troops. Should they elect to occupy the country militarily, there would be no practical way to stop them. Such a move, however, would cause serious damage to the Soviet image in the region and should serve to undermine Soviet influence and prestige throughout much of the world.
