446 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement demands that all Costa Rican political leaders assume an attitude of independent thinking and choice of action on international issues. Stemming from this very independence and quite openly coupling with it “enlightened self-­interest”, Costa Rican public opinion in all parties tends, as a matter of national pride, to adopt the feeling that a very high degree of attention and consideration should be given by the U.S. to Costa Rica’s own internal problems. From all walks of life I and the members of my staff continually hear it said: “Costa Rica has been a true and faithful friend of the United States and of democracy. What has this gotten us? Virtually nothing. Because we have been so helpful to you, you people in the United States Government seem to take us for granted. In our own struggles with our far left in Congress and in public opinion, those of us who wish to help the United States are confronted with practical political problems. We need to be able to point to concrete examples as to why it is in Costa Rica’s best selfish interest to stay four-­square on the side of the United States.” Perhaps it may prove to be impossible to tip the balance immediately back in our favor on the specific issue of trying to get more Costa Rican leadership on our side in Latin America on the Castro problem now. But personally I doubt that this is true, at least to the extent of strongly recommending that we at once take concrete steps to this end. Furthermore, I think it is true that we must act now, if only to check this harmful Costa Rican attitude from growing worse. Specifically there are at least three local problems on which we could help if we could give immediate loans or aid to Costa Rica. The first is the critical need to relieve the public water shortage in San José. Anything done on this would have a terrific immediate public impact right here in the capital where national public opinion is moulded. The price tag on the first stage of this project, which would cure the current water shortage, is estimated at about $3.5 million. A study under Point IV as to the general requirements has been made and paid for by us. Before a specific program could be started, a detailed engineering study at a cost of about $150,000–$200,000 must be made. A grant of this amount with expressions of encouragement that a loan for the final project would be favorably considered would have far-­ reaching public effects, but it alone would not suffice for the political objective envisaged, because the substantive work would have to come much later. Secondly, Costa Rica’s two-­year-­old application for $5 million of DLF 10-­year (or better) money to beef up the splendid rural credit system of the country would have great impact, and so far as the Embassy knows needs very little if any more paper work. This loan is particularly important because of the acute internal problem involving the entire banking situation following on the probable loss of $2–$3 million through the coffee scandal and the sharp internal dispute arising out
