948  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
and hire pilots. As an economic matter, the cut-­throat competition does 
not result in building additional modern airplanes. Pilots and equip­
ment shift from one line to the other with no accumulation of transport 
assets available to the Department of Defense in an emergency. General 
Quesada repeated that competitive bidding was destroying the princi­
ple of a regulated industry.
Mr. Durfee pointed out that the Civil Aeronautics Board had not 
taken part in the preparation of the draft policy paper. He referred 
to Page 10 of the paper, which suggested that the present system of 
negotiating contracts was to be continued. CAB did not approve of the 
present system of negotiating contracts, but otherwise had no objection 
to the paper. The present practice of MATS in awarding business by 
competitive bidding led to cut-­throat competition, which concerned the 
CAB. One of the largest certificated international air cargo carriers was 
now on the edge of insolvency due to its competitive bidding practices. 
Since 1958 FAA, the Department of Defense, and CAB had attempted 
to solve this problem, but had been unable to do so because CAB has 
no power to regulate international air rates. If and when CAB obtained 
the power to regulate international rates, it would probably establish a 
minimum rate, although Defense has objected to such minimum rates 
on the grounds that (1) all bids would tend to be at the minimum rate 
and (2) Defense would then have to choose a carrier to which a contract 
was to be awarded on some basis other than rates. Mr. Durfee felt that 
this difficulty could, however, be resolved; but unless CAB obtains the 
power to fix international rates, the present system of contracts may not 
assist in the development of a modern cargo aircraft.
Mr. Douglas admitted that the situation was difficult. He would like 
to see the private air carriers build up an increased capacity. However, 
he felt that Defense had no alternative to awarding contracts on the basis 
of the lowest bid. Defense had tried various other systems in awarding 
contracts and had always run afoul of the Comptroller General. Mr. 
Douglas then pointed out that the Policy Guidance in NSC 5919 might 
lead to a possible misunderstanding with respect to certificated carriers. 
This term could be construed to include only a very few carriers and in 
this case the increase in cost would be high. The Department of Defense 
could live with some thirty certificated carriers. Mr. Douglas felt the 
Department of Defense had made considerable progress in increasing 
the participation of private airlines in MATS business, inasmuch as 53 
per cent of the personnel and 18 per cent of the cargo were now carried 
under commercial contract. The President asked how much traffic was 
carried by ship. Mr. Douglas said that in the last two years the Air Force 
had sent 95 per cent of its personnel and dependents by air, while the 
Army had sent a smaller number by air. Mr. Douglas pointed out that 
it cost less to send military personnel and dependents by air than to
