320 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI similarly benefit Gorbachev politically by subjecting strategic military forces to the same economic pressures as domestic projects. A variation on this approach would link unilateral reductions with a challenge to the U.S. to undertake reciprocal actions. The Soviet argument could parallel that which we employed in presenting the President’s verification/stability measures—­that the sides could achieve stability and predictability benefits by implementing now certain reductions or exercising restraint in certain programs, such as decommissioning SSBNs, limiting ALCM deployments or observing a moratorium on SLCM production. Unlike a purely unilateral move, this approach would probably be intended to serve primarily symbolic, propaganda goals. If so, it would reflect a compromise option, possibly with those who want to slow down the START process. II. A second approach would entail taking concrete steps to move START forward by proposing solutions to overcome current impasses. These solutions could represent serious movement in the Soviet position and display that Gorbachev is in control of the START decision-­ making process in Moscow. Several candidate options are consistent with this approach. — First, the Soviets could accept one or more of our verification/ stability measures (VSM) and propose to work the details in Wyoming and Geneva. However, they will certainly argue that several of the measures should be extended to cover cruise missiles and heavy bombers. Nazarkin hinted to me on several occasions that he thought Moscow would respond favorably to these proposals.5 Karpov implied this also, and mentioned specifically that VSM should be expanded to cover strategic systems other than ballistic missiles. — A second possibility would be on SLCMs.6 We have been getting lots of signals that the Soviets have been considering a number of different approaches to SLCMs. The SLCM issue is highly visible, both in Western Europe and in the strategic community, so a SLCM proposal would be presented as a dramatic initiative to break the START deadlock.7 A Soviet proposal on SLCMs would likely reflect some of the possibilities that have already been floated with us or in the public arena. For example, Nazarkin pressed hard for the establishment of a working group to discuss SLCM verification and suggested that the Soviets could accept each side’s freedom to mix nuclear and conventional systems within a negotiated aggregate ceiling. A SLCM initiative is likely to repeat these ideas, possibly including also a proposal 5 Baker underlined “that he thought Moscow would respond favorably to these proposals.” 6 Baker underlined “on SLCMs.” 7 Baker underlined “a SLCM proposal would” and “presented as a dramatic initiative to break the START deadlock.”
