74 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement V. OVER-ALL PROSPECTS 66. Likelihood of General War. Despite the pride which the Soviet leaders take in their achievements and the confidence with which they seem to view the future, they still have and are likely to retain a healthy respect for US power. Even when the USSR acquires a substantial capa­ bility in ICBMs it will still be faced with great uncertainties about its capacity to wage successful warfare against the US. Moreover, like the leaders in the West, the Soviet leaders have a keen appreciation of the extraordinary destructiveness of nuclear weapons and of the dangers which they pose to victor and vanquished alike. We believe it unlikely, therefore, that the Soviet leaders, for at least the next five years, will deliberately initiate general war or embark upon a course which they believe involves a serious risk of general war. 67. During the foreseeable future there will be a constant jock­ eying for position between the US and the USSR. This will create for the world’s leaders a most difficult problem in calculating the risks involved in their actions—­or their inactions—­in particular situations. Failure to calculate accurately could lead to various conceivable forms of local war or even to a general conflict. We do not see any easy way to determine whether local wars will break out and whether, if they do, they can be kept limited, or to determine what techniques, weapons, diplomatic warnings, and maneuvers are most likely to contribute to a limitation of such conflicts. We believe that all the major powers will attempt to keep wars limited if they do occur, but the various pressures on chiefs of government in particular situations, the rapid­ ity with which events often occur, and the great importance of timing and of time, often confuse and distort the intentions of the parties involved. The circumstances of today with respect to the importance of surprise and with respect to the widespread destructiveness of war are unprecedented in human history. We are not persuaded to believe that wars would remain limited simply because it would be sensible not to allow them to expand. On the contrary, we can conceive of a variety of ways in which they could expand even though it was the initial intention of the parties to limit them. Consequently, we believe that the chances of keeping wars limited, whenever major areas or causes might appear to either party to be affected, are at best not too promising. 68. The United Nations, judging by its performance during the Suez crisis, might prove in some instances a useful instrument in pre­ venting or limiting conflicts. For example, if a country is prepared to compromise rather than to fight or to extend a conflict, the UN can pro­ vide a means to do so with less loss of prestige. In most cases, however, the UN probably will not be effective in halting a conflict unless the US and USSR happen to be agreed on such an outcome.
