March 27–December 31, 1979
919
David Framework, Sadat strongly differing with me said, “they are
right.”
8. At various points during the conversation, Sadat reflected preoc-
cupation with the Saudi position, saying he did not fully understand it
and reiterating his sense of grievance with the Saudis generally and
Prince Fahd in particular. He would, however, rise above this and was
prepared to fulfill his commitments, in cooperation with the United
States, for security in the Arabian Peninsula and Persian Gulf. In this
connection he repeated his earlier offer of “full facilities” for the United
States to cooperate with Egypt in maintaining stability and security in
the Gulf and in the Sudan. If the United States has a problem with
Saudi Arabia in connection with the forthcoming Security Council de-
bate, Sadat said, we should try to handle this in our bilateral relation-
ship with the Saudis. He stressed that he fully supports strong
U.S.-Saudi relations and that we should do what we need to in order to
reassure the Saudis in our bilateral relations. Above all, however, we
must be cautious about any move in the Security Council which could
frighten the Israelis.
9. Noting Sadat’s repeated references to the Saudis, I took this
opening to make the point to him that it would be helpful to us if he
could avoid criticisms of Saudi Arabia. Sadat said he would refrain
from such criticisms and, what is more, would repair his relations with
them when that became possible, despite all that they had done to him.
10. Following our meeting and after our brief remarks to the press,
I took Sadat aside to make certain he fully understood that our present
position was to move ahead immediately with a U.S. resolution in the
Security Council, if possible with the Israelis but if necessary without
them, to pre-empt a harder line Arab resolution which we would have
to veto and which would risk strong reactions from the other Arabs.
11. In reflecting on Saturday night’s meeting, I must admit to
having been unprepared for Sadat’s almost total preoccupation with
not “scaring” the Israelis, his confidence that there can be a break-
through by the end of the year as a result of our support and his per-
sonal efforts with Begin, and his assumption that we can contain the
Saudi reaction to a U.S. veto in the Security Council. He bases the latter
on his conviction that the Saudis know they depend “100 percent” on
us for their security, and on a basic assumption that we have already
made a deal with the Saudis, although I did my best to disabuse him of
this. Atherton and I were both convinced that he believes firmly that
our basic reason for going forward with a resolution is to fulfill a deal
we made with Fahd. I do not believe we ever convinced him to the
contrary.
12. It is relevant to the foregoing to report that in a call on a senior
Foreign Ministry official earlier Saturday afternoon, Leonard was told
