662  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
significant statement that Belize activities fostered by Governor4 
against Guatemala were for purpose of countering Guatemalan pro-
paganda. Implication was that Governor Belize (sic) welcomed exile 
activity against Ydígoras. President said it would not matter if an exile 
attack were made on Guatemala from Belize or if they were able to 
get in Guatemala and then attack Belize thereby involving him and 
putting fat in fire. He had accordingly told Colonel Antillón to men-
tion subject in Washington. If the above does not seem make much 
sense, I agree.
At end of long conference where maps were reviewed in 
detail, I finally pinned the President down repeating I expected go 
Washington and what should I tell State Department about move-
ment of troops. He said he would not send troops unless he were 
menaced. He promised that there would be no troops moved without 
first letting me know. (Army Attaché5 in discreet inquiry, including 
visits to troop units today unable find any evidence of prepara-
tions for troops movements). I thanked him and said this was fine 
and I hardly thought it would be necessary; that speaking without 
instruction, I felt he could be assured that were there any indication 
of possible attack from Belize the U.S. could influence Her Majesty’s 
Government to contain it.
Comment: On the several occasions on which thus general subject 
of Belize has been disserted upon by Ydígoras, this was longest and 
most detailed and revealed deep resentments of long standing. Such 
resentments have in no way been attenuated and he now is person-
ally both angered at Governor for treatment given at time his visit to 
Benque Viejo and by English action sending Canberra bombers on visit 
Princess Margaret. Incidentally, I had to correct him rather directly on 
this when he felt Department in response to British message on subject 
virtually accused Guatemala of bad intentions.
I had hoped President’s reply today would dispel necessity for trip 
to Washington. But in view Department’s mention other matters and 
President’s gnawing concern with Belize question feel it may be desir-
able consult and will proceed unless receive telephone call to contrary 
tomorrow morning June 7.
Mallory
4 Sir Colin Hardwick Thornley, Governor and Commander in Chief of British 
Honduras.
5 Col. John T. Berry.
