3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
379
that the matters he had to discuss were potentially explosive for the re-
lationship. The fate of the two Soviet UN employees arrested and jailed
had started it,2 but the Secretary had then raised the matter of listening
devices in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Firyubin3 in Moscow had
given the Soviet part of the story and view of the matter, which was
quite different from the U.S. assertion of the case.
Bessmertnykh stressed, and returned to the point several times,
that there should be no linkage of the matter in the Embassy and the
two jailed Soviets. He wanted first to discuss the Embassy matter. Gro-
myko had promised some information on U.S. acts of the same calibre
against the Soviets here in Washington, New York and San Francisco,
and Bessmertnykh was instructed to give some brief information on
that subject. Reading from a Russian language nonpaper, which he did
not hand over, Bessmertnykh said:
Begin Quote. In the last several years there were found in Soviet in-
stallations in the U.S. more than 50 various special electronic devices
which were used for listening to conversations held in buildings and
over telephones.
—1977: a special cable was discovered, and a special device, which
was connected to the internal telephone system at the country resi-
dence of the Ambassador at Pioneer Point.
—1975: in the building occupied by the Soviet Trade Mission in the
U.S., on Connecticut Avenue, several radio transmitters were discov-
ered, designed for listening to conversations in working offices, in-
cluding the office of the Trade Representative himself. Earlier, several
special preamplified microphones were found in the former trade of-
fice building at 1511 16th Street, N.W. (these were found when the So-
viets were moving out of that building).
—1973 and 1974: in the building of the Soviet Consulate General at
San Francisco, there were found several radio transmitters, preampli-
fied microphones and two cables used for listening to conversations in
the offices and living quarters.
We informed U.S. authorities and the U.S. side requested no pub-
licity. This is the same way we have proceeded in cases of agents, acting
at the specific request of the U.S. side in giving no publicity. End Quote.
Turning to the two jailed Soviets, and reiterating the hope that the
U.S. side would separate that case from the matter he had just ad-
dressed, Bessmertnykh said the Soviet side was very much concerned.
As Gromyko had said, it was potentially very dangerous for the rela-
tionship. If not handled in a mutually acceptable way, the Soviets
2 See footnote 6, Document 109.
3 Not further identified.
