622  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
not helped by threats of that kind. I hoped he did not mean it the way 
it sounded. I was perfectly willing for public to judge on basis of facts 
concerning our discussions. However I did not see how exchange of 
public statements would help progress.
33. I said I was also surprised he would purport to speak for 
­American people. I believed I was in position to do that. However, 
I did agree that American people desired improve relations between 
our two countries. I had tried to point out during meetings effect on our 
relations and talks of Americans still imprisoned his country.
34. I said I thought part of difficulty of present situation is lack 
of complete understanding concerning meaning of first agreement 
reached between us. At time that agreement reached, I had tried my 
very best obtain common understanding of words in agreement, par­
ticularly word “expeditiously.” However, Wang not willing reach such 
understanding with me. This points up and emphasises need of full 
understanding in any other agreements we may reach. In that spirit 
I have been trying to discuss matters with Wang.
35. I said that as I had stated this morning, I proposed next meeting 
be January 12. At that meeting I would expect to be in position to make 
further comments concerning Wang’s December 1 draft and make sug­
gestions concerning amendments we would consider desirable. My 
government was continuing its study of draft and of entire matter. I did 
not expect to be in position to give our views until January 12 because 
of interposition of Christmas and New Years holidays.
36. I said magnitude and delicacy of question is such I did not see 
what could be gained by forcing pace of discussion. Wang himself had 
said question under discussion is most serious. World and our own 
peoples are more interested in solidity of agreement than in speed. We 
should certainly not attempt sacrifice solidity and satisfactoriness of 
agreements to speed. I felt it would be more satisfactory of Wang would 
agree to January 12 for our next meeting.
37. Wang replied we were now seeking ways and means for set­
tlement of conflicts between our two countries. If both sides sincere, 
100 days would certainly have been enough to get something out of 
discussions. It cannot be claimed we did not have enough time. I would 
be able to see how patient PRC side has been.
38. Wang said I had referred to terms such as threats. He could not 
accept such terms. PRC side has no intent of threats against US. In fact 
PRC side feels all along it is being threatened. Also it would not agree to let 
discussions be dragged out when sufficient time exists to achieve results.
39. Wang said as I had stated, he did not have least intent speak on 
behalf of American people. He was only expressing view that interests 
of people of whole world were identical and American people of course
