Human Rights
261
ernment, and makes its own policies.2 This foundation could: 1) funnel
money to the international human rights organizations and to national
human rights organizations operating in other countries (as well as to
American human rights groups), based on the value of their work;
2) provide much needed support for refugee resettlement efforts, in-
cluding the retraining (language, professional standards, etc.) and
placement of professionals (doctors, lawyers, scientists, etc.) who are
political refugees. In particular, the Foundation could finance the reset-
tlement of such key individuals—not in the US where their talents are
wasted—but in other third world nations badly in need of these skills.
This would redirect the classic “brain drain” in the interest of pro-
moting both human rights and economic development; 3) support the
work of NGOs in the multinational organizations particularly the UN,
where they are the source of crucial data on human rights conditions;
4) set up and award an annual human rights prize, with a sizeable
award comparable to the Nobel, to recognize an outstanding contribu-
tion to human rights anywhere in the world.3 The Foundation could
probably employ (depending on the legislative terms of its creation)
foreign nationals who could provide essential expertise in certain areas,
and would give it a slightly multinational image.
(2) Reapportionment of Support from the Violators to the Violatees
The Administration could publicly announce that it was rechan-
neling certain funds which would have gone to governments guilty of
human rights violations, and would spend it instead on those who had
suffered from these violations.4 This would obviously have to have
Congressional approval, but if it were announced in this way, it would
probably get it. These funds might either be spent directly by the gov-
ernment, or could be redirected through the Foundation or to an inter-
national body of some sort, for example, the UN Commission on Ref-
ugees. (In view of last week’s Congressional denial of the funds needed
to support the additional 15,000 Indochinese refugees paroled earlier
this summer, this may prove to be the only way we can get help to these
people.)5 This policy would be closely linked to:
2 Brzezinski wrote “good idea” in the margin next to this sentence.
3 Brzezinski placed a vertical line in the margin next to the portion of this sentence
that begins with “source” and ends with “Nobel.”
4 Brzezinski drew an arrow in the margin pointing at the beginning of this sentence
and wrote “interesting but needs development.”
5 Presumable reference to the passage of H.R. 7769 by the House on September 27.
H.R. 7769 allowed Indochinese refugees (classified as parolees) who had resided in the
United States for 2 years to apply for permanent resident alien status, extended the fed-
eral resettlement aid program (which would temporarily expire on September 30), pro-
vided for a general phase-out of the program, and allocated $25 million for job training
and placement programs. The Senate subsequently passed a companion measure on Oc-
tober 10. (Congress and the Nation, Volume V, 1977–1980, pp. 46–47)
