868  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
NI–19.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to 
the Department of State1

Managua, October 20, 1959, 11 a.m.
121. PASS CINCARIB IN RESPONSE CC 66897E2
Department circular telegram 1493
Overall U.S. objectives Nicaragua in country team’s view describ-
able following terms:
(A) Encouraged development stable political systems along dem-
ocratic representative anti-Communist lines without damage to all 
important principle nonintervention. Progress in attainment this objec-
tive believed indispensable for maintenance attitudes this country 
friendly to U.S. and for retention Nicaraguan Government’s and peo-
ple’s support U.S. world policies.
(B) Encourage development strong, self-­reliant economy based 
free enterprise system in ultimate U.S. interest.
(C) Complementary to (A) and (B) above and looking to facilitation 
those aims, strengthening of U.S. ties by demonstrating friendly, help-
ful interest in peoples welfare through advances in education, health, 
sanitation and in field of labor, which will result in more efficient use 
human resources.
(D) Foster U.S. concepts of responsibility for hemispheric defense 
of and internal security.
(E) Maintain before Nicaraguan people accurate reflection of what 
U.S. is and stands for as means explaining our policies and obtaining 
better understanding their aims. Similarly, diffusion of cultural activi-
ties intended to gain wider acceptance U.S. ideals in educational, intel-
lectual and artistic matters.
No single program among those now existing or contemplated 
1961 in Nicaragua is dedicated to achievement overall political objec-
tive stated in (A) above. Analysis all proposed U.S. programs, however, 
as well as observation past U.S. activities reflect important continu-
ing contributions from all program sources without exception toward 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 717.5-MSP/10–2059. Confidential.
2 No copy of this military telegram was found in Department of State files.
3 Circular telegram 149 to all chief of mission, August 19, solicited the Embassies’ 
view on the U.S. role and objectives in Mutual Security Programs and non-U.S. programs 
for fiscal year 1961. (120.171/8–1959)
