1977 101 Secretary Brown noted that there was a risk in overstating capability since the Soviets might respond with what they perceive to be a capability equal to our puffed-­up capability and then the whole situation goes unstable. General Brown noted that he had trouble believing that the Soviets believe everything that they hear about US capabilities since they very closely follow what actually goes on in Congress and through the newspapers and that in reality we do not fool them with any public statements that might be exaggerated. Secretary Brown noted that while we do not fool them with the actual numbers, there still is uncertainty in their estimates of our capability and, in particular, how we would use it. General Brown concurred in this noting that some cases we do not even know ourselves how we would use it. Secretary Brown then asked Robert Bowie to comment on how the Soviets see the strategic balance, how the rest of the world and, in particular, our European Allies see it, and what the Soviets are trying to do with their strategic systems. Bob Bowie indicated that the Soviets probably also think there is a rough balance in strategic systems at this time, and that our chief Allies also see the situation to be a rough equivalence in strategic systems. However, there is a strong difference of opinion on just what the Soviets are doing. He noted that the ongoing improvements in Soviet ICBM capability did not appear to us as reflecting an attitude of seeking assured destruction, but rather that they were seeking war-­fighting capabilities; however, this is not necessarily how they see it. We assume that they should go for the types of weapons suitable for strategic objectives similar to ours; however, it is not clear just how they see the strategic situation. Secretary Brown noted that if it is their idea that one must have war-­fighting capability for deterrence, then they might not be deterred unless we also have war-­fighting capability. Bob Bowie noted that there are differences of views on this question. Some believe they might take more risks in their behavior if we do not counter such things as their improved war-­fighting capability. Even if the Soviets achieve some superiority, they are still unlikely to see nuclear war as a desirable thing; nevertheless, from a political standpoint, they might see less risk in other activities. He noted that there are a fair number of people in the intelligence agencies who see the current situation in these terms. Spurgeon Keeny noted that he agreed that the real purpose of strategic forces was to deter nuclear war, and the key to this was having assured retaliatory capability. At the same time, there was also a need to maintain a perceived balance in strategic forces such as currently existed. Secretary Brown injected that Soviets today had more capability in some areas. Keeny responded that both sides do—­that no one is ahead in all individual categories. With respect to the Soviets’ obsession
