Chapter 2, January–June 1989  129
25.	
Memorandum From Richard Davis and William Tobey of the 
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for 
National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, June 5, 1989
SUBJECT
NSC Meeting on NSR–14 Arms Control Review—Defense & Space and START 
Issues; Wednesday, June 7, 1989, 10:45–12:00
This will be the first of three NSC meetings to review the details 
of our negotiating position in START and Defense & Space, before the 
talks resume on June 19. This meeting will continue the discussion of 
our basic START objectives begun during the May 25 NSC meeting, 
review our D&S position, continue the May 25 NSC discussion on 
where we are going in START, and review the basic numerical limits in 
START. You also may want to take the opportunity to broach the subject 
of a new initiative on deMIRVing.
Given the short time available before negotiations resume, the NSR-
14 review has concentrated on options that meet one of two standards. 
They should either: (1) be necessary because our current position is not 
consistent with our interests (in other words we could not take “yes” for 
an answer); or (2) be an opportunity to advance the negotiations (and/or 
put a Bush imprint on them), consistent with national security. Promising 
approaches that require further analysis have been deferred.
At Tab I2 is a meeting memorandum, with discussion papers pre-
pared by the PCC, for you to forward to the President. Your copies of 
the discussion papers are at Tab II.3
Objectives for the Meeting
Our START approach was discussed briefly by the NSC at the May 
25 meeting. We recommend you and the President use this opportunity 
to continue a frank discussion of our overall direction in START and 
Defense & Space. This meeting must answer the fundamental ques-
tion: Is the fundamental direction of our NST approach the right one? 
Thus, before turning to specific START and Defense & Space issues, the 
agenda calls for picking upon the “heart-­to-­heart” discussion begun at 
the 25 May 1989 NSC meeting. To support this discussion, our memo 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSC Meetings Files, OA/ID 90001–006, NSC0021—June 07, 1989—
Strategic Arms Reduction Talks, Defense Policy, Space Issues. Secret. Sent for action. Sent 
through Kanter.
2 Printed as Document 26.
3 Attached but not printed. See Tabs D1 and D2, Document 26.
