40 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 11. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs-Designate (Bergsten) to Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal1 Washington, March 21, 1977 SUBJECT Shoes—For Today’s EPG Meeting I have looked long and hard at the shoe case, hunting for a reasonable compromise. Such compromises are available for color television sets and sugar, and we are actively pursuing them. But I have concluded that we should limit our shoe action to beefed-up structural reform, for six basic reasons: 1. The industry is a chronic case of inexorable consolidation and decline. Import relief won’t help the small firms; it certainly won’t trigger increased investment. The big ones don’t need it. 2. Ford’s decision to avoid import relief in May 1976,2 despite his “commitment” to the industry, is the benchmark against which our decision will be judged—not the ITC or industry recommendations. 3. This is especially true as it will be our first big one. Any restrictions will be widely interpreted as presaging “a protectionist tilt,” with severe costs, even if subsequently proven to be unfounded. 4. This will be the only big U.S. trade decision prior to the summit. (Sugar, being agricultural, is viewed differently.) Adoption of restrictions would greatly weaken the President’s position, and significantly undermine our efforts to (a) strengthen the trade pledge and (b) rejuvenate the MTN. 5. The effect of restrictions on the North-South dialogue would also be severe. Twenty-two separate countries, virtually all of them LDCs, would be hit with sharp cutbacks (even if the base period is liberalized). 1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, EC–5–2 Economic Policy Group (EPG) 1977. Confidential. Sent through Solomon. Printed from a copy that indicates that Bergsten and Solomon initialed the memorandum. Tabs A–E are not attached. A list at the end of the memorandum identifies them: Tab A, “STR paper” (printed as Tab A to Document 10), Tab B, “Economic Effects of Various Options”; Tab C, “Editorials on Shoe Case” (see footnote 3, Document 10); Tab D, “Analysis of Various Options;” and Tab E, “Detailed Description of Possible Structural Reform Program for Shoes.” 2 Apparently a reference to Ford’s April 16, 1976, denial of import relief to the footwear industry. See footnote 2, Document 10.
