Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX of U.S. policy toward Europe by focusing on the four key issues. The basis for that review should be four short, sharply-focused papers, clearly setting out the issues and alternative U.S. approaches, together with their implications.” Specifically on Eastern Europe, the Policy Review Committee was directed to “spell out the practical differences between PRM–9 response option 3—bias toward Eastern European countries that are either somewhat liberal internally or somewhat independent of Moscow—and option 4—an effort to improve relations across the board with no prior ranking. How would different countries be affected differently by the two approaches? What are the implications of the two approaches for our approach to human rights, trade and U.S. relations with the Soviet Union? The review should also identify any special cases—for instance, perhaps, the GDR—and suggest what might be gained by expanded contacts with them.” (Ibid.) Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated SUBJECT PERSPECTIVES—Human Rights in the USSR and Eastern Europe 1. In recent weeks the tempo of dissident activity and harsh official reaction has accelerated throughout Eastern Europe. The pre-Christmas exchange of imprisoned Soviet dissident, Vladimir Bukovskiy, for Chilean Communist leader Luis Corvalan received international media coverage and focused renewed attention on the human rights scene. Since the exchange, the Orlov Committee, organized to monitor Moscow’s compliance with the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), and other Soviet dissidents have endured a rash of arrests, interrogations and house searches where the KGB has planted false evidence. In January a group of Czech intellectuals and Prague Spring leaders issued a legalistic human rights manifesto, “Charter 77;” Prague reacted immediately with police harassment. These events provide an appropriate peg for reviving world interest 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
