506 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement of high-­ranking officers and some terrorist activities directed against individuals in these forces are probably also having an adverse effect on their loyalty to Trujillo. 4. Since our previous estimate, the economic situation has deteriorated further. Business is stagnant, and an increasing number of people are suffering economic hardship. In addition to some flight of private capital, members of the Trujillo family are reported to have made substantial withdrawals from the national reserve bank—­a development which might seriously weaken the government’s financial position. Even if these reports prove unfounded or exaggerated, the spread of rumors that such withdrawals were taking place would obviously contribute to a decline in public confidence in the regime. 5. On the other hand, Trujillo himself shows no signs of relinquishing control, and there is no information to indicate that discontent in the military is wide-­spread. The plans of the internal opposition probably have been set back by the regime’s repressive measures. The numerous exile groups lack cohesion and effectiveness, despite the encouragement and support given them, not only by Castro, but also by moderate leaders such as Venezuelan President Betancourt. There are deep divisions between pro-Communist and anti-Communist elements within these groups. The Succession 6. The character of the regime which will eventually succeed Trujillo will depend upon the time and circumstances of Trujillo’s departure. In present circumstances, we think it unlikely that Trujillo will be overthrown by a Castro-­type invasion or revolution. It is more likely that Trujillo will eventually be forced to leave by the military acting with the encouragement and support of the upper and middle classes and the Church. The longer his departure is delayed, the more explosive the situation is likely to become. 7. Castro has already failed in an attempt to overthrow the Trujillo regime through an invasion by Dominican exiles with Cuban support. His agrarian reform program has had no appreciable impact on the Dominican peasantry, who remain generally unaware of it. They generally still regard Trujillo as the Benefactor. The upper and middle classes, though increasingly disaffected toward Trujillo, are repelled by the excesses of the Castro regime in Cuba. The military also are repelled by what they have seen happening in Cuba. Thus there is now in the Dominican Republic no important element likely to support a Castro-­ type invasion or revolution. 8. Nevertheless, tension is rising in the Dominican Republic and the eventual fall of the Trujillo regime will be increasingly anticipated. In such circumstances, persons of property and military officers, apart from Trujillo’s personal associates, will become increasingly anxious to
