North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 907 —Evidently new contracts must be signed next Monday.4 Thus we must either press ahead to secure these amendments in the contracts, thereby risking a repetition of our experience with Indonesia in other countries, or seek less offensive new reporting requirements, or drop for at least this round of PL–480 shipments any effort to change the contracts with recipient governments. —This effort—which Agriculture leaked to the Washington Post last week5—has encountered a frosty reception from the Hill. Senator Inouye is livid about it and has indicated his belief that the Executive Branch is over-interpreting the Congressional intent embodied in Section 112–A. Senator Humphrey, we are told, is disturbed that the enormous effort that he put into the development of the PL–480 program over the years may be jeopardized by this ill-considered move. Twelve Senators have written to express their dismay that the United States would withhold food from less developed countries as a lever on human rights.6 —Bob Bergland evidently is eager to repeal Section 112–A of the law. But that will take time and will not resolve our immediate problem. —The continued delays in shipments that have resulted from this confusion are costly to the recipients. For example, in the seven weeks shipments have been held up, the cost of commodities desired by Indonesia has increased by $17 million. A reasonable interpretation of the law does not require us to withhold shipments from any of the intended recipients. We believe it would be desirable to expedite early dispatch of the commodities. Since this has become a public issue, however, it would be prudent to consult with the Congressional leadership and secure their understanding that for this round of shipments we will not attempt to add new amendments to PL–480 contracts, while leaving open the future of Section 112–A and how it should be interpreted by the Executive Branch. This 4 December 5. Inderfurth underlined the words “contracts must be signed next Monday.” 5 See footnote 8, Document 289. 6 Brzezinski highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins with “effort that he put into the development” and ends with “as a lever on human rights.” Fourteen Senators signed the November 16 letter to Talmadge; see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, footnote 5, Document 92. Senator Robert Dole (D–Kansas) sent a copy of the letter to Carter under cover of a November 17 memorandum requesting that he personally intervene in the matter. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File, Peace, Box PC–1, Executive, 1/20/77–1/20/81) Talmadge sent a copy of the letter to Vance and Christopher under cover of a November 18 memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Office of the Deputy Secretary, Warren Christopher, Lot 81D113, Box 18, Human Rights—PL 480)
