10 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement the lead-­zinc industry serious injury will be done to U.S. relations with a considerable number of countries in Latin America and elsewhere. Since the summer of 1957, when the Administration sponsored a bill providing for increased protection for lead and zinc,5 there have been important developments affecting the U.S. position of leadership in the world, and it can well be argued that a new situation now exists. Therefore, a new and exhaustive search has been made in the Department for an acceptable alternative. A program has been devised, consisting of assistance of various kinds for the communities, workers, and companies involved in the lead-­zinc industry, and it is being put forward separately for consideration at a high level in the Department. Opinions differ as to whether there is a worthwhile chance of getting it accepted in Congress. On this basis, it is recommended: (a) that the United States adopt, if possible, measures other than tariff increases or quotas to provide relief for the domestic lead-zinc industry, and (b) that if a tariff increase proves to be unavoidable, every effort should be made to limit its scope and duration. When the tariff increase is announced there should be a simultaneous announcement that the U.S. is prepared to participate in an international study group for lead and zinc. 2. Copper (a) Oppose the pending bills which would increase the tax on imported copper, and (b) in response to requests, if made, indicate to supplying countries a willingness to discuss copper prospects, including possible establishment of a regular study group looking toward an international copper agreement. 3. Petroleum Events in the petroleum field are moving rapidly. By the Voluntary Oil Import Program6 the Administration is trying to reduce imports into Districts I–IV to 12 per cent of domestic production, and has also imposed a limitation on imports into District V. This additional import reduction into Districts I–IV, coupled with the problem of trying to get the major oil companies to relinquish portions of their quotas to new 5 Apparent reference to H.R. 8257, submitted to the 1st Session of the 35th Congress on June 19, 1957, and companion bill S. 2376, introduced on June 24. These bills went, respectively, to the House Committee on Ways and Means, and the Senate Finance Committee; they were not acted upon during the session. 6 In July 1957 a voluntary oil import program was recommended by President Eisenhower’s Special Committee to Investigate Crude Oil Imports for the purpose of reducing programmed imports in the last half of 1957 from 970,000 barrels to 756,000 barrels daily (b/d). (Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 542, April 1, 1958; Current Economic Developments, Lot 70 D 467)
