242 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 guidance on how you would like me to respond to his comments in this area. 9. (S) The Shah appeared very despondent when I left. He said, “I guess we can wait a few more days to see what happens.” I said that while the news about country number 1 is disappointing, it was only one of a number of possibilities and that we must press ahead on the remaining ones. 93. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to Secretary of State Vance and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 11, 1979 SUBJECT Direct CIA Contact with Shahpour Bakhtiar 1. On 8 December, an officer of this Agency established direct contact [less than 1 line not declassified] with Shahpour Bakhtiar.2 An indirect channel of communications between Bakhtiar and this Agency had previously been arranged in late August, but recently Bakhtiar, because of the critical situation in Iran, reiterated his request for a personal meeting with a CIA officer. 2. During the one and one-half hour meeting with our officer, Bakhtiar said that he believes any viable future government must be slightly left of center and must include elements of the far right and far left in order to control them. He believes Khomeini has three months remaining at most and, as a result, he has been making strenuous efforts to put his organization together. Bakhtiar contended that while it may appear [less than 1 line not declassified] he is not doing much, he has in fact made a lot of progress. Specifically, he professes that: 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 95M01183R: Policy Files (1977–1981), Box 1, Folder 5: DCI Turner—Eyes Only Files— Various Subjects. Secret; Sensitive. Brzezinski and Turner agreed to show this memorandum and Kalaris’s December 5 memorandum (see Document 85) to Carter, but not to Vance. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00112R: Subject Files, Box 15, Folder 42: DCI/DDCI/Memrecs/Memos/Agendas of Brzezinski/Aaron Meetings) 2 At the top of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Bakhtiar is a dangerous contact if he should imply any US complicity (Kuwait)—be very careful. C.”
