United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 89 we requested this year. If we do not recommend additional funds for the Inter-American Bank I think our request for the Development Loan Fund should be increased by $150 to $200 million for the specific purpose of increasing its efforts in Latin America. In the overall Mutual Security Program this increase would be offset at least to some extent by continued reductions in our front aid programs. I discussed this briefly with Secretary Anderson some time ago and I will now pursue the subject further with him4 and keep you advised.5 DOUGLAS DILLON 4 Under Secretary Dillon summarized the content of this memorandum in a telephone conversation with Secretary Anderson on May 18, at 10:20 a.m. (Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations. Lot 64 D 199) 5 A memorandum from the President’s Staff Secretary, Brig. Gen. Goodpaster, to under Secretary Dillon, dated May 24, reads as follows: “The President has received your memorandum of May 17, 1960 on ‘Inter-American Development Bank.’ He asked me to tell you that he agrees generally that it would be better to use the Inter-American Bank, rather than the Development Loan Fund, for soft loans in Latin America.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series) ETA–33. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning (Smith) to the Acting Secretary of State1  Washington, July 5, 1960. SUBJECT Possible New Initiative to Reflect President Eisenhower’s Concerns Expressed at the NSC meeting on June 30, 1960.2 There is attached a rough draft describing a possible political initiative which I believe reflects the President’s mood as stated in the NSC last week. 1 Source: Department of State, PPS Files, Lot 67 D 548, “American Republics 1960– 1961.” Confidential. 2 At the 449th meeting of the NSC on June 30, President Eisenhower expressed his concern about conditions causing social unrest and political instability in many Free World nations, including several in Latin America, and the apparent inability of the United States, in spite of its aid programs, to achieve stability throughout the world. The memorandum of discussion of that meeting, prepared by Marion W. Boggs, reads in part as follows: “The President then said he realized that an immediate answer to the problem would not come out of this exchange of views. He felt that some concentrated thinking was called for, however, and that changes in policy should receive serious consideration. He was especially concerned with the situation in Cuba, at our backdoor.” (Memorandum of Discussion at the 449th Meeting of the NSC, June 30, 1960, Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)
