126  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Dr. Pedro Abelardo Belgado, Deputy Minister of Econ-
omy of El Salvador
Sr. Mario Dalpente, [illegible in the original] Representa-
tives to IA-ECOSOC
Sr. Julio Prado, Minister of Economy of Guatemala.
Dr. Alberto [illegible in the original], Chief, Office of Inte-
gration, Ministry of Commerce of Guatemala.
Sr. Jorge Borbón, Minister of Finance of Costa Rica
Sr. Alfonsa [illegible in the original], Executive Director 
for Central America in the Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank
SUBJECT
Views of Central American Delegations on Social and Economic Development
Sr. Eleta began by stating that there was unanimous appreciation 
of the new U.S. plan. They agreed that it should be channeled through 
the Inter-American Development Bank. There is no need to have a new 
organization; the IA-ECOSOC can be strengthened. Any help given by 
the U.S. must be matched and surpassed by the countries themselves, 
but this ability to perform depends upon their economic development. 
The social help should not burden the Central American budgets; 
hence, there should be no requirement of repayment or else the new 
effort would simply be limiting the credit worthiness of the countries 
for other purposes. A study of the basic commodities is a matter of 
utmost importance to the Central American countries. Finally, he said 
that the six Delegations were now studying ways of getting together to 
augment the credit institutions in Central America for economic devel-
opment. They also want to talk to the President of the new inter-Amer-
ican Bank.2 He concluded by saying that he hoped Mr. Dillon would 
receive them one more afternoon where they could talk on matters of 
pure economic development.
Mr. Dillon stated that he appreciated their views; these were 
similar to our own. We had found misunderstandings among other 
Delegations as to the place of the new program in the over-­all devel-
opment of Latin America. We never intended, by suggesting the need 
for this program, to suggest any lessoning of economic development. 
We went to make even greater officers in the economic filed. Indeed, it 
is not possible to draw a very sharp line between social and economic 
development. It is our idea that the fund will be transferred to the new 
bank, loaned to the countries which will repay in local currencies under 
terms like those of the special fund of the new bank, and when these 
local currencies are repaid, they can resolve. Moreover, if the operation 
moves as we believe it will the U.S. would be willing to put in more 
money.
2 Felipe Herrera.
