International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
177
tary, trade, and development areas. On the other hand, we could expect
to encounter resistance from other countries on the grounds that a new
initiative in the investment area would undermine ongoing codes of
conduct negotiations in the U.N. and in the OECD. The relationship be-
tween these exercises and the new initiative might be handled either by
keeping them separate or by folding both into a new forum.
3. Should participation in the agreement be universal or limited to
a core group of like-minded countries? Universal participation would
result in greater coverage of the agreement but might produce a tend-
ency for the negotiations to become politicized and for the agreements
to reflect the least common denominator. A “core group” of countries
would probably be able to arrive at a stronger agreement, but a number
of host countries would be excluded. Under either option agreement
would have to be reached on the basis for decision-making, with the
two principal models being the OECD procedures under which each
country has an equal voice and all decisions must be unanimous, or the
IMF, which has weighted representation.
4. If we decide to use an existing forum, which should we choose?
If we propose the establishment of a new organization, what form
should it take? The OECD has a staff with experience in the investment
area, but its membership is limited and its procedures are slow. The
United Nations also has some expertise in investment matters and
wide membership, but it is highly political. The GATT has a heteroge-
neous membership and existing mechanisms and procedures which we
might use as a model; however, it has not dealt extensively with invest-
ment issues.
5. Should we fall back from the bilateral treaty vehicle, rather than
rely exclusively on lengthy multilateral negotiations? The United States
and other developing countries have a number of FCN treaties and
other countries have actively pursued narrower bilateral investment
treaties. The major advantage is that they can be concluded with a min-
imum of difficulty; their fundamental disadvantage is that the public
visibility of the effort will be low. Two options we have within the bilat-
eral framework would be to negotiate narrow treaties with LDCs or to
negotiate comprehensive treaties which would have the contents of
and lay the groundwork for the GATT for Investment.
Sanctions
Sanctions could be used to enforce new agreements in this area
which could range from moral opprobrium to private legal action to
state retaliation. The appropriate kind of sanction would differ as be-
tween the offender and the offense. MNEs would be subject to the local
law and sanctions in host countries, but home governments would also
play a role, as could some recognized international body. Among the
options for enforcing standards on governments are withholding eco-
