Yugoslavia
795
minor irritants would have been treated in a more serious light before
this period. The Yugoslavs recognize that in pursuing a political dia-
logue at all levels the U.S. has sought an enhanced, mature, cooperative
relationship without papering over matters on which we do not agree.
The Yugoslavs have shown a willingness to respond to this approach.
The personal correspondence between Presidents Carter and Tito on
key international issues has been an important element in creating
an atmosphere of confidence and cooperation at the senior levels of
government. The Yugoslavs must also be aware that Tito’s visit to
Washington is, significantly, the first by a Communist country leader
during the Carter administration.
3. The response on the party level has been longer in coming.
However, the LCY’s acceptance of a joint invitation from the Demo-
cratic and Republican National Committees to send a delegation to the
U.S. in the fall promises the possibility of an even larger extension of
the political dialogue.
4. Our recent actions in the U.S. with regard to the apprehension
and legal prosecution of emigre terrorists have temporarily mitigated
a major and traditional problem in our relations.
5. Nevertheless, our political relations still are fragile and any of
a host of unforeseen developments could adversely affect their positive
movement—grievous decisions emanating from the Belgrade Non-
aligned Meeting this year, an upsurge of anti-Yugoslav emigre activity
in the U.S. (especially during the Tito visit), fallout from the CSCE
Conference, the misreading of an incident similar to the “overflights”
occurrence. An important objective of the political dialogue is to help
insure that we are able to weather such occurrances.
Economic/Commercial:
6. It is in the economic and commercial area—perhaps more than
any other—that we can give concrete expression to the overall general
improvement in our bilateral relations. At the same time, however, it
is also the economic area in which disappointments over unfulfilled
promise can be greatest, and in which we now face a severe bilateral
problem—the current impasse over ExImBank’s operating procedures
in Yugoslavia.
7. The present state of the Yugoslav economy and Yugoslavia’s
economic balance between East and West provide both foreign policy
and commercial incentives for us to capitalize on the current status of
our bilateral relations. Committed [to] continuing a high rate of eco-
nomic growth domestically (GNP and industrial production rose by 7
percent and 9.4 percent, respectively, in 1977), Yugoslavia has had to
rely on increasing imports of foreign equipment and technology, and
has had to borrow heavily abroad to pay for them. Now, increasingly
concerned by their growing economic reliance on the Soviet Union (the
