170
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
mid-afternoon, after Sadat had returned from his meeting with Presi-
dent Carter.2 The Egyptians had thereafter had a brief meeting with
Sadat, who had given them some instructions.
Kamel then said that the Egyptian side had found the American
paper3 “perplexing.” It was not “coherent.” It had given them a great
deal of trouble. Things are scattered throughout the paper, and the
Egyptians were having trouble following exactly what has been meant.
The Secretary asked about the nature of Kamel’s concerns. Kamel said
the Egyptian side feels it is necessary to study our paper carefully. It is
now in the process of doing so. The Secretary stressed that we want the
Egyptian views on where they believe the paper is deficient and what
should be done about it. Ghorbal stated that the Egyptians are doing
exactly that. He indicated that the Egyptians agreed with what Eilts
had suggested, namely, that the Egyptians present us with specific tex-
tual suggestions.
The Secretary then again asked Kamel for precise indications of
where the Egyptians believe our paper is deficient. Reading from a
handwritten memorandum, Kamel indicated the following:
A. First, the Egyptians believe our paper is a departure from previ-
ously expressed American positions. Specifically, in the withdrawal
language on the West Bank, there is no mention of the ’49 lines. The
Egyptian side had expected that there would be a reference to a return
to the ’49 lines with minor recitifications. The Secretary told Kamel that
this subject had been discussed between Sadat and President Carter.
The language included was that agreed upon by Sadat. Kamel was a bit
nonplused, but responded that we should recognize that the Egyptian
side must first study the document before agreeing on specific lan-
guage. There must have been some misunderstanding if President
Carter got the impression that Sadat is in total agreement. Sadat, Kamel
pointed out, is “shy” and wants to be polite. As Kamel understood it,
Sadat had only agreed with President Carter that the paper would be
referred to the Egyptian Delegation in order to obtain the latter’s obser-
vations. These were the instructions that Sadat had given to the Egyp-
tian Delegation. Sadat wants the Egyptian Delegation to scrutinize the
paper. Kamel apologized profusely for any wrong impression that
might have been given. Ghorbal added that Sadat had read what Presi-
dent Carter gave him, but that Sadat’s comments had been preliminary
and off-the-cuff. They were neither complete nor were they intended to
be a final judgment.
Kamel went on to say that Sadat had said he would agree to any-
thing so long as land and sovereignty are excluded. “We are Egyp-
2 See footnote 33, Document 28.
3 See footnote 34, Document 28.
