which our Navy officials would have been willing to agree to, which authorized the twenty per cent, variation in the construction of ships of each class—that is, if one was increased, the other should be reduced. I will not go into the details of this because before the Preliminary Conference reassembles, we shall have to examine the whole subject and, of course, present it to you upon your return to Washington. However, after discussing it with the Navy, we thought we ought to ask for some information. You will see from the British note that apparently they propose no limitation for surface vessels, that is, cruisers or destroyers, except those carrying guns of over six inch and up to eight inch calibre. If this is what their understanding is, it would leave all cruisers with six inch guns or less without any limitation at all and no limitation whatever on destroyers which I assume we could not agree to. Also apparently it would permit any country to build all the submarines of six hundred tons or less without any limitation. Of course, the size of submarines vary. Most of them are more than six hundred tons, especially the ocean-going ones. Nevertheless, a six hundred ton submarine can be very effective with a short range of cruising. We shall make no reply to the note at all until we get the British answer and until the whole subject is studied and submitted to you. Of course, I cannot see how we could agree simply to limit cruisers carrying over six inch guns and leave the countries free to construct all the small cruisers they desire armed with guns of six inch calibre or less. In any event, I do not believe the Preliminary Conference would recommend any such proposition to a disarmament conference if there is one ever called. I think, however, that Great Britain is going to try very hard to get some plan to be recommended to a general disarmament conference and officials of the Navy Department are working on the whole subject for the next meeting of the Preliminary Conference. Faithfully yours, FRANK B. KELLOGG 36 Note No. 35S, July 31, 1928, p. 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230].
