1956 735 towards making declaration. His December one draft did not contain anything which not acceptable to either of two sides. 16. Reading now from prepared statement, Wang continued that as US already used force in Taiwan area, any announcement by both sides on non-­employment force must necessarily lead to solution of next step. It exactly with this in mind that his draft provided for continua­ tion of talks to seek practical and feasible means for settlement disputes between two countries. 17. Wang said his side firmly of opinion conference of Foreign Ministers should be held settle by negotiation question of tension in Taiwan area. This not what I had said this morning, that they wanted stop present talks in favor of holding FonMin conference. They had never advanced any suggestion along that line or made any sug­ gestion of stopping present talks, and immediately holding Foreign Ministers conference. They had only said that holding conference at Foreign Ministers level is natural outcome of Ambassadorial talks. 18. Wang said however their side had not advanced in their draft announcement any prerequisite, nor had it in draft announcement demanded that my side accept any views which not acceptable. On con­ trary, it US side which demanded PRC side accept in draft announce­ ment so-­called right self-­defense on Chinas territory Taiwan. 19. Wang said on number occasions in previous meetings I even repeatedly alleged that US holding on to Taiwan purely for self-­defense and that holding US forces in Taiwan entirely in conformity with arrangements of collective self-­defense. These remarks serve confirm that what I had wanted with insertion so called right self-­defense was that PRC side recognize status quo of American seizure Taiwan as well as US-­Chiang treaty. How could this be explained away as not requir­ ing PRC side renounce its position? 20. Wang said at last meeting I had stated and again had made sim­ ilar statement this morning, that I willing listen any suggestions that would meet problem that would be produced for my govt if clause on self-­defense were simply withdrawn. 21. Wang said if US position indeed as I had put it, as not desiring prejudice position or views either side, then their draft exactly on that line, as it does not contain any prerequisite nor does it require submis­ sion of either side. If, however, position is to require their side accord recognition to American seizure Taiwan as well as US-­Chiang treaty and accept American aggressive acts as legal, then US must give up this position, as it would require submission their side, and would deprive continuation of talks of all meaning. 22. Wang said I had repeatedly stated that I willing listen any suggestion their side might have; their suggestion very simple and
