March–August 1953 Mossadeq, but more probable that some of them would execute orders of the Shah acting in support of Zahedi. Should the commanders of the brigades at Tehran incline to neither side the outcome of any coup or legalistic maneuver to replace Mossadeq would depend upon whether Mossadeq or Zahedi could muster the largest civilian mobs. There is no indication that Zahedi has control over armed forces in the provinces which he could move against Tehran. 2. Tehran Police The Tehran Police have demonstrated—in July 1952—their inability to maintain order in face of mob violence. Hence they are not an element of importance, although headed by an officer appointed by Mossadeq. 3. The Majlis The Majlis is not a4 factor to be considered in the course of a forceful coup. Should Zahedi come to power by a legalistic maneuver, he might receive an initial vote of confidence particularly if effective political action were taken among the deputies. The Majlis numbers 79 deputies but this total number has never been present at recent sessions. Of this number 30 are allegedly loyal to Mossadeq. Four deputies are on the fence and the balance of 46 members is potentially anti-Mossadeq. This potential opposition is as follows: Freedom Faction (composed of former supporters of Mossadeq, led by Haerizadeh) Ayatollah Kashani supporters Opposition deputies Pro-Shah deputies Total However, in spite of this potential opposition Mossadeq has won overwhelming votes of confidence in the past. These votes have been on his handling of the oil issue and on his retention of special powers. In recent weeks the opposition has increased in strength and should a test come on some such subject as the future position of the Shah in the constitutional government—and come at a time when a potentially strong successor is on the scene—Mossadeq might fall. Following the traditional pattern of past years, this successor would be given a vote of confidence by the Majlis. 4 The words “not a” have been crossed out by hand and replaced with the word “another.”
