this, believing that Chinese were opposed to an internationalization of their external radio communications. The matter is at a stalemate therefore. 4. A reply to the Japanese memorandum of June 1 last61 is being considered. In regard to its proposal of a radio consortium, I had thought of informing the Government of Japan that if an arrangement based upon joint cooperation of Japanese, British, French, and American radio interests, and including joint operation of the stations to be set up in accord with the arrangement under the control of China, should prove to be acceptable to the Chinese Government, and, of course, provided it would involve in no way a grant of special privileges bearing a character of monopoly which would operate to prevent independent wireless interests from entering the field, and provided any existing claim to monopoly were given up, this Government would have no objection in principle to the working out of such a plan by the interested private commercial companies. 5. However, on May 12 General Harbord came to consult with me; he handed me a letter62 in which it was stated that in the opinion of the Radio Corporation, a position had been reached in regard to its negotiations with the Chinese where financial retrenchment had become necessary; that its intention was to recall Colonel Davis, who was needed by the company and by his family here; and that Davis would be instructed to turn over any papers to you which were necessary to enable you to continue pressure in behalf of Chinese-American control of the communication by radio between the United States and China. 6. The letter from the Radio Corporation concluded with a statement that unless you were able within six months to bring about definite final action by the Chinese Government, it would then seem wise to the Radio Corporation, by way of preparation to enforce a claim for all damages accrued, to consider recommending to the Federal Telegraph Company that it declare that the Republic of China was in default under existing contracts and the further commitments it made last October. 7. I discussed the situation with Harbord as I outlined it above in paragraphs 2 and 3, with which outline he agreed. He stated that the British and French
