Ecuador 557 (Depcirtel 456)4 was based upon premise that Ecuador would cease publicly agitate border issue and was designed provide cooling off period both countries. This was made clear to Chiriboga (Deptel 430).5 (2) In view of continued agitation of issue, Department believes a joint statement should be made by Guarantors rather than separate statements which would be subject varying interpretations. This would presumably include a clear statement of Guarantors position that Protocol cannot be invalidated by the unilateral act of one of the parties. (3) The text of statement can we believe best be worked out in Rio, to be cleared then with Department and presumably other Foreign Offices. We believe that it should be designed to encourage both Peru and Ecuador to cease public agitation of issue having in mind the need to maintain peaceful, friendly relations between the two countries and the need for a united hemisphere capable both of facing up to the intensified external and internal threats to its wellbeing and to the grave economic and social problems facing it. Some of the language used in Article I of Protocol and in last year’s draft Guarantor statement might be useful in this regard. (4) Department sees merit in suggestion made to us by Chileans that statement would have less adverse impact on Ecuadoreans in particular if it were issued in response to Chiriboga’s message apparently sent to all Guarantors. (Lengthy telegram October 22 addressed to Secretary6 presumably similar to memoranda you refer to as having been received by Brazilian and Chilean Foreign Offices from Chiriboga.) Statement might also refer in general to various memoranda received by Guarantors from Peruvians. Department suggests that, before text of statement is made public, later on behalf of Guarantors might consult with Rio representatives of both Ecuador and Peru re statement. Later might wish to make clear to Ecuadoreans that statement is directed to issue of unilateral denunciation and is not intended close door on possibility of eventual settlement satisfactory to both Peru and Ecuador. Herter 4 See Document EC–20.
