1977  107
extent that the emerging Soviet hard-­target capability was real, it cer-
tainty would be unwise to put M–X in silos and mobile M–X created a 
serious problem of acceptability in this country as well as in terms of 
its impact on SALT.
General Brown indicated that the alternative basing approach for 
M–X might be acceptable. Spurgeon Keeny noted that this approach 
raised serious concerns about SALT compliance.
Secretary Brown noted that the M–X mobile question needs a lot 
more careful examination. He indicated that he had been of each mind 
with respect to mobiles and really did not know where he stood on this 
issue right now.
Randy Jayne noted that with respect to the Triad, the three legged 
beast had emerged as a result of concerns about vulnerability which 
may have been outgrown by now. For example, there was now no 
Soviet ABM threat. In addition, we do have potential for developing 
accurate SLBMs as well as having an airborne force with a capability 
that will keep us comfortable for some time. Thus, it may be that we 
will have a mix of forces that does not have requirement for equality 
in the Triad.
Secretary Brown noted that if we do go to a Dyad, it is clear that 
the force that will be dropped would be the ICBMs. However, this force 
had much better command and control than the submarines. Randy 
Jayne noted that we might be giving up something in perceptions if 
we talk about an augmented Dyad as opposed to a Triad; therefore, we 
should not apologize for the capabilities of our Minuteman force.
General Brown emphasized that under the ABM Treaty, while 
deployment was severely restricted, there were no constraints on test-
ing and that the Soviet Union had continued a vigorous programming 
that was a cause for concern. Secretary Brown asked whether we were 
concerned that they might back out of the treaty to which General 
Brown replied, in the affirmative.
Dave McGiffert indicated that he was sympathetic with the views 
that David Aaron had expressed and that he did not see how from the 
Soviet point of view, they would be concerned about the risk of our 
launching vulnerable assets on warning as distinct from launching 
invulnerable assets on warning. Charles Duncan raised the question 
of how long the Minuteman IIIs would be viable. General Brown indi-
cated that we were finding some cracks in the engines. Charles Duncan 
asked whether this could be fixed through maintenance to which Gen-
eral Brown answered that he thought so but that in some cases we may 
have to build new propulsion systems which could be done.
Duncan then raised the question of what the impact would be in the 
future when we would not have the cruise missile advantage we have 
today. Secretary Brown indicated that in terms of how things would
