September 1953–December 1954
853
4. In next year it not believed political activity of various Iranian
social groups will change materially. Activities peasants and tribes,
aside from possible intrigues of Qashqais, may not be considered as of
decisive significance. Worker agitation for better wages and problem
unemployment may have to be met partially by government. Activities
of merchant class, particularly those benefiting from Mosadeq’s pre-
vious inflationary policies, will have to be channeled in direction of rec-
ognition benefits to be derived from improved economic conditions
flowing from an oil agreement. Familiar problem will remain of edu-
cated Iranians frustrated in securing suitable jobs because of Iranian
economic and political conditions. It believed best government can do
during coming year is to keep popular frustrations from mounting,
maintain anti-Tudeh campaign, and permit improved conditions stem-
ming from an oil settlement and resumption substantial Iranian oil ex-
ports to have their effect.
5. Without an oil agreement of some kind or, failing this, continued
American financial aid, it seems impractical to think any non-
Communist regime, no matter how authoritarian, can survive. Public
sentiment may be mobilized in behalf oil agreement or at least neutral-
ized if it considers such arrangement protects Iranian rights. Although
this broad concept, it will be necessary for Zahedi regime to publicize
fully it has safeguarded Iran’s interests in making settlement. Tudeh
Party has been seriously scotched by strong government actions taken
but its essential leadership and organization intact. In event no oil set-
tlement or foreign financial aid, Tudeh Party in alliance with malcon-
tent Nationalists could become in 1954 once again serious threat to con-
tinued independence of Iran.
6. Any regime fully determined to impose an oil settlement
without regard public reaction undoubtedly with army support could
secure temporary Iranian acquiescence but consent could be expected
to be brief. However it believed that Zahedi regime, despite its faults
for which certain remedial action can be taken, offers best available
means to achieve an oil settlement which under present volatile Iranian
conditions could have likeliest prospect of durability.
As well, it believed that Shah recognizes Zahedi in better position
to reach oil agreement than any potential Prime Minister now that Mo-
sadeq can no longer be considered. However, Shah might at some stage
wish replace Zahedi by another also opposed to extreme Nationalists.
Abrupt dismissal of Zahedi would be likely strengthen forces opposed
to an oil settlement as could undermine any oil arrangement already
made. Questions whether Zahedi is to remain in power and whether
Shah permits him sufficient leeway for constructive action may be an-
swered in part by ability United States and United Kingdom fully to co-
operate in Iran.
Henderson
