Negotiating Channels 509 197. Memorandum From the White House Counsel (Cutler) to the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)1 Washington, March 5, 1980 SUBJECT The Shah When I talked to Bill Jackson this morning, he advised me that the Shah’s medical condition has worsened considerably. The local doctors now believe that he must have an operation to remove his spleen immediately. Dr. Kean is flying down to verify their conclusions. If they decide on the operation they of course want to go to Gorgas.2 I have told him we will stand by our commitment to support his medical view. If the operation occurs it may alleviate a number of our problems because the Shah will have to be at a house in Panama City for some time, and we may be able to turn over a new leaf by getting him away from the present unsatisfactory arrangements on the island. I promised you would inform Ambler Moss immediately so that he can support Kean’s view that the operation should be performed at Gorgas. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 6, Iran 3/80. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Brzezinski and Christopher. A typed note at the bottom of the memorandum reads: “[Dictated but not read.].” 2 On the question of where the splenectomy would be performed, the Shah and his entourage favored Gorgas Hospital in Panama City, which was managed by the U.S. Army. The agreements with the Shah for his stay in Panama included access to Gorgas for medical purposes. Torrijos favored Paitilo Hospital, also in Panama City. (Memorandum from Tarnoff to Vance, March 6; Department of State, Records of the Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Presidential Breakfasts Jan/Feb/Mar 1980) Brzezinski stated that the United States would not object to the Shah using a U.S. hospital provided that the Panamanians did not object. (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Sick and Pastor, March 7; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran 3/27/80–3/31/80)
