326 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV then get the Congressional support for the programs, we would be worse off than if we had done nothing. Christopher added that he preferred to consult with Congress before making a program choice but that he leans towards Option 2b.4 Harold Brown said that Congress’ view is unstructured. Congress probably would follow the Administration on any program choice between Options 2a and 3. Lower and higher level programs might get support but that is more dubious. Harold Brown rejected Christopher’s request for Congressional consultations first, insisting that it had to be the other way around: we must choose a program and then go to the Congress. Keeny, speaking for ACDA, favored program Option 2b, and expressed a fear of tying our civil defense to Soviet activities. Cutter, speaking for OMB, chose program Option 2b with reservations about civil defense effectiveness. Mitchell, speaking for the Federal Preparedness Agency, concluded that our real choices lie between 2a and 3, but that in view of Brzezinski’s comments, perceptions are key in assessing civil defense effectiveness. Presently, what we know about perceptions indicates that we need a policy, program emphasis, and some movement. Admiral Turner, speaking for CIA, responded to Brown’s question, what is the effect of U.S. civil defense on Soviet perceptions? Turner said there are two schools of thought. One argues that the Soviets only care about our offensive programs. The other argues that they care about both offensive and defensive programs. An improved new U.S. program would, therefore, only have a mild effect on Soviet perceptions. Lt. General Smith, speaking for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, observed that we seem to believe that we must do more. The question is how much. The JCS favors Option 3. Harold Brown then asked DCPA Director Bardyl Tirana whether we could achieve enhanced evacuation by diverting funds within the present civil defense budget from other elements of the program. Tirana answered that all but $40 million of the present budget is required to buy into the state and local civil defense organizations. The remaining $40 million is largely allocated for evacuation planning. It is politically impossible to divert the other money from state and local organizations because they would withdraw, leaving the Federal Government to build a replacement organization which would cost at least twice as much in the absence of local matched funds. 4 The five options are in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 14, Civil Defense: Policy Review Committee: 9/77–8/13/78.
