640  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
ES–40.	
Memorandum for the President by the Secretary of State1
 
Washington, November 26, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recognition of Junta in El Salvador
On November 11[10?], 1960 you authorized me to recognize the 
Junta Government of El Salvador at any time when I considered our 
interests would best be served by so doing. In view of doubts voiced 
by our intelligence community and others regarding the possible conse-
quences of recognition, we sent a ranking Foreign Service Officer, who 
had until recently served as Director of the Office of Central American 
and Panamanian Affairs, to El Salvador to make an impartial survey of 
the problem. On the basis of numerous talks he held with persons in 
El Salvador, including American and Salvadorans with whom he had 
long been acquainted, the six-­man Junta and former President Osorio, 
he has reported that Osorio seems to be the key figure behind the pres-
ent Government and that the latter is attempting to maintain its inde-
pendence of Castroist or Communist policies and personnel.2 Mr. Allen 
Dulles and the Department of State's Director of Intelligence3 on the basis 
of this officer's report and their judgment of current developments in El 
Salvador, no longer have any objection to recognition. I therefore pro-
pose to extend recognition on or about November 30, 1960 unless you 
perceive objection.4
Christian A. Herter
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Secret. Drafted 
by Coerr and Higdon. A memorandum from Herter to Goodpaster, November 25, 1960, 
suggested that he not put this matter before the President until Monday afternoon, 
November 28, to give the Department of Defense “an opportunity to register their dis-
sent should they feel as strongly as they did in the past.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman 
File, Dulles-Herter Series)
2 See telegram 326 from San Salvador, November 30, 1960, Document ES–39.
3 Hugh S. Cumming, Jr.
4 According to a notation on the source text, President Eisenhower approved the 
memorandum on recognition, December 1, 1960.
