1194
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the same. Such a materials transfer would serve disarmament and non-
proliferation objectives, and it is something specific that could be ac-
complished sooner than a cut-off agreement.
Despite the uncertain prospects for early completion of negotia-
tions on a cut-off, it would be productive to make such a proposal at the
SSOD, and would give substance to our expressed desire to move in the
direction of nuclear disarmament. It would also help to fulfill the
pledge you made to the General Assembly last March that the US
would make a strong and positive contribution to the SSOD.4
As has been the case when the US has advanced the proposal in the
past, the United Kingdom has expressed some concern about the idea
of a cut-off proposal because of the effect such an agreement could have
on its nuclear weapons program. This concern might be eased by exten-
sive advance consultations and by initially proposing only US-Soviet
exploratory discussions. Should such discussions take place and pro-
vide the basis for beginning serious negotiations, we would again
consult with the UK to see whether their concerns could be met
adequately.
It should be noted that while any inspection of Soviet territory
would be difficult to negotiate, one of the advantages of our present
cut-off proposal is that on-site inspection requirements would be han-
dled by an international body (IAEA). Furthermore, such inspection
would be limited to safeguards to preclude the diversion of nuclear
materials to weapons purposes. Previous US proposals (in the 1960’s)
had included IAEA inspection of shutdown military facilities, as well
as civil facilities, and US adversary inspection rights for suspected clan-
destine activity—both of which were strongly opposed by the Soviets.
[7 lines not declassified] This is a critical issue that should also be ad-
dressed in the interagency study.
We recommend that you sign the memorandum at Tab 15 directing
the preparation of an interagency study of the issues involved in reaf-
firming at the SSOD US proposals to negotiate an adequately verified
cut-off and transfer agreement.
4 See footnote 4, Document 473.
5 Not attached.
