1470  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
had been raised from consular rank and were known as Ambassadorial 
talks. Of course he welcomed Mr. Martin’s designation, but as he 
understood it, Mr. Martin had not been given the rank of Ambassador. 
In this respect it involves a change in their nature and thus the talks 
cannot be considered as Ambassadorial talks. Again he wanted to state 
it does not involve any personal opinion against Mr. Martin. He per­
sonally appreciates Mr. Martin’s ability and Mr. Martin certainly enjoys 
the U.S. Government’s confidence. Mr. Martin is well informed on our 
problems.
23. Wang continued that he wanted further clarification. We began 
with Ambassadors who had their advisers. Each team was headed by 
an Ambassador. Now that I was being transferred and Mr. Martin des­
ignated, the talks cannot be considered as Ambassadorial but between 
advisers.
24. I asked whether we needed to raise the problem. The talks were 
being continued between the representatives of the two governments. 
As I told him previously, it was not possible to designate an Ambassador 
at this time.
25. Wang replied. He recalled that our association began in 1954. 
I  would recall that after the talks between us were instituted I was 
unable to continue. I agreed to designate an administrative officer to 
continue the contact. As I was aware the talks were on the same level. 
If there is any change in the level, it involves a change in the nature of 
talks and the nature of the problems to be settled will be influenced. The 
nature or rank of diplomatic negotiations has a bearing on their ability 
to resolve problems in negotiations. For instance, matters handled at 
the supreme level between heads of government cannot be ­handled by 
foreign ministers.
26. I stated that I thought it was up to each government as to the 
authority and competence it gives to each representative. Mr. Martin 
will be diplomatic representative.
27. Wang replied that he had to consult his government on this 
matter and would give a reply when he had been informed.
28. I stated that the reply, however, should be addressed to 
Mr. Martin at the Consulate. I added that there was the matter of a 
press announcement. If we could give a date, there would be less press 
speculation. We could give a date without discussing the level. I would 
suggest “Representatives of the U.S. and the Peoples Republic of China 
will meet on January 9th”. That is four weeks from today. If for any 
­reason there is a change, that could subsequently be announced.
29. Wang replied, should we make announcement along this line, 
“Ambassador Johnson has been given a new appointment. For this 
­reason the present talks between the two countries are suspended. The 
procedure for the future talks will subsequently be agreed between 
the two sides”.
