3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 914 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Admiral Turner asked what the objective of such a message would be. (U) Dr. Brzezinski said it could serve as a deterrent. (C) Secretary Brown felt that such a statement could only be helpful if the Soviets were on the brink of intervention. He also stressed that it would have a greater effect if it was supported by the Allies. (C) Secretary Muskie asked what the effect on the Soviets would be if we did not do anything. (C) Secretary Brown said that unless we took the lead on this issue the European reaction would be too weak and disparate. (C) Dr. Brzezinski agreed that any statement would not be decisive. However, it would be an indication of the seriousness of our concern and would put down a marker. While such a statement would not deter the Soviets, it was preferable to ambiguity and silence. (C) Secretary Brown said that if the Soviets were not sure whether they were going to intervene, the more we made clear to them the consequences of their actions ahead of time, the better was the chance of deterring an intervention. (C) Dr. Brzezinski also pointed out that it would be odd if Governor Reagan and Richard Allen3 appeared to make the stronger statements. (U) Secretary Muskie agreed that the statement as it stood was fine. (U) Dr. Brzezinski turned to the question of a hotline message to Brezhnev. It would emphasize that we had no intention of exploiting the situation in Poland but that we wanted Brezhnev to know that we were issuing a statement. He asked what the group thought Brezhnev’s reaction would be. He pointed out that we had used the hotline before in non-crisis situations. (C) Secretary Muskie replied that he did not see how the Soviets could be upset by such a statement or regard it as threatening to their security. In his view it was a relatively moderate statement. He stated that if we held a meeting of the political directors, we had to be prepared to tell them what we would do. (S) Dr. Brzezinski said we could press them harder on economic conditions. (C) Admiral Turner felt that the language “exploiting the situation” would go better in a private message. (C) 3 Richard Allen served as President Reagan’s National Security Adviser. Ronald Reagan won the presidential election in November 1980 and was inaugurated as the 40th President of the United States on January 20, 1981.
