1094  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
annually. Therefore, the proposed purchase would have no effect on the 
Government’s general budget and no particular effect on Peru’s balance 
of payments position, especially since Peru has a favorable sterling bal-
ance of payments. The Peruvian Government was, of course, aware of 
the other implications of its acquisition of this cruiser and wished to 
assure us that these had all been carefully considered.
Mr. Rubottom said he was grateful to Ambassador Berckemeyer 
for coming in to explain the Peruvian position. Three years ago, he 
had talked with the Ambassador and with Admiral Llosa regarding 
the possibility of transferring a U.S. cruiser to Peru, and he regretted 
that it had not been possible to arrange for this. Nevertheless, speak-
ing as a representative of a country which has enjoyed particularly 
close relations with Peru and which has wanted to give maximum 
assistance to Peru’s economic development, Mr. Rubottom said we 
were very much surprised by the present proposal for the purchase 
of a cruiser, even if we accepted the logic of the agreements advanced 
by the Ambassador. What Peru should consider was the psychologi-
cal impact in the U.S. and other countries of this transaction. As the 
Ambassador undoubtedly knew, a strong current was developing in 
the U.S. against our military aid programs. It would be extremely diffi-
cult for him (Mr. Rubottom), in testifying before Congress, to justify our 
military and economic assistance to Peru in the light of the proposed 
purchase of the cruiser. In view of Peru’s difficult financial position, 
we had tried to do everything possible to accommodate the Peruvians 
on the question of releasing the soles frozen in the submarine purchase 
account, making funds available for the highway project, and arrang-
ing for grant assistance in rehabilitating the vessels offered under our 
ship loan bill. While we recognized Peru’s sovereign right to take any 
measure it considered necessary for its own defense, we could not but 
feel that the cruiser purchase would make cooperation between our 
two countries more difficult.
Ambassador Berckemeyer agreed that there would be some unfor-
tunate repercussions from this deal, but he pointed out that it would 
be very difficult for Prime Minister Beltrán, despite his austerity pro-
gram, to oppose a national defense measure which had been approved 
many years previously, especially since the special laws like that set-
ting up the Navy fund were “untouchable.” Actually, the purchase of 
the cruiser was economically justifiable on the basis of the high cost of 
maintaining the obsolete units which it would replace. Also, we should 
take into account the important role of the Navy in educating the young 
men of the country, training them in modern techniques and teaching 
them to be good citizens. Further, we should consider the fact that the 
Peruvian Navy had had thirty years of cordial relations with the U.S. 
Naval Mission.
