different Consular official shall sit in the appeal in mixed criminal cases. (vii) The President and Judges of the Provisional Court as well as the Judges of the Court of Appeal shall be appointed by the Kiangsu Provincial Government. 2. In cases involving imprisonment for ten years or more and in cases involving the death penalty, the Provisional Court shall report the same to the Kiangsu Provincial Government for approval. In cases in which the Provincial Government refuses its approval, the Provincial Government shall give its reasons and order the Provisional Court to rehear the case and again submit the judgment to the Provincial Government. All criminal cases in which the infliction of the death penalty has been approved shall be remitted to the Chinese Authorities outside the Settlement for the execution of such penalty. Inquests and autopsies (Chien Yen) in the Settlement shall be held jointly by the Judges of the Provisional Court and the Deputies appointed by the Senior Consul. 3. The prisons attached to the Provisional Court, with the exception of the House of Detention for civil cases and the Women’s prison which are to be separately provided for, shall be under the charge of the Municipal Police specially detailed for the purpose, but they shall be operated as far as practicable in conformity with the Chinese Prison Regulations and subject to the supervision of the Court. The President of the Provisional Court shall appoint a visiting Committee, which shall include a Deputy of the Senior Consul, to make investigations from time to time and if it is considered that there are any respects in which the control over the prisoners is unsatisfactory, the same shall be reported to the Court, whereupon the Municipal Police shall be charged by the Court to make the necessary rectification which the said police shall carry out without delay. 4. All summonses, warrants and orders issued by the Court shall be executed by the judicial police who shall be detailed for this
