Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 303 Tab A Message From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks (Burt) to Secretary of State Baker3 Geneva, undated 0014. SUBJECT: START: Some Thoughts on Where We Stand 1. We are getting ready to wrap up our current negotiating round here in Geneva and I want to give you my entirely personal impressions of where we stand and some ideas about where we should go from here, including in your September meeting with Shevardnadze. 2. As you know, I approached this first Bush Administration round as a reconnaissance mission; to get a feel for the rhythm and routine of negotiating with the Gorbachev-­era Soviets. In fact, it was more than this; some solid progress was made. The Soviets finally agreed to give us equal rights to heavy ICBMs and to accept the principle of equal, intermediate ceilings as START reductions are carried out. That said, my single most important impression of these negotiations has more to do with their overall atmosphere than their technical details: the Soviets really want a START agreement and they are thus ready to deal. 3. I’m sure that Sovietologists can offer a number of explanations for Moscow’s current attitude. In my view, it reflects in part Gorbachev’s domestic difficulties and his hope that a major accord reducing nuclear arms would bolster his standing at home and abroad. I also believe that a START agreement, in Gorbachev’s mind, would give a boost to Perestroika. While a CFE accord would result in larger short-­term savings, my Soviet counterpart has told me Moscow hopes that a START treaty would begin a process in which the Soviet high-­ tech establishment—­now heavily preoccupied with the strategic arms race—­could be diverted to the task of regenerating the Soviet economy. Whatever the explanation, the bottom line, at least from my vantage point in Geneva, is clear: if we want a good agreement in a year or two, this Administration can achieve one. 4. If this is the goal, we need to begin thinking now about overall strategy and specific tactics. In General, our goal should be to make steady progress in the talks so that you and the President will have the option of moving into the end game at a politically opportune time. As I have become painfully aware during this round, this will not be easy. We have not only inherited one of the longest and most complex 3 Secret.
