January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1243 salem, as delineated after the Six-Day War, shall not be impaired; the President of the State, the Knesset, the government, and the High Court, shall all have their permanent seat in Jerusalem. Virtually all Knesset factions were in agreement that such a law would be essentially superfluous, because most of its content has been basic GOI policy since East Jerusalem was annexed in 1967. To vote against such a bill, however, would be to oppose motherhood and matzah balls. Hence, rather than moving to strike the bill from the agenda, the Knesset voted to refer it to the law committee, chaired by Dovish NRP MK David Glass. Only the communists and Sheli voted “no”. 4. MK’s with whom we spoke did not expect the bill even to be seriously debated in committee. Should it somehow come up, however, the alignment faction has prepared its own bill which would supplement Cohen’s draft with provisions that guarantee the status of all the holy places, guarantee equal rights and responsibilities for minorities in Jerusalem, grant Jerusalem preference with regard to development and public resources, and give Ministerial status to the Mayor of Jerusalem. 5. The foregoing has been discussed with ConGen Jerusalem. Brown 372. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State and the White House1 Cairo, May 16, 1980, 1718Z 11060. Subject: Letter From President Sadat to President Carter on Suspension of Negotiations. Ref: Cairo 11043.2 1. Secret-entire text. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat, 1–6/80. Secret; Flash, Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right-hand corner of the telegram, indicating that he saw the document. 2 Telegram 11033 from Cairo, May 16, outlined the substance of the message Sadat sent Carter in light of the Egyptian Government’s March 15 decision to continue the suspension of the autonomy negotiations following the Knesset’s decision to refer the East Jerusalem annexation bill to its legal committee. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–1919)
