1174  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
replied that I will, of course, be glad to see him, suggesting the 20th in 
order that I can return here the morning of the 21st.
I have not followed his views recently, and have only noted in The 
New York Times his open telegram to the Secretary suggesting that I take 
up the plane incident in Geneva. However, I presume he will be satis­
fied the way it was handled through the U.K.
The only purpose of this letter is if there are any special cautions 
or advice the Department feels I should have before talking with him, 
I would appreciate having a telegram sent me at Geneva.
As a responsible member of the Foreign Relations Committee 
I assume that he is fairly well briefed on our policy and that I can talk 
with him quite freely.
Incidentally, during Senator Long’s recent visit here he did not 
raise and there was no discussion whatever of my Geneva talks.
Sincerely yours,
U. Alexis Johnson
Ambassador
712.	 Letter 55 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 55
Washington, September 13, 1956
Dear Alex:
The American Red Cross gave us on September 12 their report on 
the interviews with the Chinese prisoners. They did a very thorough 
job. They carried out their instructions precisely, presenting the three 
choices very fairly and explaining the matter fully and impartially. We 
can say with confidence that no pressure of any sort was exerted on 
the prisoners, and that they were afforded an opportunity to make up 
their own minds on the basis of full and exact information, without any 
interference. Three prisoners elected to go to mainland China, two to 
Taiwan, and nineteen preferred to remain in prison to serve out their 
sentences. The remainder had already been released under normal 
prison regulations. We are having the reports on each of the 24 cases 
reproduced for transmittal by pouch to you either today or Monday.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
