that they have no cause for complaint. The case against Chile must
therefore be proved by the best evidence which in the nature of the situation
is available. We are able to prove by legal evidence direct participation of
the authorities in deportations and other acts of violence in a few cases,
such as the forcible wholesale deportations of March, 1925, in which the
Chilean officials have been unusually bold or careless or the victims
unusually courageous, and around these cases we are able [to] group a great
many incidents where direct complicity cannot be proved but which seem to
every American here to afford ample corroboration.
It will practically never be possible to establish any facts in regard to this
conspiracy except by a preponderance of conflicting evidence. Chile is of
course counting on this situation; she is counting on the difficulty of
obtaining satisfactory evidence; and counting on the facility and impunity
with which she can manufacture counter-affidavits by the wholesale.
Edwards said in the Commission that “it is a Chilean doctrine that no
Chilean testifies against his own country.” Chilean counsel said in a
document submitted to the investigating committee: “The Peruvian will say
one thing and [the?] Chilean will never be lacking to say the opposite. How
can the truth be gleaned?” It can be answered that the truth can be
ascertained, first, out of the mouths of American witnesses who have made
a record of what they have seen and heard here for the past 8 months and
that the situation is one in which any Anglo-Saxon court would also admit
opinion evidence because of the impossibility of conveying a correct
impression of all the facts in any other way; second, that the truth may be
ascertained by the impartial judgment of the investigating committee and its
examiners and, finally, of the Commission itself based upon the testimony
of a large number of witnesses which has been taken with every formality
except that it has not been deemed either necessary or desirable to
administer an oath to the witnesses. It is submitted that it is a function of the
Commission, and finally of the Arbitrator, to determine the truth by reliance
upon these means.
Further to the Department’s questions regarding fulfillment of the
prerequisites. Resolution will follow in another cable. Discussion in this
cable of two or three items will illustrate Chile’s formal and technical
compliance combined with her substantial evasion and refusal.
