1446 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 7. Wang continued. With regard to the 103 whose names I submit­ ted, the statement I gave this morning admitted the fact that those per­ sons were prohibited from returning to his country. The fact that my authorities issued the order clearly explained the fact that there were persons prevented from returning. It was still a fact that 21 still were not able to return. Considering the points he had made this morning, he therefore again requested me to impress on my government to take measures necessary to remove all these obstacles so their nationals can in fact exercise their right to return to their country without obstruction. 8. I replied. It seemed to me that on the one hand he was complain­ ing that we made persons go too quickly and on the other hand we prevented them from going. All I was asking of Wang—all I ever asked of Wang—is that Americans in prison who unquestionably desire to be released and return be permitted to do so. 9. Wang indicated he had nothing more to say. 10. I said I had something more to discuss this morning. I then read the following prepared statement: “Mr. Ambassador, you will recall that at our 23rd and 24th meet­ ings I discussed with you the question of American military personnel still missing from the Korean hostilities and concerning whom we had solid grounds for believing that your side must have information. You will recall that it was your position at the time that this matter should be taken up in the Military Armistice Commission in Korea. I pointed out that we were not concerned as to where the information was fur­ nished but only in obtaining the information. “I was pleased and encouraged that when, in accordance with your suggestion, the matter was again taken up by the United Nations Command in the Military Armistice Commission, your side accepted the lists of personnel which they had so long refused and promised to investigate the matter. I and my Government hoped that at long last your authorities had decided to liquidate this question by furnishing the requested information. However, this hope was sorely disappointed when at the 69th meeting of the Military Armistice Commission in February of last year the lists were returned with simply the notation, in the overwhelming majority of cases, of ‘no data’. In a lesser number of cases your side finally admitted that the men had been prisoners of your side but attempted to account for them by stating that they had escaped. “Mr. Ambassador, as pointed out by the United Nations Command representatives at the 79th meeting of the Military Armistice Commission last month this information is simply not credible. Not a single one of these men has ever returned to our side and if they had in fact at one time escaped they must therefore have been recaptured or killed by forces of your side. If such was the case, forces of your side must have some record thereof and I cannot understand why they continue to refuse to furnish it to us. I also find it astonishing that your side would
