704 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 6. Afghanistan: Ceausescu was careful to emphasize that in citing above factors, he was trying to find causes but not rpt not justify Soviet actions in Afghanistan. He indicated he fails to understand why USSR sent troops. Ceausescu felt that outside support for anti-regime forces in Afghanistan was a factor in Soviet decision to intervene. He believes that a US-Soviet agreement could be reached perhaps, on the basis of Soviet withdrawal on one hand and cessation of outside support for anti-regime forces on the other. Ceausescu indicated current US action against Soviet Union is not rpt not moving process towards a solution; on the contrary, it could aggravate tensions and have unpredictable results. In reply, Newsom mentioned that President Carter wants to continue detente in areas where constructive action is possible, such as chemical warfare, CTB and CSCE. US response, however, reflects strong public reaction to Afghanistan situation in which Soviet invasion has made major change in balance of influence in that area. US President cannot exclude possibility that Soviets have ambitions in South West Asia wider than in Afghanistan and US, as a great power, must insure it has strength to meet such challenges. Newsom emphasized that we would like to find non-military means of resolving problems but we cannot be indifferent to the fact that others are using military force. No strong nation can afford to be unprepared in such situations. 7. Yugoslavia: Ceausescu was relatively up-beat regarding prospects for Yugoslavia. He said “I do not believe that Yugoslavian situation gives rise to worries,” indicating that the good Yugoslav social order has good prospects for maintaining Yugoslav independence, which he implied would be case even following Tito. 8. European security: Ceausescu stressed Romania’s desire to strengthen European security with particular emphasis on continuing CSCE. He mentioned specifically that Romania wants a solution to problems of military disengagement including problem of “nuclear missiles.” Newsom indicated US support for CSCE and stressed in larger context that President has not withdrawn SALT II Treaty. 9. Iran: Ceausescu reiterated Romanian view that sanctions are not most effective means of resolving [garble], chiefly because they will aggravate difficult Iranian internal economic situation. Newsom explained that President Carter, because he chose to seek a peaceful resolution, felt the need to use all UN machinery and such action was also important to maintain support from an angry US public opinion for his Iranian policy. Newsom stressed US had postponed formal implementation of sanctions until Islamic Conference is concluded, that we welcome apparent election of Bani-Sadr;7 if it appears we can 7 Abdulhassan Banisadr was invested as President of Iran on February 4, 1980.
