596  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
from a politically-­binding declaration into a legally-­binding deal that 
in our system we would have to send to the Hill. We cannot do that 
because of the problem of verification that Amb. Burt identified.
Burt: Let us take another look at the work done in Moscow. This 
is a sophisticated political document. It takes into account the verifica-
tion problem. It assures that neither side will undermine or circumvent 
because of the declarations they will make on deployment plans.
Akhromeyev: We have a cardinal difference here. It has nothing 
to do with this document. I accept this document from the first line to 
the last line. The difference of opinions is in a different area. We will 
sign a treaty on reducing strategic arms. This document lies beside it. 
The purpose of it is to put a certain limit on strategic offensive arms. I 
refuse to understand how we can sign a document that does not limit 
SLCMs. Shevardnadze shares my thinking. This is a cardinal difference 
in our attitudes, we should report this to ministers. In form, we agree 
to the language. This question did not come up in the past because we 
did not have a common understanding of the definition of long-­range 
SLCM. Until we agree that a long-­range SLCM is a SLCM over 600 km, 
and you persist in saying 300 km, we are confronted with a situation 
where it is fruitless to agree on numbers. We do not yet have a common 
understanding on what a long-­range SLCM is.
Bartholomew: That is why we put brackets in the draft text. We 
did not agree on range in Moscow. Akhromeyev: I agree we disagree. 
Now we are agreed that we are addressing only nuclear SLCMs under 
certain conditions. There is also the range threshold. In the past it was 
useless to talk about numbers. These are rather big differences. I believe 
our ministers should hear from us.
Bartholomew: Let us sum up. Our negative view on paragraph 
4 is also our view on 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. There were two and only 
two SLCM issues after Moscow. One, whether only nuclear SLCMs are 
included or nuclear and conventional, and two, whether 300 km and up 
are included or 600 km and up. Now you are saying yes to nuclear if we 
say yes to 600. Akhromeyev: Da.
Bartholomew: I cannot say yes. Independent of the issues of 
nuclear and range, we believe any numerical limits such as proposed 
in paragraphs 4 and 6 of your paper were excluded by the agreement 
in Moscow. The US cannot agree in any case. This is our position of 
paragraphs 4, 5, and 6.
Akhromeyev: You are very clear. This is the most important dif-
ference today. The US and the Soviet Union have different opinions on 
whether to set up a level for SLCMs on both sides. The US believes it is 
not necessary. We always considered such a level should be set. It could 
be in the negotiating record or some other mutually binding document.
