1060
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the Peace Package, he will try to make some modifications. He will talk
with Harold about it this weekend.10 By Monday, we will tell Eppy. It
would be a mistake to expect much. We have an extremely tight
budget. This is not Israel’s fault. The Soviet threat has gone up, and we
have had to increase the defense budget (partly in relation to the SALT
debate). We will put a higher profile on our commitment to the Persian
Gulf region, which will help Israel some, as well. Therefore he has had
to cut down funds for social programs below what they would have
been—for the aged, the poor, for education, though they will be ade-
quate. Foreign aid has suffered severely. But he is determined not to cut
aid to Israel or Egypt. Jordan, Syria, Greece, Turkey—including some
good friends—will be cut back in dollar amounts. In addition, the
dollar is decreasing in value. This will not happen to Israel. He will
try—and he believes he will succeed—in getting a little more than a
symbolic amount. This will increase the value of the Peace Package. He
cannot be more definite now, and doesn’t know the amount. He will
meet with McIntyre on it. He understands Israel’s problems, and
wishes we could be more generous.
Minister Weizman asked if there is anything he can do. Some people
in Israel said that he should shut up on the peace process!
The President said he doesn’t know what will happen with com-
bined developments in Iran and Afghanistan. Maybe there is a silver
lining in the clouds. He has a sense that many of the so-called mod-
erates are deeply concerned about the consequences for them. If the So-
viet Union moved into Pakistan; if the Iranians tried to unsettle the
ruling family in Saudi Arabia; if there is Iranian-Iraqi violence, over the
three islands11 or otherwise—then the importance to them of having a
strong and stable Israel and Egypt would greatly increase. We see the
strategic importance of a friendly and strong combination of Egypt and
Israel. This can be a stable rock, about which the waves of the region
swirl. The last time he talked with Giscard, he began to see for the first
time the value to France of a strong and friendly Israel. He (Giscard)
was always the most critical of Israel, because of historical ties to Leb-
anon and other factors. He (the President) does not condemn Giscard
for this. But France has begun to change its attitude toward Israel. The
most serious aggravation in the entire world is the settlements. He un-
derstands the Israelis need to do something, but for us in dealing with
the French, the Japanese, and the Moslem world, they are no help. They
10 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Brown in the Oval
Office from 5:43 to 5:50 p.m. on December 28. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No
memorandum of conversation from this exchange has been found.
11 Reference is to the islands of Abu Musa, Greater Tunb, and Lesser Tunb in the
Persian Gulf, over which Iraq had claimed sovereignty rights since 1971.
