February 1951–February 1952
11
The Shah is reported to fear that out of the present international
situation there might emerge an alignment of nations along the fol-
lowing plans: (1) a Soviet-led bloc, (2) an appeasement bloc, led by the
British, and (3) a resistance bloc, led by the United States. He reportedly
further fears that such a development might bring with it an under-
standing between the British and the Soviets whereunder, among other
things, Soviet control of Azerbaijan might be exchanged for British con-
trol of the Khazistan-Abadan area. The Shah is supported in this belief
by others, some of whom point to the fact that in 1946 the British were
prepared to throw the Qashqais into revolt and thereby curve out their
own puppet state around the oil fields and refineries when it appeared
as though Azerbaijan might be lost.
Certainly there is reason to share the Shah’s reported fears that the
continued growth in British circles of the desire to avoid entanglements
which might lead to war might carry with it the hope of reaching some
working agreement (even if temporary) with the Soviets. Such a divi-
sion of interest would, again, seem to serve the primary interests of the
Soviets and might easily be looked upon as a worthy expedient by the
British inasmuch as they could then bring in troops to defend Abadan.
(d) To Continue to Use the Psychological Factors Inherent in the Present
State of World Affairs as a Weakening Agent Against the Iranian Government
and People—
The will of the Iranian Government and people to resist the Soviets
has lessened considerably during the past year. The Iranians have been
frightened by the Communist show of strength in Korea and, con-
trasting that strength with what they think is the global military
weakness of the West, have concluded that their hope for survival lies
in becoming “neutral” and in dropping their previous Western colora-
tion. With this policy of neutrality and good neighborliness there has
also developed the lessening of Government control over Communist
activity. In fact, the authorities have become reluctant even to take any
drastic measures against the Tudeh Party.
The Iranian is much more at home in the field of intrigue than he is
on the field of battle. Consequently, he is very responsive to any evi-
dence of real outside strength which might be directed against him. The
Soviets might very well keep the Iranians in the present state of hopeful
suspense, while at the same time preparing the ground for the installa-
tion of a new order and being helped in that connection by the uneas-
iness and consequently softness of the Iranians.
(e) Endeavor to Initiate Civil War in Azerbaijan—
Our Consulate in Tabriz has reported the presence in Azerbaijan of
a number of officials of the former “Democratic” regime. Also, several
newspapermen who recently toured through the area have reported
that they found the population in general to be dissatisfied, to feel ne-
