Comprehensive Test Ban
325
limits specified in these treaties. This has been our own experience in
verifying both the SALT ONE accords and LTBT and, more recently,
the 150 kt limit of the TTBT. However, a nuclear test under a CTB
would constitute a major and deliberate violation and despite their ten-
dency to take advantage of loopholes, we have no evidence of any such
gross violation of an arms control agreement. Nonetheless, it is impor-
tant in any CTB considerations to recognize the limits that can be
achieved in detecting and identifying nuclear explosions and to under-
stand fully the impact that testing at or below these limits would have
on US national security. At the same time, it is important to recognize
that the Soviets would be uncertain as to the specific limits of our detec-
tion capability, and the potential consequences of being caught could
be expected to constrain the political leadership from cheating unless
there was an urgent national security reason for doing so. The US can
verify a comprehensive test ban only above certain yield thresholds
which are established by the capabilities and limitations of US national
technical means, and by the extent of Soviet efforts to evade US surveil-
lance. At current test sites and under current Soviet test practices, this
threshold is very low. However, assuming they are willing to test un-
derground in seismic or remote ocean areas and take measures to con-
ceal the nature of their test operations, [14 lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified]
The Soviets undoubtedly have a better capability than the US to
marshal resources to accomplish evasive testing at yields of a few
kilotons. If the Soviets were to carry out nuclear tests in evasion of the
provisions of a CTB Treaty, they could continue the development of
some nuclear weapon systems. By conducting tests at or below our de-
tection threshold, they would be able to improve their design capabil-
ities in areas such as tactical weapons, certain ABM systems, and
weapons effects. The conduct of such tests would make it easier in the
long term for them to maintain some measure of their scientific, engi-
neering and computer capabilities relating to the design and stockpile
maintenance of nuclear weapons.
There are, however, several factors that would mitigate the incen-
tive to conduct such low-yield evasive testing. [4 lines not declassified]
the possibility that even a low-yield test might be detected and identi-
fied. The Soviets would also have to take into account the fact that in-
formation on an evasion program might become available from human
sources.
B. Impact on US/Soviet Weapons Programs
The US has conducted over 480 underground nuclear weapons
tests since 1963, of which about 300 were under 10 kt. [2 lines not declas-
sified] The US in general has developed a wider selection of nuclear
