Afghanistan
75
31.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, September 29, 1978, 1848Z
23479. Subject: Soviet Policy and Attitude Toward Afghanistan.
Ref: State 240411 (Notal).2
Begin summary: Soviet policy toward Afghanistan continues to be
directed toward drawing Afghanistan into ever-increasing dependence
on the USSR. Brezhnev’s September 22 Baku statement that Moscow
intends “to develop and deepen” Afghan-Soviet ties suggests a hope
for more formal links at some future stage.3 While Moscow is assisting
the Taraki regime in consolidating and widening its power base, we
doubt that Soviet support for Taraki personally is irrevocable.4 That
support could be switched to others if dissatisfaction and opposition
to his leadership should mount in the future. End summary.
1. While the Soviets no doubt have the evolving situation in Afghan-
istan under constant review, we see no evidence that Soviet policies
toward the DRA are in the process of revision. These policies continue
to fall broadly into two categories: (A) assisting the pro-Soviet Afghan
regime to consolidate the “revolution” and to eliminate its opponents;
and (B) drawing Afghanistan into closer dependence on the Soviet
Union in economic, military, administrative, and other areas while
maneuvering to reduce Western and Chinese presence and influence
in Afghanistan. As expressed by Brezhnev in his September 22 Baku
statement, the Soviet Union—like the DRA—intends to “widen and
deepen” Soviet-Afghan relations.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780400–1081.
Confidential; Limdis. Sent for information to Ankara, Bonn, Dacca, Islamabad, Jidda,
Kabul, Leningrad, London, New Delhi, Paris, USLO Peking, Rome, Tehran, and
USNATO.
2 See footnote 2, Document 30.
3 Brezhnev’s speech, which touched on a number of issues, was summarized in
telegram 243631 to Moscow, September 25. Regarding Afghanistan, the telegram noted
that Brezhnev’s decision to single out the country “can probably be taken as an expression
of support for the new Afghan regime, which is beset by problems on several fronts.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780392–0429)
4 On August 24, the Embassy reported in telegram 20305 from Moscow that it had
picked up “unconfirmed rumors” from a Pakistani Embassy Minister in Moscow who
was in contact with a “Soviet Afghan specialist.” The Minister relayed that Taraki was
unable to foster a “true” Afghan revolution and that it was “inevitable” the Parcham
faction, rivals to the ruling Khalq Party, would “return to power.” Conversely, the
Embassy also reported that, according to an Indian Embassy official, the Soviets consid-
ered Taraki “as best situated to guide the Afghan ‘revolution’ between the extreme Left
and Right poles in Afghan politics.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780346–1069)
