National Security Policy 1025 250. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, April 29, 1960 SUBJECT Debrief of NSC Meeting, 28 Apr 1960 MR. GORDON GRAY—Said questions had been brought up in the planning group about the 48-­hour warning and about the relocation of the government people, during those 48 hours. With all the military on full alert and with all of this being known, would the Soviets attack then or would they not? —The second question was what should be done in regard to warning and instructions to the civilian population? There was a lot of discussion as to difficulties in calling off an attack once it has been ordered, and the possibility that if they tried to call it off somebody wouldn’t get the word and it would be launched anyway. Then, the war would be on and they would have lost their ini­ tial advantage of a heavy initial attack. In other words, if the Russians tried to call it off and if they weren’t successful in calling it off, they would have really lost their nation and not have gained anything by it. It was decided that it was very unlikely that once the Russians decided to launch an attack that they could afford to call it off. The decision had to be made once and for all. —The next question as to whether to tell our people. A lot of peo­ ple said that it would be better if the people were not unduly excited and were told it was an exercise, that you wouldn’t know for sure that an attack was coming, and that if you told them that an attack was coming for sure, they would probably panic. However, the President said that you should tell the people. I agree, even though a lot of people would panic. It they are not told completely about what is happening, it is going to leak and they will lose confidence in the integrity of their own government in periods of crisis and they will desert and be wholly selfish. In a time of crisis if you told the people the whole business, as much as you possibly can tell then, they would realize that their gov­ ernment is doing everything it possibly can to protect them and that their government is going to fight like hell. You can’t play games with people in periods of crisis. 1 Source: Debrief of the NSC meeting of April 28: Polaris reserves, Soviet intercept capability against aircraft, SAC dispersal, fallout. Top Secret; Hold Closely. 3 pp. Naval
