1955  213
adopt appropriate measures so that they can expeditiously exercise 
their right to return. (2) Government of Republic of India will be 
invited to assist in return to PRC of those Chinese who desire to do 
so as follows:
A. If any Chinese in US believes that contrary to declared policy 
of US he is encountering obstruction in departure, he may so inform 
Embassy of Republic of India in US and request it to make representa­
tions on his behalf to US Government. If desired by PRC, Government 
of Republic of India may also investigate facts in any such case.
B. If any Chinese in the US who desires to return to the PRC has 
difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of Repub­
lic of India may render him financial assistance needed to permit his 
return.
(C) The US Government will give wide publicity to the foregoing 
arrangements and the Embassy of the Republic of India in the US may 
also do so.
4. With respect to Americans in the PRC, Ambassador Wang Ping-
nan, on behalf of the PRC, has informed Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson 
that:
(1) The PRC recognizes that Americans in the PRC who desire 
to return to the US are now entitled to do so, and declares that it has 
adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can 
expeditiously exercise their right to return.
The Government of the UK will be invited to assist in the return to 
the US of those Americans who desire to do so as follows:
A. If any American in the PRC believes that contrary to the 
declared policy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in depar­
ture, he may so inform the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK 
in the PRC and request it to make representations on his behalf to the 
Government of the PRC. If desired by the US, the Government of the 
UK may also investigate the facts in any such case.
B. If any American in the PRC who desires to return to the US has 
difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the UK 
may render him financial assistance needed to permit his return.
C. The Government of the PRC will have [give] wide publicity 
to the foregoing arrangements and the office of the Charge ­d’Affaires of 
the UK in the PRC may also do so”.
Gowen
