National Security Policy  1211
of the Budget, and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, indicate 
his action with respect to the attached draft NSC Action by completing 
and returning the enclosed memorandum form, if possible by or before 
Thursday, December 29, 1960.2
James S. Lay, Jr.
Executive Secretary
cc:  The Secretary of the Treasury
The Attorney General
The Director, Bureau of the Budget
The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference
The Chairman, Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security
Attachment
Draft Record of Action by the National Security Council
PROTECTION AGAINST BW AND CW ATTACK
(NSC 5802/1, paragraph 16; Executive Order 10421; Memo for 
NSC from Acting Executive Secretary, subject: “BW Detection and 
Identification”, dated October 17, 1960; Memo for NSC from Executive 
Secretary, subject: “Protection Against BW and CW Attack”, dated 
December 15, 1960)
a. Concurred in the judgment of the NSC Planning Board that 
research in the field of BW detection and identification is important 
from the viewpoint of national security.
b. Noted the request of the President that the heads of all 
Executive departments and agencies concerned, in collaboration pur­
suant to Executive Order 10421 with the Director, Office of Civil and 
Defense Mobilization, consider actions that might be undertaken to 
protect vital facilities (including government buildings) against BW 
and CW attack, utilizing presently available measures as appropriate.
NOTE: The action in a above, as approved by the President subse­
quently transmitted to the Secretaries of Defense and Health, Education 
and Welfare, and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, 
for guidance in the initiation and conduct of research and development 
programs related to this problem.
The action in b above, as approved by the President, subsequently 
transmitted to all appropriate Executive departments and agencies for 
appropriate implementation.
2 Memorandum form not enclosed. [Footnote is in the original.]
