848
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(4) make special arrangements for food security assistance to the
developing countries;
(5) promote collective self-reliance among developing countries.
Implementation of the plan can be furthered by national food
sector strategy studies which the Summit countries have encouraged
the IBRD and World Food Council to undertake.
b) IBRD Program for Storage Facilities. The IBRD is considering fi-
nancial and technical assistance to developing countries for construc-
tion and management of a 7–8 million ton reserve storage system. The
Tokyo Summit communique´ encouraged such an effort. These facilities
could make an important contribution to food security in LDCs and, if
negotiations are concluded, could be integrated into the IWA
framework.
3. Food Aid
Food aid provides relief in emergency situations and helps poor
countries and vulnerable groups meet basic food requirements which
they are unable to provide for themselves. Food aid is a large compo-
nent of U.S. food security efforts:
a) PL 480. The U.S. provides about 2/3 of the world’s food aid.
While a large portion is devoted to emergency and supplemental
feeding programs, U.S. food assistance under PL 480 is increasingly de-
velopmentally oriented. Title III (Food for Development) is pro-
grammed on a multi-year basis to support agricultural development
programs in the recipient country.
b) World Food Program. The U.S. annually pledges 23% of the
target of the World Food Program (WFP). The WFP provides about
15% of the world’s food assistance, mostly to support agricultural pro-
duction projects and programs for increasing the nutritional status of
vulnerable groups. The U.S. meets its pledge through PL 480 Title II
assistance.
c) International Emergency Food Reserve (IEFR). Established
under the auspices of the WFP, the resources of the IEFR are used only
for emergency relief. The U.S. contribution has been 25% of the annual
500,000 ton target and is carried out through PL 480 Title II assistance.
d) Food Aid Convention (FAC). The U.S. pledged 4.47 of the total
7.59 million metric tons of minimum annual cereals aid pledged at ne-
gotiations for a new FAC. The pledges were conditional upon achieve-
ment of a new IWA and are not yet in force. The U.S. pledge would be
met through PL 480 assistance, which currently delivers over 6 million
tons of food aid annually.
The U.S. has launched an effort to persuade other donors to com-
plete the text of a new Food Aid Convention regardless of the status of
negotiations for the Wheat Trade Convention—in essence “delinking”
