836 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Middles East. Regarding yesterday’s talks Minic wanted to make it clear that although President Tito indicated that he would not have supported President Sadat’s recent initiative if Sadat had sought his view, there was no dispute about Egypt’s right to choose the means it felt would be most effective. Yugoslavia did not comment at the time but felt that the initiative would not work. They foresaw that one result would be that a group of Arab countries would form a “rejection front” and would look for support from the Soviet Union. This has indeed happened. Tito told those who met in Tripoli to adopt a moderate approach, but they did not and the extremist statement which resulted from that meeting was “ridiculous”. After waiting for the situation to settle down, those countries have been in touch with Tito and have exchanged messages. Tito advised that the solution could not come through extreme opposition to Egypt or in an extreme reaction by Egypt. But Sadat “very emotionally” broke relations with all those countries. Yugoslav efforts now are directed at overcoming the problems between the other Arabs and Egypt. Yugoslavia advised that the “rejectionists” meet again to adopt a more realistic position. He asked what can be done if the direct Egypt-Israeli talks do not produce a result. The situation is very dangerous. Yugoslavia does not share the opinion that this would bring about the downfall of Sadat, since he has great support in Egypt. But it is possible that he will then draw on this support to turn to a harder line. He will say that he has done all he possibly can and taken great risks but that Israel has not been responsive. He may also say that the U.S. did not give enough support to his efforts. Then the whole issue will be back to the starting line. Minic asked if in our view there was any other approach and inquired about the possibility of a preparatory conference for a Geneva Conference which would include all likely participants. He said that this idea has not yet been discussed with [us?] but Yugoslavia believes that UN Secretary General Waldheim’s recent initiative was a good one, though premature. Is there any third road to a solution, he asked, and what is the current status of the joint statement between Secretary Vance and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko last October?8 Was it still valid, were the Soviets still interested in playing a role? Secretary Vance said that the joint statement with Gromyko stands and the Soviets agree that it remains valid. Minic noted that the Yugoslavs had expressed support for the statement on the day it was issued. 8 The United States and the Soviet Union issued a joint statement on the Middle East on October 1, 1977. The statement proposed guidelines and procedures for Arab- Israeli negotiations of a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East and called for an international conference in Geneva. (Department of State Bulletin, November 7, 1977, pp. 639–640)
