World Hunger and Food Policy
745
—Delivering the adapted seeds, fertilizer, pesticides and techniques to
farmers in LDC’s: Few LDC’s have efficient agricultural extension serv-
ices, often reflecting their own budgetary and personnel constraints but
also the low priority many governments place on raising the standard
of living of their rural populations. There may be opportunities for AID,
perhaps together with the Peace Corps, to do more in undertaking and fi-
nancing the development of agricultural extension services in particular
LDC’s. (This is being done to some extent already but whether it might
be undertaken more widely and with closer AID/Peace Corps coopera-
tion, could be usefully examined.)
Finally, the United States has a variety of policies aimed at helping
LDC’s expand their exports, which they must do if they are to earn the
foreign exchange to finance the large quantities of LDC imports pro-
jected for the coming decades. These policies include the generalized
system of preferences,7 and the current MTN negotiations, aimed at re-
ducing trade barriers generally—and in particular to products of im-
portance to LDC’s.8 Even with these policies, however, a considerable
gap is expected to develop between LDC food production and desired
food consumption levels. Projected LDC grain import needs by 1985
range from 75 to more than 100 million tons, compared with just 30 mil-
lion tons of LDC grain imports in 1973–4. The Bourne study could examine
projected LDC grain import needs for 1985 to obtain as accurate and up to date
a picture as possible of these requirements and their implications. The study
could also consider how these needs might be factored into US trade
and agricultural policy and whether planning future food aid pro-
grams in particular might take account of these future needs.
A Focus on Malnutrition
Food is the most basic human need. Though there is at present no
widespread famine in the world, many millions of people (estimates
range between 400 million and 1 billion) do not have a nutritionally ad-
equate diet. Malnutrition reduces the mental and physical capabilities
of these people, and makes them more susceptible to disease; and when
it occurs before the age of 4, malnutrition can result in irreversible
damage to a child’s physical and mental development.
The world-wide malnutrition problem is largely one of the inade-
quate income levels of the world’s poor. This problem is likely to con-
tinue as long as widespread poverty exists, unless direct action is taken
7 The Trade Act of 1974 permitted the President to establish a Generalized System
of Preferences, which eliminated tariffs on some products imported from LDCs. Such a
system promised to expand imports and improve the economic sustainability of these na-
tions. For additional information, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXXI, Foreign
Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Document 223.
8 The Tokyo round of multilateral trade negotiations was underway in Geneva.
