Chapter 2, January–June 1989  29
verification of such limits will be extremely difficult, the Administration 
should begin now to address the problem of how limits could be verified. 
I have done some work with PM and S/P that could serve as a starting 
point for this effort; Bill Burns also has some ideas.
Defense and Space Issues
As the SDI program has evolved, our Defense and Space position 
has failed to keep pace, to the point where there are now substantial 
inconsistencies between the two:
(1) We are proposing in Geneva to conduct limited testing in space 
of ABM weapons during the period of nonwithdrawal from the ABM 
Treaty (probably through 1996). This initiative was formulated at a time 
when SDIO was anticipating such testing between now and 1996. The 
latest SDI Report to Congress indicates that space-­based weapons test-
ing is no longer planned during that period, so our testing in space 
proposal serves no programmatic purpose.
(2) The instructions to the Defense and Space delegation for the 
last two rounds set as one of their primary objectives securing Soviet 
agreement to the broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty. Since the 
SDI program now intends to remain within the narrow interpretation 
during the anticipated nonwithdrawal period, this objective no longer 
makes sense.
(3) Our proposal would effectively free the sides from ABM Treaty 
constraints at the end of the nonwithdrawal period; since the current 
program will not be at the deployment stage at that time, this provision 
would serve only to free the Soviets to deploy.
Clearly, the review should thoroughly rethink our Defense and 
Space position. Our objective in these talks has been to facilitate our SDI 
program while providing a measure of predictability for the Soviets. If 
we decide to continue the talks, we should maintain this goal. If the 
President decides on an SDI program similar to the current one, we 
should be able to agree to a framework (nonwithdrawal through 1996, 
no testing of space-­based weapons, return to the status quo ante after 
1996) that will satisfy the Soviets while affecting our program not at all. 
Even if we do this, however, we may find it advantageous to negotiate 
some physical parameters delineating what amount of testing is allowed 
by the ABM Treaty, to avoid future compliance disputes that might 
arise due to the ambiguity of certain Treaty provisions. Alternatively, 
we might explore with the Soviets the possibility of shutting down the 
Defense and Space talks, addressing broad Soviet concerns through a 
Summit statement or exchange of letters rather than a formal agreement, 
and dealing with ABM Treaty ambiguities through other channels, such 
as in the Standing Consultative Commission.
