Arms Control and Disarmament  1557
a surprise or “pre-­emptive” Soviet attack may grow. In those nations 
which depend upon the US for protection, fears may also increase as 
to whether the US remains willing to risk general nuclear war in order 
to defend their vital interests. In view of the foregoing, certain nations 
might lean toward neutralism in an effort to gain security through 
accommodation. (Paras. 50–52)
7. A period of rapid change in weapons development and of uncer­
tainty as to the relative balance of military power could put an increas­
ing premium on striking the first blow. As the time period required for 
preparation of a devastating attack diminishes, the problem of inter­
preting the intent of the other side—particularly during periods of cri­
sis when precautionary military activities had been initiated by both 
sides—will become even more critical. The relatively greater certainty 
of retaliation resulting from the development of mobile missile systems 
or hardened sites would strengthen the operation of the deterrent on 
either side. Even so, either side might decide that the deterrent effect of 
the other side’s strength or posture was outweighed by the necessity to 
launch the first strike as the best hope for survival.2 (Paras. 53–54)
8. Barring an effective disarmament agreement, there will probably 
be a gradual spread of nuclear capabilities to some additional coun­
tries. Nevertheless, we do not foresee any early lessening of the present 
strong political and psychological restraints on their use. (Paras. 48, 57)
DISCUSSION
I. INTRODUCTION
9. The destructive power of nuclear weapons has long been in the 
public consciousness. However, the advances in delivery capability 
represented by the satellites and by the missile test programs appear 
to the world as reflecting a new dimension in the threat. The opinion 
is widely held that the time is near at hand when hasty action, perhaps 
as a result of a faulty estimate of the intentions of the opposing side, 
can unleash a devastating attack with high-­yield weapons delivered by 
ballistic missiles. The world was not prepared for Sputnik and the com­
pound reaction of admiration, shock, and apprehension was profound. 
The reassessment of national policies touched off by this evidence of 
Soviet technological capability is still in progress.
10. However, with over a year’s perspective since Sputnik it can be 
said that no great and sudden changes in attitudes or policies have as 
2 For reservations of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence. Department of 
the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of 
the Navy, regarding this conclusion, see footnote to paragraph 54. [Footnote is in the 
original.]
