893.00/6764: Telegram
[Document 448]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 18, 1925—5 p.m.
[Received November 18—10:54 a.m.]
488. My 480, November 12, 4 p.m.36
1. Information from several reliable sources indicates that possibility of
immediate conflict in the north, that is, between Chang and Feng, appreciably
diminished. It seems certain that, in typically Chinese fashion, a compromise
agreement has suddenly been arrived at between them which it is rather
generally believed will tide over the difficulties between them for the next
few months. According to this agreement it would appear that Chang will
remove his troops from Paotingfu and Tamingfu and probably as far as Lutai
on the Peking-Mukden Railway some 50 miles north of Tientsin, thus
evacuating all positions held between Nanking and Tientsin, and that the
latter port will be made available to Feng for import of munitions, etc. Feng
on his part agrees to withdraw from vicinity of Peking northward, thus
leaving a neutral zone in Chihli. Superficially Chang appears to give up more
than Feng but it is quite likely that Chang is only too glad to be given a face-
saving excuse for the withdrawal of his too widely extended line and
commitments south of Tientsin.
2. There remain of course the several independent factors, such as the Honan
situation, which is very complicated by Sun Chuanfang, and the Yangtze
provincial leaders with Wu Pei-fu nominally at their head. While it is true
that the tension as regards an immediate conflict between Chang and Feng,
which has been on the increase until the past few days, has now been very
greatly lessened, it would be unwise to consider the possibility of war past
since the equilibrium may be disturbed at any time by the action of the
factors noted above over whom neither Chang nor Feng exercises effective
control.
3. Through train service south from Peking is now completely suspended;
express trains on Peking-Hankow line taken off; express from Mukden from
5 to 15 hours late; and while Peking-Suiyuan Railway running on fairly
regular schedules, passengers are prohibited from disembarking at Great Wall
