1114
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The U.S. Position
In late 1978, negotiations among State, AID and other interested
agencies produced an agreement that AID should provide a total of
$2.5 billion over the decade in bilateral aid for rural water supplies and
sanitation, with the annual disbursements rising toward the end of the
decade. This figure was contingent on commensurate support from
LDCs and other donors and on future absolute increases in the AID
budget. AID direct spending on water and sanitation in recent years
has been in the range of $150–$180 million; if this level is maintained,
expenditures over the decade will total $1.5–$1.8 billion. More than
two-thirds of the current annual total is accounted for by a few large
ESF projects, mainly urban, in the Middle East. Urban projects had not
been counted against the original target of $2.5 billion, but, given cur-
rent funding prospects, will have to be included in any future an-
nouncement of a target.
In view of the uncertain funding outlook, AID now opposes an-
nouncing any spending target for the decade. AID is committed to
doing more on water, which has second priority in their health sector to
the broader primary health care program (which includes water and
sanitation in an integrated approach). Doug Bennet agrees that the pro-
portion going to water should increase as the total DA health budget
increases. However, AID is unwilling to vitiate the primary health care
program to meet a high water spending target. Whether or not the high
level of ESF going into water and sanitation can be maintained will de-
pend on funding levels, the future mix of ESF recipients, and recipients’
desires and needs for major water and sanitation investments.
AID is currently unable to project its water and sanitation expendi-
tures for the coming decade. Over the next two months they will con-
duct a water policy review and will clarify their own priorities.
Other Donors
Some multilateral agencies, especially the World Bank, are gearing
up for major efforts. The World Bank already spends close to $1 billion
a year on water and sanitation. Its staff has drawn up and submitted to
McNamara plans that would push expenditures for the 1980s up to
nearly $20 billion, and increase the share going to rural areas. (As-
suming McNamara approves the new water policy, we should make
sure the US director endorses it.)
European donor interest, according to Peter Bourne, is high, but
the willingness to commit resources varies. The West Germans and
Swedes have been leaders in this area, between them helping 37 LDCs
develop national plans for the decade. The British are interested but are
working with a shrinking aid budget. The French are, as usual, inter-
