1632 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Enclosure Draft Letter to Khrushchev DRAFT LETTER TO KHRUSHCHEV Dear Mr. Chairman: Today the Geneva negotiations for the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests are resuming. During the recess I have considered where we stand in these negotiations and what the prospects are for the suc­ cessful conclusion which I earnestly desire. I have also talked with Prime Minister Macmillan, who reported to me on his frank discus­ sions of this matter with you. The United States strongly seeks a lasting agreement for the dis­ continuance of nuclear weapons tests. We believe that this would be an important step toward reduction of international tensions and would open the way to further agreement on substantial measures of disarmament. Such an agreement must, however, be subject to fully effective safe­ guards to insure the security interests of all parties, and we believe that present proposals of the Soviet Union fall short of providing assurance of the type of effective control in which all parties can have confidence. Therefore, no basis for agreement is now in sight. In my view, these negotiations must not be permitted completely to fail. If indeed the Soviet Union insists on the veto on the fact finding activities of the control system with regard to possible underground detonations, I believe there is a way in which we can hold fast to the progress already made in these negotiations and no longer delay in putting into effect the initial agreements which are within our grasp. Could we not, Mr. Chairman, put the agreement into effect in phases beginning with a prohibition of nuclear weapons tests in the atmo­ sphere? This would require a simplified control system not involving the mobile on-­site inspection which has created the major stumbling block in the negotiations so far. My representative is putting forward this suggestion in Geneva today. I urge your serious consideration of this possible course of action. If you are prepared to change your present position on the veto, on procedures for on-­site inspection, and on early discussion of con­ crete ­measures for high altitude detection, we can of course proceed promptly to conclude negotiation of a comprehensive agreement for suspension of nuclear weapons tests. If you are not yet ready to go this far, then I propose that we take the first and readily attainable step while the political and technical problems associated with control of under­ ground and outer space tests are being resolved. If we could agree to such initial implementation of the first phase of a test suspension agree­ ment, our negotiators could continue to explore with new hope the
