6
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
plified by the Trilateral Commission relationship among North Amer-
ica, Western Europe, and Japan.
The machinery of consultation must be reexamined and some new
mechanisms developed. Others need to be abandoned or revitalized.
We must strengthen international organizations such as the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the United Nations. Our
new commitment to multinational consultation should be reflected in
the quality of the representatives we appoint to international agencies.
It is likely in the near future that issues of war and peace will be
more a function of economic and social problems than of the military
security problems which have dominated international relations in the
world since World War II.
The relationship between Japan and the United States is based on
both firm pillars of interest—our mutual security and our great eco-
nomic relationship.
The security of Japan is vital to the United States, and we will
maintain our commitment to Japan’s defense. The sensitive question of
the level and deployment of military forces here will, of course, be
shaped in a continuing dialogue with Japan.
The enormous trade flow of $24 billion a year is the largest
overseas commerce the world has ever known. We rely on one another.
There is no place for abrupt unilateral decisions which shock the other
trading partner. Major foreign policy actions affecting the other must
be thoroughly discussed in advance with our friend.
Interdependence means mutual sacrifice. For example, we must
cooperate with our allies in reducing our demands for fossil fuel, assist
them in the alternative development of energy resources, build up
common stockpiles, plan jointly for future crises, and share the oil in-
vestments of the OPEC countries.
Among our people there is broad support for continuing the policy
of de´tente with the Soviet Union and China—but not at the expense of
close cooperation and consultation with our friends and allies. We
must again reorient our foreign policy attention toward our friends.
Our recent emphases have all too often involved our adversaries and
ignored the interests and needs of our allies. De´tente should be pur-
sued on a mutually beneficial basis through a series of sustained, low
key and open discussions among the participants—and not just dra-
matic or secret agreements among two or three national leaders.
Our concern with foreign policy, however, must go beyond
avoiding the mistakes of the past, reaffirming our close relationship
with our allies, and continuing the process of de´tente. We must end the
continuing proliferation of atomic weapons throughout the world,
which is as senseless as a waste of precious resources as it is a mortal
