830 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 before his plans are too far advanced. A suggested cable replying to Cairo 14368 is attached for your approval.3 We believe we should make a distinction between participation of an official nature that could have adverse consequences in Tehran and observances of a more personal nature that could be sustained without aggravating the Iranian crisis. Our decisions now appear to include the following: —whether to authorize Roy Atherton to attend an official funeral; —whether to send an official emissary or delegation; —whether to convey condolences to the Empress; —whether and how to observe official mourning ceremonies; —how to handle a request by the Empress to come to the United States; and —advice to private Americans regarding funeral attendance. On the first two points, i.e., an official delegation or attendance by Roy Atherton at an official funeral, we would be inclined to recommend against those observances. We expect that other countries would be similarly hesitant, although we might be prepared to follow what the Diplomatic Corps will do. As a first step, we should ask Roy to consult promptly with other members of the Diplomatic Corps with a view to having the Corps take a unified position, if possible, and to convey it quietly to the Egyptian authorities with a view to urging the Egyptians toward a relatively private ceremony. We would not suggest that a Presidential emissary be sent to any funeral. If the President wished to acknowledge the event in some personal fashion, it is possible that a private citizen friendly to the President could be asked to attend on a purely personal basis. We would see no problem in a personal message from the President and other officials who wish to express condolences to the Empress. Most Iranians hold no special animus against her, and they would understand sympathy being expressed to a widow. Many Iranians would be concerned, however, if the Pahlavis continued to seem a political threat, and we will continue to hear demands for a return of the Shah’s money. In these circumstances, a brief, personal message of sympathy for the Empress should be tolerable in Iran. We could acknowledge to the press that such condolences had been conveyed. 3 Attached but not printed. The draft instructed that Atherton not attend any funeral, that no official delegation would attend, that participation of an official nature in commemorations should be avoided, and that he should consult with EC–9 representatives in Cairo and with Sadat, and welcome the Empress to the United States after checking on the timing. For the final version of the telegram, sent as 175165 to Cairo, July 3, see Document 308.
