had in safeguarding legitimate foreign interests against violation through arbitrary action by local authorities. 2. In recognizing on these grounds the successive administrations set up in Peking hitherto, I still believe we have been well advised in each instance. However, through various stages of uneasy doubt I have arrived at the definite conviction that conditions have been brought about by developments of the past year or so under which we cannot expect that a conservative or even friendly influence will characterize any new regime here. The Central Administration, with the dwindling away of its actual authority and power recently accelerated, has naturally lost its sense of responsibility for the carrying out of the obligations of the country as a whole. It is unable beyond a small locality to make its will effective. Having no stake in the maintenance of prosperity and order in other areas, its interest in the trading sections of the country has ceased, as has its concern for the maintenance there of normal relations with foreign countries and their interests, and whether agitations disrupt the normally mutually profitable economic structure and jeopardize the safety of foreigners. Increasingly the governmental entity maintained at Peking has become a mere agency of whatever military factions control it. Witness the levy of the 20 percent cigarette tax. A year ago the Foreign Office admitted that tax to be in violation of treaties and its inability to prevent it in the Yangtze provinces was deplored. Now, for the profit of the occupying forces, it is levied within the walls of Peking and is defended by the Foreign Office with sophistries to which no resort was earlier attempted. The tendency of the Peking administration has been to become a local political organization, like, for instance, those at Canton and at Shanghai; its distinction from other than merely regional organizations lies fundamentally in the recognition by the foreign governments which it enjoys. While this fact confers no power upon Peking to control other sections of China in behalf of foreign rights, it does afford to Peking the opportunity of making an appeal through the country to nationalistic sentiment as the doughty champion of China for the Chinese. Thus, when Peking
