1556  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
reflect a mixture of apathy and fatalistic resignation, fear of the conse­
quences of nuclear war and, particularly in Western Europe, acceptance 
of nuclear weapons as essential to defense and national status and 
prestige. In the main, peoples and governments appear to be making a 
gradual and steady adjustment to the threats inherent in the existence 
of nuclear weapons and we believe that future developments are not 
likely to produce any sudden or marked changes in present attitudes 
and policies. (Paras. 9–10, 49)
2. It is possible, however, that the wedding of nuclear explosives 
with ballistic missiles will produce fundamental shifts in these attitudes 
and official policies. Such changes could come with little warning in the 
midst of a crisis situation which served to crystallize the ferment, fears, 
or newly formulated concepts of the age. (Para. 56)
3. Opposition to the testing of nuclear weapons continues strong 
throughout the world, especially in Japan, India, and in parts of Western 
Europe. But in most Western countries this opposition is subordinated 
to the view that nuclear weapons are essential to defense and that a test 
ban should be made effective by measures of inspection and control. 
There is great interest in disarmament, including various propositions 
for disengagement, as a means of reducing tensions and the dangers of 
war. By-­and-­large, the public demands caution in situations involving 
the risk of great power involvement and there is considerable support 
for UN intervention to observe, control and police areas in which there 
is a threat to the peace. (Paras 13–14, 22–24)
4. Most non-­Communist governments display similar attitudes of 
caution and concern over the nuclear situation. In Asia and the Middle 
East the nuclear situation continues to reinforce neutralist sentiments 
which derive from cultural and other factors. The Western European 
governments are highly sensitive to popular pressures for measures to 
reduce the dangers of war, and they consider it necessary, and even 
desirable to explore possibilities for negotiations with the USSR. (Paras. 
35, 38–40)
5. Nevertheless, Soviet pressures and advances in weapons tech­
nology have not caused these governments, and others in the Free 
World depending on the US deterrent, to alter their posture or align­
ment. Many governments, including those of the NATO powers, are 
able to lead the public to accept the proposition that participation in an 
alliance whose strategy rests on the maintenance of a nuclear deterrent 
is the best guarantee of security. (Paras. 32–33)
6. The rapid pace of technological development will create serious 
problems for the US and the world. There may be doubts as to who 
has the lead in modern weapons, and it may become increasingly diffi­
cult to convince the peoples and governments of Western Europe—and 
other parts of the world—that the deterrent is in fact effective. Fears of
