1955  483
344.	 Telegram 1136 to Geneva1
Washington, November 5, 1955, 4:19 p.m.
1136. For Johnson. Your 1048.
Consider redraft too wordy, opening door to variety of undesir­
able possible interpretations and implications. Also question wisdom 
of abandoning original concept of separate, unilateral declarations in 
favor joint declaration. Specific comments by paragraph follow:
2) Undesirable because places U.S. in position of publicly acquiesc­
ing in PRC’s right to hold any policy objective, even though we might 
consider such objective inimical to survival of free world. It seems to us 
we cannot, even implicitly, accept the PRC’s right to hold such policy 
objectives as, for example, subversion of free governments.
3) Statement that renunciation of force does not involve interests of 
third parties could be construed as leaving Communists free to attack off­
shore islands, which not specifically covered by Mutual Defense Treaty.
4) Provides loophole for Communists to insist this does not apply 
to Taiwan, which domestic matter.
5) Contains too strong an implication that U.S. willing enter upon 
far-­reaching negotiations if Communists renounce force.
6) and 7) Inclusion phrase “when this would threaten interna­
tional peace” again provides loophole for Communists to argue Taiwan 
domestic matter and only threat to international peace arises from U.S. 
“use of armed force” against it.
Believe we should strive for simple wording which pins Commu­
nists down clearly and unmistakably not to use force in Taiwan area. 
They obviously seeking meaningless wording which would not tie their 
hands. We would rather, if necessary, face up to Communist refusal 
to agree to clearcut statement, provided latter appeared reasonable to 
most of world, than get their agreement to ambiguous document which 
they would then proceed to evade.
For reasons set forth paragraph 3 Tedul 42 as well as above con­
siderations believe draft contained Deptel 915 most satisfactory pro­
duced to date. If considered too bare, it might be prefaced by reference 
to general principles to which all civilized nations subscribe, without 
using exact UN Charter language in Wang’s draft. Would be interested 
in Phleger’s comments this telegram.
Repeat to Secretary.
Hoover
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–355. Secret; Priority; Limited 
Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald in draft and by McConaughy.
