comprehensive and efficient wireless service can be formed in China by cooperation between the Mitsui and the Federal projects both completed and brought up to date; that such a system would prove profitable and produce revenues sufficient to pay for both projects. The American companies, disposed to enter into such a cooperative arrangement, are willing to put large sums of their own money to the hazard of the correctness of their beliefs. In the opinion of the American interests concerned the Japanese Government, entertaining the fears it does concerning the strain upon China’s treasury the completion of these projects would entail, does not correctly evaluate the increased revenues sure to result from new facilities of high efficiency. American communication companies find that facilities newly created, create revenues by which they are sustained and stimulate rather than diminish the revenues of those facilities which existed before. And further, the question of whether the results to be expected would justify the expenditures which must be made, would appear rather to be one for decision by the parties financially interested, who, better than their Governments, can determine the soundness of their business arrangements. [Enclosure 2] The Japanese Government suggests as a solution the cancellation of the Mitsui and the Federal contracts and the organization of a consortium including Japanese, British, French and American radio interests to make with the Chinese Government whatever arrangements may be found necessary for the establishment and operation of China’s overseas wireless service. In its memorandum the Japanese Government points out that the Mitsui Company has completed its station at Peking. The American companies for their part would point out that the completion of the Mitsui station is the very fact which would make this suggestion in its present form impossible of acceptance. Cancellation of the contract would not cancel the completed station. The Mitsui Company would properly expect payment for the station it had built. Under its contract with the Chinese Government payment is the only right the Mitsui Company has. The monopoly asserted is only a security for that right. If through the organization of an international consortium the Mitsui Company should secure payment, then all its rights under its arrangement with the Chinese Government would
