Peru  1113
Several times, he told me “the opposition” was going to delay the 
problem as long as possible because it will make a great “banders” 
(issue) in the 1962 election. He said with all the opposition to IPC this is 
something which will appeal to the people.
I told the President that 1972 was going to roll around quicker 
than he thought and that no large concern was going to wait until the 
last minute to attempt to negotiate a contract on an oil concession or 
monopoly with a nation. I said I felt certain it would be necessary to 
start negotiation on a settlement before 1972 and this would not only be 
in the interest of the company, but also beneficial to the people of Peru. 
He admitted this.
I stated that if IPC is as unpopular as he feels it is (I personally 
believe he has the correct feel on this because it has become a real 
popular subject with no IPC backers), I was certain the sharehold-
ers would want to do something to correct the situation, therefore 
what was the answer? He said that expropriation was not the solution 
because Peru knew better than to try to buck the big international 
oil concerns. He realized that Peru would need foreign markets and 
that it could not compete with the big companies if Peru tried to take 
over alone. He said he saw a partnership deal as now exists in other 
countries.
I stated that as he already knew IPC was owned almost wholly by 
ESSO and that ESSO is acquiring sole ownership; and that maybe the 
solution would be to take the name of IPC entirely out of the picture 
and make it ESSO of Peru. He said, “something like that.”
I told the President that our concern over La Brea y Pariñas did 
not center altogether around IPC, but that we were worried about the 
adverse effects an unfavorable decision would have on the climate 
for foreign investment in Peru. Any discriminatory action here would 
make us start worrying about other United States investments such as 
Toquepala, Cerro de Pasco, Marcona, etc., etc.
Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said I need not worry because IPC was a case 
within itself—“an isolated case.” He stated several times that this mat-
ter had nothing to do with anti-American sentiment. He said, “if you 
will think back on all the discussions and debates in Congress you will 
note that not once was the name of the United States mentioned—no 
U.S. imperialist talk—no anti-American sentiments.” He said he was 
afraid the Eisenhower visit to Chile was going to be mentioned and 
touch off remarks of ill feeling but this did not happen.
Jack D. Neal
