March 1952–February 1953
369
the belief that if Kashani were in power its opportunities for taking
over the country would be improved.
Likelihood of an Attempt to Overthrow Mossadeq
6. Since Mossadeq’s return to power in July 1952 there have been
continuous reports of plots to overthrow him. Kashani and Army of-
ficers are frequently mentioned as leaders, but the reports conflict on
matters of essential detail. It does not seem likely that Kashani will seek
to replace Mossadeq so long as no clear issues of disagreement arise be-
tween them, so long as his influence on Mossadeq remains strong, and
so long as Mossadeq is willing to assume responsibility. So far as a mili-
tary coup is concerned, we have no evidence to indicate that any group
of officers has the capability which the initiation of a successful coup
would require.
Probable Outcome of an Attempt to Overthrow Mossadeq
7. In the event that an attempt is made to overthrow Mossadeq, the
following means are available:
a. Violent Means:
i. Military Coup: A military coup against Mossadeq is not likely to
succeed because Mossadeq has had the opportunity to eliminate ele-
ments in the Army hostile to him, and none of the Army personnel re-
ported as currently being involved in plots against Mossadeq are be-
lieved to have the prestige or influence to obtain the necessary support
from the Army.
ii. Mob Violence: A contest in the streets between the forces sup-
porting Mossadeq and Kashani would be bitter and destructive. The
lineup of forces would depend in large part on the specific issues in-
volved at the time the rioting broke out. If there should be a break now
between Mossadeq and Kashani, we believe that Mossadeq could rally
greater forces than Kashani. The lineup would probably be as follows:
(a) Mossadeq: the bulk of the National Front rank and file in the
cities; Dr. Baghai’s Iranian Workers’ Party with their organized street-
fighting forces; the Somka (Fascist) Party, provided the Tudeh sup-
ported Kashani; the Pan Iranian Party; and the Army and part of the
Police Force, providing they were given specific and direct orders.
(b) Kashani: his followers in the National Front; the Bazaar mobs
and the bands organized by his son; the Fedayan terrorist organization
of Moslem extremists; the Tudeh and its various subsidiaries; and pos-
sibly some support from the tribes if the Army sided with Mossadeq.
iii. Assassination: Assassination of Mossadeq would probably re-
sult in the accession to power of Kashani. (Note: Kashani would prob-
ably also come to power if Mossadeq should retire or die a natural
death.)
