1102
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
10. In order to buy time, short though it be, we are indicating to
Fahd that we are reviewing in detail all of the recent attacks both by
Sadat and the Egyptian press on SAG and the royal family. For that
reason, we need texts of article referred to in reftel as well as such other
attacks of recent vintage (the Saudis monitor all and we are asking
them likewise for the information which they have).
11. In the meantime, continuation of Sadat’s attacks and resulting
retaliation would be harmful to all concerned. It would push Saudis
closer to those Arabs who want to punish Sadat and his supporters.
Saudi Arabia would also find it increasingly difficult to caution even
the slightest restraint in anti-Sadat moves and would be more vulner-
able to pressure from other Arabs to exert influence on Sudan and So-
malia to put greater distance between them and Sadat. It would also
make it far more difficult to count on Saudi assistance when it will be
needed to help reintegrate Egypt into the Arab world.
12. Sadat is doing himself tremendous damage and we think that
intervention by the President through a personal plea to Sadat to stop
further attacks on Saudi Arabia and the Saudi leadership may be the
only way to avoid a regional crisis also affecting U.S.-Saudi relations.
West
343.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Cairo, February 20, 1980, 9 a.m.
SUBJECT
Meeting between David E. McGiffert, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs, and Kamal Hassan Ali, Egyptian Minister of
Defense
PARTICIPANTS
US Side
Assistant Secretary of Defense David E. McGiffert
American Ambassador Alfred L. Atherton, Jr.
Lt General Ernest Graves, Director, DSAA
Vice Admiral Thor Hanson, Director, Joint Staff
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–81–0446, DEM
Memcons/Reporting Cables. Secret. The meeting took place in the Ministry of Defense.
Drafted by Colonel Edward C. Redican, USAF (OASD/ISA (NESA)) and approved by
McGiffert.
