732  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
agree to the line Burt took in Geneva. I note the range of options you 
have laid out, but they don’t put us in reach of a solution.
Burt: We have two guiding principles. First, we are searching 
for effective verification, without in any way undermining the secu-
rity, the survivability of mobile ICBMs. Second, we want no undue 
burdens. We need an approach to notification that, together with 
tagging and other provisions, all taken together can guard against 
illegal missiles. Perhaps your options might provide us something we 
could build on. For example, every two weeks, or once a month, for 
each deployment area, there could be notification of how many mis-
siles were outside each restricted area on a daily basis. That would 
be something we could consider. Break down the deployment areas 
into restricted areas and notify the number of mobiles outside each 
restricted area each day. Let me emphasize these are post-­notifications, 
not pre-­notifications. They would not affect survivability, and would 
impose no undue burden. I suggest later this evening when you are 
addressing CFE, Nazarkin and Koltunow and I could explore this 
subject in more detail.
Bartholomew: I have a question on the mobile sublimit. You know 
our preference was to ban mobile ICBM MIRVs, as part of a program to 
reduce the concentration of MIRVs, leading eventually to elimination 
on land-­based MIRVs. Your side said this is a subject for subsequent 
negotiations, and our side is prepared to have a sublimit as an interim 
step. Your side proposes 1200 and we propose 800. Secretary Baker said 
in Moscow let’s split the difference. Why don’t you say da?
Nazarkin: Let us split the difference between 800 and 1600.
Bartholomew: There are two serious negotiating proposals—­first 
your 1200, then our 800. The ball is in your court.
Karpov: Our 1600 proposal was serious, and our drop of 400 from 
that was serious.
Bartholomew: You know your program. I have some knowledge of 
your program. You know that I have some knowledge of your program. 
The split solution does good things for START, and does not cause a 
problem for you.
Karopv: Our position on a warhead sublimit for mobile ICBMs 
takes into account the solution on mobile ICBM notification.
Bartholomew: You have the linkage backwards. I could offer you 
flexibility in warheads, as I have on 1000. This should be an inducement 
to you not only to resolve the mobile ICBM sublimit, but to come to 
terms with us on essential verification measures as well.
Karpov: We do not believe we need sublimits on mobile ICBM 
warheads. Mobility means survivability, provides a means for assuring
