84 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II concern for human rights and economic assistance. Possible approaches: Make this idea an agenda item for talks with visiting senior officials from the OECD area or propose it as a topic for consultation at the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD. With the ground prepared for talking with the British and Scandinavians, the US could be in a position to have the AID Administrator make a major presentation at the next session of the high-level DAC.31 —Further efforts in behalf of women’s rights—since available information suggests that women suffer more violations of basic economic, social, and political rights than do men. Action Requested —Authorize the AID Administrator to follow up and expand on the “New Initiatives” program, with the first step, formal presentation of an action plan and stipulation of resource needs to the HRCG by May 1.32 Actions Being Taken —The Deputy Secretary is asking D/HA to follow up with AID on ways to increase consultations on human rights with other industrial nation donors. One end product: a cable to the field, with input from EUR and EA, indicating how the US plans to work with the other industrial democracies to further human rights.33 —The Deputy Secretary is asking AID and IO, in conjunction with D/HA and S/P, to draw up a status report and action plan to improve women’s rights. (Due for review by the HRCG by May 15.) B. Use of International Financial Institutions (IFI’s).34 The so-called Harkin Amendment, which injects human rights considerations into the bills authorizing US participation in the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the African Development Fund (ADF)—together with the recent Reuss bill35 and Humphrey proposal extending human rights considerations to all the IFI’s—present us with a difficult 31 The 1977 DAC High Level Meeting adopted a “Statement on Development Co-operation for Economic Growth and Meeting Basic Human Needs.” It emphasized that meeting basic human needs was an essential component of economic growth. 32 Christopher initialed his approval. 33 Christopher bracketed this point and the one below and wrote in the margin next to each: “ok, WC.” 34 Christopher placed a vertical line in the margin next to this paragraph and added: “This point needs more study—Ann Swift is supposed to be preparing paper.” 35 Reuss introduced H.R. 5262 in the House on March 21. A section of the bill required the United States, “in connection with its voice and vote” in the international financial institutions to “advance the cause of human rights, by seeking to channel economic assistance to governments that do not engage in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights.”
