1174  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
11. No more than 50 percent of the total number of deployed 
rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs and their associated missiles may be 
engaged in routine movements at any one time.
12. All trains with deployed rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs and 
their associated missiles of a particular type shall be of one standard 
configuration. All such trains shall conform to that standard configu-
ration except those taking part in routine movements, relocations, or 
dispersals, and except that portion of a train remaining within a rail 
garrison after the other portion of such a train has departed for the 
maintenance facility associated with that rail garrison, has been relo-
cated to another facility, or has departed the rail garrison for routine 
movement. Except for dispersals, notification of variations from stan-
dard configuration shall be provided in accordance with paragraphs 
13, 14, and 15 of Section II of the Notification Protocol.
ARTICLE VII
1. Conversion and elimination of strategic offensive arms, fixed 
structures for mobile launchers of ICBMs, and facilities shall be car-
ried out pursuant to this Article and in accordance with procedures 
provided for in the Conversion or Elimination Protocol. Conversion 
and elimination shall be verified by national technical means of veri-
fication and by inspection as provided for in Articles IX and XI of this 
Treaty; in the Conversion or Elimination Protocol; and in the Protocol 
on Inspections and Continuous Monitoring Activities Relating to this 
Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the Inspection Protocol.
2. ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs, ICBM launchers, SLBM 
launchers, heavy bombers, former heavy bombers, and support equip-
ment shall be subject to the limitations provided for in this Treaty until 
they have been eliminated, or otherwise cease to be subject to the lim-
itations provided for in this Treaty, in accordance with procedures pro-
vided for in the Conversion or Elimination Protocol.
3. ICBMs for silo launchers of ICBMs and SLBMs shall be subject 
to the limitations provided for in this Treaty until they have been elimi-
nated by rendering them inoperable, precluding their use for their orig-
inal purpose, using procedures at the discretion of the Party possessing 
the ICBMs or SLBMs.
4. The elimination of ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs, mobile 
launchers of ICBMs, SLBM launchers, heavy bombers, and former 
heavy bombers shall be carried out at conversion or elimination facil-
ities, except as provided for in Sections VII and VIII of the Conversion 
or Elimination Protocol. Fixed launchers of ICBMs and fixed structures 
for mobile launchers of ICBMs subject to elimination shall be elimi-
nated in situ. A launch canister remaining at a test range or ICBM base 
after the flight test of an ICBM for mobile launchers of ICBMs shall be
