Arms Control and Disarmament  1477
392.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, November 18, 1958
SUBJECT
Geneva Nuclear Tests Negotiations
PARTICIPANTS
The Under Secretary
Mr. Philip J. Farley—S/AE
Mr. Ronald I. Spiers—S/AE
Dr. James Killian—Special Assistant to the President
Dr. Hans Bethe—President’s Science Advisory Committee
Dr. Killian explained that he had asked Dr. Bethe to report to the 
Under Secretary about developments in Geneva and his views on pos­
sible next steps. Dr. Bethe said he thought it would be particularly use­
ful for Mr. Herter to have a first-­hand account of the atmosphere in 
the negotiations. He said that the meetings were substantially different 
from the summer technical sessions and that things were moving quite 
slowly. He said that until the U.S. had put in its “excellent” treaty out­
line, there had been no movement on the part of the USSR. At this point 
the USSR was forced to discuss the control problem to some degree, 
since they could not let our statements go unchallenged. Consequently, 
we have received same clarification as to what the USSR does want and 
does not want. He remarked that the most hopeful point is that both 
the Russians and the U.S. have emphasized their commitment to the 
Technical Experts Report, which has now become a “sacred” document. 
It has become clear that the USSR strongly objects to our concept of 
organization of a control system and that they want the system orga­
nized on a basis of parity. They are particularly opposed to the idea of 
an administrator “who would be able to tell the U.S. and USSR what 
to do.” Dr. Bethe thought that our best tactic was to continue to put in 
papers dealing with substantive points and to proceed to talk about 
them, thus by-passing insofar as possible the agenda issue. The Dele­
gation felt strongly that we should not accept the Russian agenda. The 
Delegation was unanimous in its opinion that the USSR did not want 
to break the meetings off, although they might do this ultimately if the 
breaking issue is favorable to them. He emphasized that we should be 
willing to give the Delegation flexibility in determining tactics and in 
dealing with details of the control system, such as the division of the 
1 Source: Bethe’s views of nuclear test suspension conference. Secret; Limit Distribu­
tion. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199.
