3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
701
Both publicly, including in the Security Council, and in a private
manner, we have expressed our position of principle. This remains un-
changed: expressing the hope that the conflict between the USA and
Iran will be settled to the mutual satisfaction of both sides, we firmly
declare that the USSR is in favor of the strict observance of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations and considers that the violation of
this Convention by anyone whatsoever constitutes an act contrary to
international law.
In addition, we have approached the Iranian leadership on this ac-
count, expressing ourselves in favor of the release of the American dip-
lomats and we have confidentially informed the American side about
our demarche—that is, by our initiative we have in reality cooperated
with the United States. There is reason to suppose that the advice we
expressed did not go unnoticed in Tehran. It is, however, unclear to us
whether the American side properly appreciates our constructive step.
We repeat: our position in this whole issue is clear and unam-
biguous. Any assertions to the contrary serve no useful purpose and
can hardly correspond to the interests of the American side itself.
End quote.
4. In the conversation that followed, Shulman began by saying we
welcomed the Soviet position on release of the hostages and regarded it
as most important. He then made the following comments on points
raised in the Soviet non-paper:
—Soviet media. Shulman said Soviet media continue to contain
equivocal language which lends support to Iran’s position and
weakens the effect of Soviet support for the US on the hostage issue.
Given the important stake which both countries have in preserving the
principle of diplomatic inviolability, Shulman said we would expect
the Soviet Government’s position not to appear ambiguous or be di-
luted by the Soviet press.
—Security Council. Shulman said the President has shown utmost
restraint and had made clear our policy was to exhaust every peaceful
means to resolve the crisis. He said we were now approaching a new
stage in our efforts to find a peaceful solution and would soon ap-
proach the Security Council to see how the ruling of the International
Court of Justice could be implemented. Shulman said he hoped the So-
viet Government would recognize the importance of utilizing peaceful
methods and would support our efforts.
—US opinion. Shulman said the current crisis had a major impact
on US public attitudes. He said he feared the consequences if Soviet be-
havior in the Security Council made it appear that the USSR did not
wholeheartedly support release of the hostages.
