These prior treaty stipulations had not been executed because China had failed to do
away with likin. Another of the duties of the Special Conference is to determine the
conditions under which a surtax on imports to be imposed pending the abolition of likin
is to be levied. In the invitation which China has issued to the Powers for that
Conference35 which is to take place at Peking on October 26, China recalls the fact that
its delegates at the Washington Conference when assenting to the terms which
eventually were written into the Washington Treaty, stated at the 17th meeting of the
Committee on Pacific and Far Eastern questions of the Washington Conference, that it
was not their intention to relinquish their position, but that they intended on all
appropriate occasions in the future to bring up again for consideration the desire of the
Chinese Government regarding tariff autonomy, and it asks that this matter be
favorably considered by the forthcoming Special Conference. I believe that the Powers
have all come to the conclusion that the Conference will have to be broadened beyond
the strict letter of the Washington Treaty. For its own part, this Government is willing,
either at this Conference or at some subsequent time, to consider with China a
comprehensive revision of the treaties dealing with the entire subject of the tariff.
China is also demanding the abolition of the privileges of extraterritoriality by foreign
Governments. This question of extraterritoriality was considered, as I have shown, in
our Treaty of 1903, where we promised we would give every assistance to China that
we could in the reform of her judicial system and be prepared to relinquish
extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese laws, the arrangements
for their administration and other considerations would warrant us in so doing. This
subject took more concrete form at the Washington Conference, as I have shown, by
Resolution V. Under that Resolution, as before stated, it was provided that a special
commission should be appointed to investigate the question of extraterritoriality and
Chinese laws and judicial system and to make recommendations as to the means they
may find suitable to improve the laws and judicial system of China and to assist and
further the efforts of the Chinese Government to effect such legislation as would
warrant the relinquishment, either progressively or otherwise, by the Powers of their
respective rights of extraterritoriality. The United States is willing to take up the subject
and examine it and has appointed as its special commissioner for this purpose Mr. Silas
H. Strawn, of Chicago, an eminent lawyer, who is also going to participate in the Tariff
Conference. This Government is willing through this Commission to examine the
whole question of extraterritoriality and desires the Commission to make a speedy
report with recommendations upon their findings which will enable this Government to
consider what if any steps may be taken with a view to the relinquishment of its
extraterritorial rights. I know, in a general way, that within the last few years China has
made some progress in the enactment of laws, in reform of her judicial proceedings, in
the education of judges and lawyers, with a view to fulfilling her aspirations to be
relieved of these extraterritorial restrictions upon the exercise of her sovereign powers.
I believe the people of this country sympathize with these aspirations of the Chinese
people and that this Government would be willing to give up these extraterritorial
