Summaries of Compilations  LXIX
Guatemala
U.S. Relations With Guatemala
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
The assassination of the pro-American and anti-Communist 
President of Guatemala, Carlos Castillo Armas, in July 1957 threatened 
Guatemala with political uncertainty. In fact, a relatively orderly tran-
sition emerged. An interim government arranged a new Presidential 
election in which Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes won a plurality but not a 
majority. Through popular pressure and political dealing, Ydígoras 
won approval of the Guatemalan Congress to which responsibility for 
naming the President devolved when no Presidential candidate won a 
majority in the popular election. An upper-­class, authoritarian, former 
professional soldier who represented Guatemala’s traditional classes 
and conservative forces, Ydígoras assumed the Presidency in March 
1958 without enjoying firm support in the new Congress where his 
political supporters made up only 16 of the 66 members. (GT–5)
Ydígoras compensated for his political vulnerability by engag-
ing in a series of high-­profile quarrels with his neighbors: with Great 
Britain over Guatemala’s claims to British Honduras and with Mexico 
over a supposed invasion and, later in 1958, over shrimp fishing. (GT–
6, 7, 14) The United States disapproved of this adventurism, but con-
tinued to provide Guatemala with economic and military assistance as 
well as development loans. (GT–8, 9, 10, 13) In early 1959, the Embassy 
reported that Ydígoras’ political situation had deteriorated rapidly and 
his overthrow was a real possibility. (GT–15) When Ambassador Lester 
D. Mallory returned to Washington in June 1959 for consultations, the 
Department of State decided that despite Ydígoras’ volatility and his 
government’s apparent swing to the left, he was still worthy of U.S. 
support. (GT–20) The Department understood that if Ydígoras was to 
rule Guatemala he would have to, in effect, play to the left. The leftist 
traditions or Guatemalan politics established during the years of the 
Arevalo and Arbenz Presidencies of 1944–1954 gave such a posture 
considerable popular appeal. Unfortunately, Ydígoras did not make 
the kind of economic decisions and reforms required to place his gov-
ernment on a sound fiscal basis. In July 1960, economic problems, labor 
unrest, terrorism, and an abortive military coup convinced Ydígoras 
to declare a “state of siege” which suspended civil liberties and estab-
lished temporary military control. (GT–29)
Concern about the survivability of the Ydígoras government took 
on added significance given the threat that Fidel Castro’s revolutionary 
regime in Cuba posed to the rest of Central America. When a group of
