1978  377
6. Pershing II (XR-­extended range). Range to 1500 km. Not limited 
by SALT, but NATO option III offered to the Soviets in MBFR reduces 
numbers of Pershings by 36 and limits the U.S. to 72 launchers for SSMs 
of range greater than 500 km. Would be a new development; much 
larger and less mobile than GLCM.7
7. Tactical cruise missiles of radius in the 1000-­km category, with 
terminal guidance (10-­foot accuracy or better), carrying conventional 
warheads, and reusable—­to reduce costs greatly. Needs a bit more 
thought about targets (I am pushing the concept hard) but could soon 
be ready for full-­scale development.8
8. Cannon-­launched Guided Projectiles (Cooperhead). Introduc-
tion of laser guidance to artillery shells will allow us to employ the 
thousands of artillery tubes already deployed as precision guided 
weapons capable of making a direct hit on a moving tank at ranges in 
excess of 10 kilometers. We will begin production of laser-­guided shells 
in 1979, reaching IOC in 1980.9
9. Assault Breaker. This program is a new initiative intended 
to break up an assault of massed armor without using nuclear war-
heads. It applies the MIRV concept to tactical forces: a tactical missile 
is launched at a column of tanks; as it approaches the column, its war-
head separates into 20 or 30 bomblets, each of which has a heat seeker 
which guides that bomblet to an individual tank. Development has just 
started, but we have the program on an accelerated pace to achieve a 
field demonstration in 1981 and to begin production in 1983.10
10. Advanced Medium Range Air-­to-Air Missile (AMRAAM). This 
will be our first “fire and forget” missile. It will allow USAF and naval 
air to achieve air superiority even if outnumbered. This missile will 
outrange missiles on Soviet aircraft and allow our F–15s and F–16s to 
engage two or three aircraft at a time since the radar guidance system 
in AMRAAM becomes autonomous shortly after launch (current air-­to-­
air systems are either short-­range or require the aircraft’s radar to track 
the target during the entire flight of the missile). We have just begun an 
accelerated development of this missile and expect to begin production 
in 1984.11
11. SURTASS. The Surface Towed Array Surveillance System is 
a new submarine detection and tracking sensor that is the result of a 
major breakthrough in acoustic array technology. This 8000-­ft-­long line 
array will be towed behind surface ships accompanying carrier task 
7 Carter wrote “?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
8 Carter wrote “MIRV’s?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
9 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
10 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
11 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
