652  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
447.	 Telegram 1496 to Geneva1
Washington, January 16, 1956, 7:02 p.m.
1496. For Johnson.
Guidance for January 19 meeting.
1. Point out that at last meeting in attempt to meet all legitimate 
Communist points, you had introduced amendment to their counter 
proposal of December 1. This amendment did not change essential 
features of Communist proposal, but for purpose of preventing future 
misunderstanding of scope and meaning, had introduced two clarify­
ing insertions a) making clear it applied to Taiwan area, and b) that it 
was not intended to deny inherent right of two sides to individual and 
collective self-­defense.
2. Refer to Wang’s statement last meeting that Communists would 
be willing consider inclusion specific mention Taiwan area in renunci­
ation of force declaration. This represents step forward and leaves only 
self-­defense issue standing in way of agreement.
3. Insist on necessity to include provision for individual and col­
lective self-­defense for protection of rights of both sides. This cannot 
possibly be objectionable to either side since it is right long recognized 
by international law. It is expressly provided for in Article 51 of UN 
­Charter. Having raised point, if US were now to agree to remove this 
provision from declaration on renunciation of force, it could be con­
strued as a waiver by both sides of this inherent right and US cannot 
agree to this. You should point out that this is not designed in any way 
to commit Communists to renounce pursuit of their policies by peaceful 
means with respect to Taiwan, as was stated in your ­November 10 draft.
4. FYI. You should hold firm on this point. Department consid­
ers Communists unlikely break over this, for they would find their 
position difficult to defend publicly. However, even if Communists 
should break on this, Department considers it impossible to yield to 
­Communist demand since this could be claimed by Communists to 
be relinquishment US right to enter collective defense arrangements 
in Taiwan area, and indeed its right to defend its ships and forces, 
and to participate in defense of offshore islands, if it decides to do so 
should they be attacked by Communists. END FYI
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–1656. Secret; Priority; Lim­
ited  Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and Clough; cleared in draft by Dulles and by 
McConaughy and Sebald.
