September 18–December 16, 1978 485 Golan. This is just as binding an agreement as the peace treaty that is now being negotiated. Israel wanted no linkage at all in the documents. They have good reason, although I don’t agree with them, but if there is linkage in the letters, in the annexes, then in the future, in three months or in three years, they are afraid that if there is no movement on the West Bank and Gaza, in setting up the self-government, and if Egypt does not approve of this, this could give President Sadat a reason to say the peace treaty with Israel is null and void. Once the treaty is signed, Prime Minister Begin, President Sadat, and I all want it to be permanent, just as Camp David is permanent. There should be no change unless both sides agree to it. The linkage is already there. After hours, after weeks, we have Israeli agreement on linkage. This is done both in the treaty and in other documents. Nothing could be clearer than the commitment to begin negotiations within one month of the ratification of the treaty on the West Bank and Gaza. This is tangible and clear. We have gotten that commitment from the Israelis. This will take place before anything else has happened in terms of implementing the Egyptian-Israeli treaty. This is a very clear linkage. In the preamble, there is also a specified linkage. This is more than Israel wants, but it is less than you want. I feel very concerned about any inclination to separate Gaza from the West Bank. I am reassured by what you say. President Sadat told me on Sunday that he was making this suggestion in a positive way in order to make things easier for Israel. But the mistrust between President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin is still very strong. It should not be there. I have confidence in President Sadat, but the Israelis do not share that feeling. So we have tried to reduce distrust by proven actions. The treaty text and its annexes, and all of the letters, will be permanent. If I sign a letter to both of you, the honor of the United States is at stake. I won’t sign such a letter unless I am sure that it will be honored. I won’t mislead either party. The treaty and the annexes and the letters are all equally binding. We cannot make more of a commitment in the treaty than was made at Camp David, and at Camp David there was already a complete linkage guaranteed and approved by Begin and Sadat. We have a target date for beginning the negotiations and a date for the establishment of the self-government. I can see your concern. I have concerns myself, and I know that this is a very doubtful procedure even if Israel, Egypt, and the United States are ready to move. There has never been a registration of all the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza to vote. There is no accurate census. We don’t know whether women will vote, or whether eighteen year olds or twenty-one year olds, will vote. Just to register everyone will be difficult. The PLO may threaten them. There is a question of Hussein’s attitude. To say that
