590 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX though we have not explored possible formulations sufficiently to know whether it can be made to work. Oil—Khalil indicated to Atherton a possible opening for resolving the problem of a supply commitment to Israel. On the one hand, he firmly maintained the Egyptian position that, while Israel will be able to purchase its requirements on a commercial basis from Egyptian sources once there is peace, Egypt cannot put this understanding in writing. On the other hand, he suggested that arrangements which would assure a fixed supply to Israel could be made on a companyto-company basis, with the Egyptian Government giving its permission to the selling company (presumably AMOCO) to enter such an arrangement with a company purchasing oil for Israel. 171. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 1, 1979 SUBJECT Secretary Vance’s Middle East Strategy Paper (U) The paper at Tab A2 describes the essential substantive problem in the negotiations concerning the “linkage” issue. It recommends that we try to repackage the outstanding issues by persuading Sadat to drop the direct conditionality between the exchange of ambassadors and the holding of West Bank/Gaza elections in return for a stronger letter on the Palestinian issue. (S) Secretary Vance also suggests two procedural steps: a ministerial meeting in the area and a summit. I understand that he is increasingly leaning toward the idea of a summit without a prior ministerial meeting. (S) What I find lacking in this discussion is a sense of broader regional strategy and the importance of time. We have a window, I believe, of about two months within which to conclude the Egypt-Israel negotiations. It is becoming more difficult, not less, to bring about accommoda- 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial Xs—(1/79–2/79). Secret. Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the memorandum, indicating that he saw the document, and wrote: “for Friday a.m. breakfast.” 2 Attached but not printed.
