446
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
in Tehran and to the Iranian request. Before making his announcement,
he would have to select a chairperson and agree on the timing of the
commission’s report and its terms of reference. The mandate would
insure that the commission would remain a fact-finding mission as
contrasted to a judicial tribunal.
—Iranian authorities would announce in the name of the Imam
(with assurance that the captors in the compound will acquiesce) that
the commission will have Iran’s cooperation in seeking a resolution of
the crisis and will meet with all the hostages individually.
—The commission would not leave New York until the Iranian
announcement had been made.
—Step 3 could involve consolidating and restraining Panama’s
position on the extradition proceedings. This is already underway.
Since this was Ghotbzadeh’s ploy, Bani Sadr may not be interested.
We have no interest in it. But if some movement is necessary, the
following moves may serve Iranian needs and limit the risks:
—Iranian authorities would state that they will seek extradition
within the framework of Panamanian law.
—Iran would appoint a Panamanian attorney to participate in the
extradition proceedings.
—The Government of Panama would ask the Shah to “place himself
at the disposal of the Panamanian government.” The Shah would not
be arrested.
—The legal proceedings would then drag out without result.
—Step 4 would focus on the commission’s work in Tehran:
—While the commission’s movements will be public, the commis-
sion would hold discussions privately in Tehran. It would go to the
compound as early as possible to review evidence with the captors
and to meet with each of the hostages privately, ostensibly as part of
the inquiry but primarily to determine the condition of their confine-
ment and their health.
—The commission (1) would announce that it is ready to return
to New York with its report to the Secretary General on Iran’s griev-
ances and (2) would report to the Revolutionary Council, which would
pass the report to Khomeini privately, that the conditions of the hos-
tages’ confinement are inhumane and that no report to the Secretary
General will have credibility if these conditions are not changed.
—Khomeini would have the hostages transferred to a hospital
under the shared custody of Iranian authorities and representatives of
the commission.
—The commission would not take its report to New York until the
hostages had been transferred from the compound.
—Step 5: report and release.
—The Commission would report to the Secretary General two days
before Iran’s religious celebration, which is scheduled the week of
February 10.
—The commission could recommend that the U.S. and Iran form
a joint U.S.-Iranian Commission to resolve outstanding issues between
