1612  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
446.	 Memorandum of Conversation Among Principals of Geneva 
Test Group1
Washington, March 26, 1959
SUBJECT
Geneva Nuclear Test Negotiations
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Negotiating tactics for nuclear testing suspension talks. Secret; Limit Dis­
tribution. 4 pp. NARA, RG 59, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199.
Dept. of State
Mr. Herter
Ambassador Wadsworth
Mr. Farley—S/AE
Mr. Spiers—S/AE
Mr. Baker—S/AE
White House
Dr. Killian
Mr. Gray
Mr. Keeny
AEC
Mr. McCone
Mr. Foster
CIA
Mr. Dulles
Mr. Brent
Dept. of Defense
Mr. Quarles
Mr. Herter said that the purpose of the meeting was to consider our 
approach at the April 13 resumption of the Geneva negotiations, in the 
light particularly of the Macmillan-­Eisenhower talks and of the recent 
technical studies completed by Mr. Killian at State Department request. 
Mr. Herter said that there had been considerable discussion during the 
Macmillan visit of the nuclear test negotiations and that this seemed 
to be, next to the Summit meeting, the problem of greatest interest 
to the U.K. Macmillan attaches the greatest importance to reaching 
some agreement on nuclear tests with the Soviet Union, although he 
appears to be firm with respect to our position on the veto. Mr. Herter 
said that both Macmillan and Selwyn Lloyd had attempted to get our 
agreement to the idea Macmillan had put to Khrushchev for a ceiling 
on inspections as a way around the veto problem. Selwyn Lloyd had 
suggested to Herter the number of 100 inspections per year. However, 
the U.S. representatives had resisted this suggestion, since adoption of 
this approach would throw us directly into discussion of the techni­
cal issues which would have to be solved before any sound number 
could be agreed. The second Macmillan suggestion had been that if it 
proved impossible to get the Soviets to change their position on the 
veto, the conference would recess after adoption of an agreed report 
to Governments outlining the areas of agreement and disagreement, 
with the thought that this subject would be discussed at a Summit con­
ference. Since the U.S. would not accept the idea of an automatic Sum­
mit conference, this suggestion has little appeal for us. Accordingly, the
