1979  591
5. Continuing US-Soviet competition in Africa, with the Soviets 
setting the pace, increasing their influence and also African apprehen-
sions about them.
6. Continued and perhaps increasing strains in the Warsaw Pact 
alliance.
7. FRG reexamination of its policies toward Eastern Europe and 
the USSR, prompted both by internal politics and perhaps a perceived 
change in the balance of external factors.
8. Continued turmoil in Southeast Asia and increased Soviet influ-
ence there.
9. Aborted US efforts to establish normal relations with Cuba, and 
the increasing violent opposition to repressive regimes in Central and 
South America.
10. The growth of Euro-­communism and terrorism, with increased 
general political instability from Portugal to Turkey.
B. (S) Although the President’s personal involvement and moral 
leadership have given the US again an image of decency and fairness 
in world affairs, we cannot count on friendships alone to preserve US 
interests. In areas where changes have occurred, even to our benefit, 
there remain serious risks. My review of the above list suggests to me 
we live in a less benign world than we did two years ago, and that we 
face increased chances for major political and economic setbacks. The 
question is how nations now friendly to us will behave if faced with 
internal upheaval or external threats backed by Soviet power. As but 
one example, we have more friends in Africa today than two years ago, 
but the Soviets and their Cuban allies are more of a military force in 
that area because of their successful operations in Ethiopia and their 
demonstrated willingness to intervene militarily in their interest. Thus, 
I do not believe that any estimate of the numbers of our friends in the 
world, as provided in your assessment, is a reliable measure of our 
influence—­especially as in that table Botswana, Belgium and Brazil are 
counted equally.
1. (TS) Of central concern is our continuing vulnerability to inter-
ruption (political or military) of oil from the Persian Gulf. In spite of the 
Administration’s intensive efforts to produce a coherent energy pro-
gram with Congress, we cannot foresee independence from Gulf oil for 
more than a decade—­perhaps much longer than that. Our Allies will 
remain dependent through the turn of the century. Should that oil flow 
be cut off, the western alliance would have few alternatives but to try 
to reopen the Gulf by military force or to accommodate politically in 
whatever way was demanded to restore the flow. The prospects of suc-
cessful use of military force to this end are at best uncertain. Continued 
loss of Gulf oil would not only destroy western economies, it would 
threaten fragmentation of the alliance itself. I believe that this situation 
poses a most grave risk to us, one which has increased dramatically in 
the past two years, and with no counterpart that the Soviets face.
