466 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 thing will be played out at a time when the election of the constituent assembly is taking place and while different forces in the country are vying for Cabinet positions, etc. While I trust my French friends, there is no basis for trusting Ghotbzadeh or Bani-Sadr. Having sounded that caution, it is an encouraging sign that the early signals out of Tehran conform precisely with our plan—for example, the Revolutionary Council called for the establishment of a “commission” instead of a tribunal. This was a point that we made strongly with our French friends and that seems to have been accepted by the Iranian leadership. 3. Because we have been dealing through a third party, it is difficult to have a precise understanding of what is and is not acceptable behavior by both parties. The French have done an excellent job in conveying the concerns and problems of both sides, but there is no substitute for direct contact and understanding. In this regard, I fully anticipate this thing falling apart a couple of times and having to be put back together. Direct contact at that time (secretly) might be good and necessary. 4. We have to be firm from the outset in utilizing the leverage provided us in the reciprocal steps. Let me give you a specific and likely example. The political benefit to Bani-Sadr occurs on the frontend at the creation of the Commission and its travel to Tehran. The risk that we take is also on the front-end when we have to abandon the principle of “simultaneous action”. The difficult part of the scenario for Bani-Sadr will be the removal of the hostages from the compound to the hospital. So, if we began the scenario without nailing down a time frame, the Commission could travel to Tehran, Bani-Sadr could reap the political benefit and because of circumstances that we can not foresee at this time, Bani-Sadr could get cold feet and either not remove the hostages to the hospital or let the thing drag on for weeks. The American people will tolerate us taking some risks and a change in our position as long as progress seems to be taking place, but they will not tolerate very long delays. For that reason, we need to use—through Waldheim—the date for the establishment of the Commission to insure a time frame for the release. We will also work this point with our French friends when we meet with them this weekend. 5. Quite frankly, the only two people now that understand both the scenario in detail and its problems/pitfalls are Hal Saunders and myself. We need for the Secretary, the Vice-President, Zbig, the First Lady and you to understand it in some detail. For that reason, I would recommend that we have a very private session for 30–45 minutes to walk through the scenario.4 Not only so everyone will understand it— 4 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Vance, Mondale, Saunders, Brzezinski, and Jordan on February 7 from 5:30 until 6:15 p.m. (Carter Library) No other record of this meeting has been found.
