Chapter 2, January–June 1989  23
Attachment
Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of 
State for Political and Military Affairs (Holmes) to Secretary 
of State Baker7
Washington, February 1, 1989
SUBJECT
Arms Control Review
In the near future you will be participating in the Administration’s 
planned review of arms control negotiations. There are good arguments 
against delay: Chemical Weapons talks begin February 7, Conventional 
Force Reduction negotiations and the CSCE talks on Confidence and 
Security Building Measures begin March 9, and pressure will doubt-
less build to renew Nuclear Testing, START and Defense & Space at an 
early date.
This memorandum lays out general thoughts on how the review 
should be structured—­the directions we should try to take and the 
pitfalls to avoid. In general, we conclude that U.S. goals in START, 
Chemical Weapons and Nuclear Testing negotiations remain valid—­
though we face especially tough decisions on strategic force structure. 
On the other hand, our Defense and Space position needs a thorough 
revamping: there will likely be no outcome in START without agree-
ment with the Soviets on treatment of ballistic missile defenses. We 
should carefully review our position on conventional reductions to 
ensure it continues to meet the challenge of Eastern unilateral reduc-
tion initiatives.
Some cautions to bear in mind: First, we have greater latitude to 
change directions in bilateral negotiations (START, Defense and Space, 
Nuclear Testing) than multilateral (Conventional Force Reductions, 
Confidence and Security Building Measures, and Chemical Weapons) 
where our approach tends to be arduously brokered with Allies. 
Second, our priorities in the Review will not be shared by all agencies. 
Finally, close consultations on the Hill during the Review will be crucial 
to success.
7 Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Harrison and the staff of PM; cleared by Timbie and 
Ross and in S/ARN (information) and EUR (information). Attached but not printed 
are Tabs 3–5, undated papers prepared in the Department of State on “Negotiations on 
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE),” “Chemical Weapons Negotiation,” and “Nuclear 
Testing Talks (NTT).”
