992  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
President Stroessner [text not declassified] has supported our 
Government in three important aspects:
First, he has refused to recognize the Soviet or any of the Iron 
Curtain countries, and in this refusal has carried it to the extent that 
any and all of their missions or individual visitors have been refused 
visas. This has been true during my experience.
Second, he has given us consistent support in international organi-
zations, even when this has put him at certain times in sharp opposition 
to some of his Latin American neighbors.
Third, he has supported the stabilization program instituted by 
the International Monetary Fund and supported by the U.S. Treasury. 
He has done this in critical moments against the opposition of influ-
ential members of his own cabinet and the military. Since the first of 
November, the exchange rate of the guaraní to the dollar has not varied 
more than one point.
In addition, he has assured my deputy, Ralph Hilton, and myself upon 
the occasion of our last visit, that the program for his next term of office is 
one of gradual democratization of Paraguay. This is good to hear, but we 
are well aware of the lack of tradition of democracy in Paraguay and of 
the questionable readiness of the people for full democratic government.
It seems to be our interest to do those things which will maintain 
a stable government in Paraguay. [text not declassified] This is my pol-
icy, within the framework of our basic policy documents relating to this 
hemisphere. When I use the first person, I do it only on the assumption 
of my responsibility. This Embassy which is operating in complete agree-
ment, based upon its individual and collective opinions, works as a team.
There are several things we could do which could in no way put 
the U.S. in an embarrassing position but which would certainly demon-
strate our friendship for the people of Paraguay and would be sound 
and durable economically under whatever government the future may 
bring. I think I state them in the order of their time importance and of 
our ability to do them.
If all the recommendations here could be authorized to this 
Embassy, we could bring about their announcement in their proper 
timing as only we can judge it.
The recommendations are:
(1) Authorizing DLF private loan sector two and a half million 
dollars credit to be extended through a local Development Loan Bank 
which would carry a label to indicate that these are American funds. 
This Development Loan Bank can be organized under the joint manage-
ment of the two privately owned banks in Paraguay, the First National 
City of New York and the Bank of London & South America (British). 
The announcement should be made and such Development Loan Bank 
should be organized forthwith under private management for private
