1134
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Linowitz agreed. Last time, Sadat had told him that set-
tlements were not important. He said they could concentrate on Gaza
and could forget the West Bank for years. This couldn’t happen. There
is a troublesome dichotomy that is hard to get hold of. Khalil is on a
kick—how can we get him off it? He has switched his philosophies—
the Ambassador hopes this does not mean Sadat, as well. Before, Khalil
said that they could transfer some powers into the first list. Now his po-
sition is that under Camp David, all powers must be transferred, and
then have the Israelis negotiate some back. This Israel will never do.
Camp David says that the powers should be defined.
At the Hague, the most important conversation—which he was
told he could not tell Khalil or Sadat—was with Burg, and was sur-
prising. Otherwise it was a sterile session. One idea dealt with absentee
ballots for East Jerusalem residents. He (the Ambassador) does not see
Burg being independent enough to talk about something like this
without Begin’s interest in the idea.
The President said that Burg might be prepared to break with his
boss.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Burg had said frankly that he (Burg)
is dismayed by Begin’s position. Shamir in Burg’s view was worse.
Burg said that he could not meet with Linowitz alone. But he (the Am-
bassador) believed that if he can persuade Shamir, then he could sell an
idea. He is a man of integrity and speaks frankly.
The President said that the Ambassador would have to waste a lot
of time teaching Shamir the issues.
Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to tell the President how
things appear. He does not have great expectations for this trip.
The President said that if issues can be clearly defined, this would
be good. Begin knows what happened at Camp David, and now he will
be ganged up on—not just with Sadat, but with some of his own asso-
ciates. Barak was good. He would take Begin off privately and get him
to change his mind in a way that was not embarrassing. Dayan was
close to this, though not as good. He is not sure that Shamir, Burg or
Weizman could do this. Barak is like a bookkeeper, or a personal CPA,
or a lawyer friend—that is, not a peer. Begin didn’t care if Barak knew
he had changed his mind, but he cared about the others. Sometimes he
(the President) would work out a position with Barak, who would go
off with Begin. Three hours later Barak would emerge and say what
Begin had suggested! There is a need for some way for Begin to change
his mind, without losing face. Begin might say that he had to let the
Knesset decide.
The President said he was extremely eager to get into this. It might
be unpleasant; and this is not the time (?). He thinks there will be no
cutoff of the process, for example for this to be taken to the UN. Yet
