doing, that we are afraid to meet the issue and are prepared to put up with almost anything rather than stiffen our attitude. It is only natural, in view of what has gone on during the past seven months, that the mass of the Cantonese should have gotten the impression that the Powers are really afraid to do more than mildly protest, as one treaty right after another is disregarded and brushed aside. There has been a mass of propaganda in Canton tending to convince the students and the general public that the powers are divided and weak, that they have no justice on their side, and that all the right lies with China. The local regime, assisted by its Russian Soviet advisers, has been steadily feeding propaganda to the people of Canton and at the same time doing everything in its power to prevent the dissemination of information contrary to its interests and aims. The local newspapers are not permitted to print anything unfavorable to the present administration. Adverse criticism is suppressed, but everything published in the United States and other countries favorable to China (and there has been a great deal of it) is seized with avidity and given the widest possible publicity. The Canton government is using the strike to further its aims. There could be no valid objection, of course, to the strike as such were it not encouraged and directed by the authorities, but there is, it seems to me, a very serious cause for complaint in the fact that the local government has permitted the strikers to uniform and arm themselves and to arrest foreigners alleged to have broken strike regulations as well as to seize foodstuffs and other merchandise in the possession of foreigners. Some six weeks ago a Japanese steamer, alleged to have touched at Hongkong, was boarded by armed pickets upon arriving at Canton and is still being forcibly detained pending the payment of a heavy ransom. The local authorities say that they are not responsible for the strike and yet they not only fail to prevent outrages of this sort but have actually promulgated laws conferring extensive police and other powers on the strikers. The United States government and the other powers were right, in my opinion, in not attempting to interfere with the ordinary course of the strike. Any interference on their part would have been unwarranted and would have been a cause for just condemnation on the part of the outside world.
