Uruguay  1167
have both this equipment and the Mission for the purpose of giving the 
Governmental leaders a feeling of security with respect to unpredict-
able developments in Argentina. This latter feeling was, of course, par-
ticularly strong during the Peron era, but developments in Argentina 
continue to inspire a feeling of uncertainty, and it seems likely that the 
Herrerista Government will have similar motivations. This reassur-
ing defense tie has no doubt been, tacitly, in the minds of leaders of 
the Uruguayan Government, as powerful a political factor as exists in 
Uruguayan relations with the United States. We can no doubt thank 
our defense relationship as well as our fundamental ideological rela-
tionship for the Uruguayan measures of cooperation with the United 
States in international matters, particularly at the United Nations. It can 
be hoped that this relationship will continue. While the Herreristas, in 
the opposition, have been unenthusiastic about this “defense cooper-
ation”, their attitude twenty years ago toward the militaristic regimes 
in Italy and Germany and their subsequent attitude toward the Peron 
regime in Argentina would not indicate any fundamental antipathy to 
“militarism” per se.
All indications we have received so far from the Herreristas are to 
the effect that they intend to adopt a clear policy of cooperation with 
the United States and the Western world and that they hope to have our 
friendly assistance.
There would seem to be no reason why we should adopt any 
change of attitude whatever in our relations with Uruguay, as we wait 
to see what concrete measures the new Administration will undertake 
and what general attitudes it will adopt. I believe that we should con-
tinue the efforts we have been making to resolve the old grievances and 
work toward new, modest measures of economic and financial coopera-
tion. We should assume that the new Administration will have as much 
interest as (or more than) the present Administration in such measures 
as possible Eximbank assistance and possible DLF loans, both for the 
UTE telephone equipment and possibly to supplement the prospective 
IBRD loan for rehabilitation. The need is so great for the surplus tobacco 
and cotton which would be delivered under the PL 4805 agreement, that 
is being negotiated that there can be little question but that this negotia-
tion would receive the unqualified approval of the new Administration.6 
In any event, the sales transaction should be completed long before the 
new Administration comes in on March 1, 1959.
5 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 
1954, see 68 Stat. 454.
6 Reference is to the Surplus Agricultural Commodities Agreement effected by an 
exchange of notes, signed at Montevideo, February 20, 1959, and entered into force the 
same day. For the text of the agreement, see United States Treaties and Other International 
Agreements (UST), vol. 10, p. 161.
