816  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Throughout the event on 3 June, the command center personnel 
at all locations performed well and in accordance with established 
directions.
188.	 Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense1
Washington, June 4, 1980
FACT SHEET
During the morning of 3 June a missile warning incident occurred 
which caused certain precautionary measures to be taken within our 
strategic forces in accordance with standard procedures. The purpose 
of this fact sheet is to provide information concerning this incident and 
to outline corrective steps which have been and will be taken.
Technical problems in the computer system that provides infor-
mation to the National Command System caused erroneous data to be 
generated which in turn provided indications in the National Military 
Command Center (NMCC) and at the Strategic Air Command (SAC) 
Headquarters of a missile attack against the United States. However, 
key missile warning sensor systems, which are connected directly to 
the NMCC, to the SAC Command Center, and to the North American 
Air Defense Command (NORAD) gave no indication of hostile mis-
sile activity and, therefore, strong indications of the spurious nature of 
the data were available. Throughout the incident, the data at NORAD 
headquarters reflected that all sensor systems were functioning prop-
erly and that no missile launches had been detected by these sensors.
The first threat indication was received by SAC directly from the 
NORAD computer. The indication was a missile warning display of two 
Sea Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM) trajectories indicating the possi-
bility of the missiles being targeted against the United States. Within 
a short time, this display had increased to a large number of SLBM 
trajectories. The SAC Senior Controller, acting in accordance with stan-
dard procedures, initiated an alarm which caused all SAC alert bomber, 
tanker, and postattack command and control crews to move to alert 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, 
Box 7, Defense Department: 5–7/80. Secret. Drafted by Claytor. Brzezinski sent the paper 
to Brown under cover of a June 5 memorandum which reads: “Attached is a copy of the 
fact sheet concerning the June 3 missile warning incident, which the President saw this 
morning. The President has asked that you receive a copy with his two questions.”
