Panama 941 military government is offensive to peoples who consider the governed territory to be their own. A military organisation operates on the basis of command rather than persuasion. Military officers grow accustomed to obedience, and are concerned primarily with matters of their internal command rather than with those of external interests. Accordingly, a military command is seldom an instrument for civil administration under which civilians and foreigners can comfortably live or work. An individual commander may avoid arbitrariness but his military status projects to foreign people more of an aura of colonialism than would adhere to a civilian. The Panamanian press campaign against the “military mentality” of the present governor suggests that the Panamanians would welcome civilian governance of the Zone. It is believed that the Zone’s government should be civilianized by the appointment of a capable civilian governor. He should in his dual role as governor of the Zone and president of the Company be responsible to the Ambassador on all matters affecting the Republic. A civilian governor should not report to the Department of the Army but to the Department of State and to the White House through the Department. It is our understanding that the appointment of a civilian governor could be effected by the President, subject to confirmation by the Senate, without further legislation. It is our Legal Advisor’s opinion that there is no legal impediment to naming a civilian Governor but the statutes call for the Governor and the President of the Panama Canal Company to be the same person (Tab B).5 Mr. Brucker, in a [illegible in the original] with Mr. [illegible in the original], indicated his view that by statute the Governor and the President of the Company must be an (Army) engineer. In the event a civilian Governor, reporting to the President through the State Department or directly to the Department, is named, it would be desirable to have the stock of the Panama Canal Company transferred to the Secretary of State. At present the President has delegated the Secretary of the Army as sole stockholder. 5 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of the Legal Adviser’s opinion, as conveyed in a memorandum on March 18 to Merchant, is in ARA/PAN Files, Lot 65 D 176, “Policy - Panama 1960.”
