March 1952–February 1953
235
oil controversy on a realistic basis. He is loyal to the Shah, and an indi-
cation that he is in the Shah’s favor is that the Shah took him to Shiraz
as a member of his entourage. Politically, he is persona grata to the Na-
tional Front which might accept him as a constitutional replacement of
Mosadeq. Also, he is a friend of Kashani. The Iranian non-communist
trade unions like him since, as Minister of Interior, he was very cooper-
ative with them. His position in the Senate is regarded as good, and he
has many respectable political friends both there and elsewhere.
Perhaps also in his favor is the fact that in 1942 the British, regarding
him as a principal link between the Iranians and the Germans, kid-
napped him and interned him in Palestine for a considerable period.
Pyman does not feel that he bears a grudge against the British for this
and Zahedi in fact said, in explanation of his attitude toward the
Germans, that he hopes the British hold no continuing grudge against
him. He is an anti-communist and has a good record as Minister of Inte-
rior and Chief of Police. He is regarded as a leading contender for the
job of Prime Minister, either as a compromise candidate vis-a`-vis the
Shah and the National Front, or as a “dictator” under the Shah.
3) Arfa—Arfa is not a serious contender, although his name has
cropped up from time to time. He is anti-communist and in fact was
jailed by Qavam as being too anti-communist during the latter’s re-
gime. He is unstable and was described as a “wild man”. He has friends
in and near the National Front, although this friendship may derive
from his insuperable hatred of Razmara and his collaboration with the
National Front to oust him. He lives on a farm and is not active polit-
ically now. The Shah’s attitude is not known, although the General and
his wife were formerly among the Palace set.
4) Garzan—Garzan, Chief of the General Staff, is not a likely candi-
date, although his name has been mentioned from time to time. He
does not have a forceful personality although in general he is regarded
as a good military man. He has never played an active role in politics.
National Front Candidates
1) Maki—Although Maki is sometimes regarded as a moderate, it
is believed that he is more an opportunist. As such he would probably
endeavor to settle the oil controversy if he could get away with it. His
firebrand statements in Abadan should not be taken too seriously. His
position on the oil matter is not on the basis of principle but on the basis
of what is to his advantage. Contrary to Mosadeq’s record, that of Maki
is not in opposition to the Shah or the Shah’s prerogatives. A former
Qavam man, Maki has important connections with the Qavam party
and could get the support of a certain number of non-National Front
politicians. His relations with Kashani are probably not good, an im-
portant factor being that in the recent elections he received more votes
as Deputy from Tehran than did Kashani. Although he would be con-
