1232 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI The President opened the meeting by thanking the delegation for their service at the Special Session. He pointed out that a number of new U.S. arms control policies had been undertaken in the last sixteen months, in such areas as non-proliferation, SALT, CTB, ASAT, Indian Ocean, and conventional arms transfers. In this latter field, we have unilaterally imposed a series of annual reductions, while honoring previous commitments in a minimal way. We are in close consultation with our key allies and other powers on this topic. At the Special Session the delegation can stand on this solid record. The President recalled his discussions with Callaghan, Schmidt, and Giscard about their proposals to the Special Session. We are in the midst of reinvigorating the MBFR talks and have recently had a fairly favorable response in those talks. In short, progress is being made on a number of fronts. How can we now help constructively to make a success of SSOD and to lay the ground work for future arms control efforts? Ambassador Young reported that the Vice President’s speech2 had set a realistic tone for a serious discussion of complex issues at the Special Session. Other countries recognized that the U.S. is taking the Special Session seriously. To the extent that there was any disappointment, it was because there had been high hopes for U.S. moral leadership, embodied perhaps in one or two creative initiatives. The Vice President had said that we were there to listen, however, leaving open the possibility that our policies would evolve. The U.S. Delegation wanted to report to the President mid-way through the Special Session on possible U.S. contributions to building a consensus document. The President asked what we could do now to be more constructive. Ambassador Young reported that he and Governor Harriman had worked out some language that might be helpful. Under the nonproliferation treaty, all nuclear powers are committed to moving to eliminate our nuclear arsenals and to offering security assurances to non-nuclear weapons states. On the latter, the President came close in his speech at the United Nations,3 and the language that Cy Vance has recommended would go the rest of the way. The delegation’s original instructions to oppose cutoff proposals were insufficiently forthcoming. The new language that the President has approved would give the delegation latitude on cutoff. We are far ahead of the Soviets on this issue. The President interjected that on negative security assurances he is prepared to let Cy Vance issue a statement along the lines of the language that had been worked out previously. 2 See Document 495. 3 See footnote 4, Document 473.
