1232
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
The President opened the meeting by thanking the delegation for
their service at the Special Session. He pointed out that a number of
new U.S. arms control policies had been undertaken in the last sixteen
months, in such areas as non-proliferation, SALT, CTB, ASAT, Indian
Ocean, and conventional arms transfers. In this latter field, we have
unilaterally imposed a series of annual reductions, while honoring pre-
vious commitments in a minimal way. We are in close consultation
with our key allies and other powers on this topic. At the Special Ses-
sion the delegation can stand on this solid record. The President re-
called his discussions with Callaghan, Schmidt, and Giscard about
their proposals to the Special Session. We are in the midst of reinvigo-
rating the MBFR talks and have recently had a fairly favorable response
in those talks. In short, progress is being made on a number of fronts.
How can we now help constructively to make a success of SSOD and to
lay the ground work for future arms control efforts?
Ambassador Young reported that the Vice President’s speech2 had
set a realistic tone for a serious discussion of complex issues at the Spe-
cial Session. Other countries recognized that the U.S. is taking the Spe-
cial Session seriously. To the extent that there was any disappointment,
it was because there had been high hopes for U.S. moral leadership,
embodied perhaps in one or two creative initiatives. The Vice President
had said that we were there to listen, however, leaving open the possi-
bility that our policies would evolve. The U.S. Delegation wanted to re-
port to the President mid-way through the Special Session on possible
U.S. contributions to building a consensus document.
The President asked what we could do now to be more constructive.
Ambassador Young reported that he and Governor Harriman had
worked out some language that might be helpful. Under the non-
proliferation treaty, all nuclear powers are committed to moving to
eliminate our nuclear arsenals and to offering security assurances to
non-nuclear weapons states. On the latter, the President came close in
his speech at the United Nations,3 and the language that Cy Vance has
recommended would go the rest of the way. The delegation’s original
instructions to oppose cutoff proposals were insufficiently forth-
coming. The new language that the President has approved would give
the delegation latitude on cutoff. We are far ahead of the Soviets on this
issue.
The President interjected that on negative security assurances he is
prepared to let Cy Vance issue a statement along the lines of the lan-
guage that had been worked out previously.
2 See Document 495.
3 See footnote 4, Document 473.
