1956  1145
argument that we were arranging to release a selected fraction of the 
large number of Chinese in prison for propaganda purposes. As far as 
the public in general is concerned, we are satisfied that the Red Cross 
visits will be adequate proof that each individual was given an impar­
tial hearing and a free choice.
A Red Cross representative came in on August 10 to work out the 
details. They have named two of their senior men to do the job, one 
taking the prisons in the West and the other those in the East. They will 
come to Washington on the 15th to be briefed and will begin their visits 
on Monday, August 20. We estimate that they will be able to complete 
the job within that week. Enclosed is the letter we propose sending to 
the prisoners advising them of the impending Red Cross visits.
If all goes as planned, we should know by the meeting following 
that of August 21 how many convicts wish to go to Mainland China, go 
to Taiwan or stay where they are. We should appreciate your thoughts 
on how to get the greatest advantage from the operation from that 
point on. We are tentatively thinking of having any who wished to go 
to Mainland China write to the Indian Embassy. This would bring the 
Indians back into the act; they could hardly refuse to assume respon­
sibility when an individual prisoner had written to them. We would 
expect also to shift the cost of deportation to the Chinese Communists, 
by having the convict request financial assistance for his return.
We may wish to make the whole story public at some point. It 
does not seem likely that public pressure of this sort would cause the 
Chinese Communists to shift the position they have so firmly taken—­
apparently in order not to be compelled to let all the Americans go 
immediately. However, we have a good case and if we place it before 
the world before the Chinese Communists do, it will put them on the 
defensive and demonstrate to any reasonable person why the United 
States has reason to be distrustful of Chinese Communist promises. 
Please give us your views.
Your letter No. 41 of July 26 came August 7. Thanks for it and 
for the news and for the comments it contained. We had already sent 
out your guidance for the August 9 meeting when your letter arrived. 
Before the next meeting, we will consider the question of what you 
might be able to imply regarding the trade discussions in the event 
of a satisfactory agreement on renunciation of force and the release of 
the prisoners.
Certainly nothing new is in prospect on the horizon as grist for 
your mill in the next few meetings. It looks as if it will be the same old 
wine and it will be difficult to put it in any new bottles.
I am sorry that we still don’t have the complete text of the letter 
from Bob McCann. Even the excerpt which I mentioned has been mis­
placed temporarily. We hope to have it for the next pouch.
