Human Rights 171 through the demands for suffrage and reasserting itself following the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s. Legislation frequently includes both the terms race and sex. When it does not there is often parallel legislation. Likewise, many private and voluntary organizations are becoming increasingly interested in women rights. The AID Women in Development Office is seeking contact and response to requests from both the traditional women’s groups and the newer women’s rights groups concerning the women in development issue. The women in development sections of the Foreign Assistance Act both current and pending6 are responses to the women’s rights movement within the U.S. and International Women’s Year. The AID Action Plan 1. Meetings, seminars and conferences with experts and other interested persons at home and abroad on the general issue of women in development and on the specific elements contained in the World Plan of Action for the Decade for Women.7 2. Concentration on the Five Year Minimum Goals as set forth in the U.N. World Plan which include: a. A marked increase in literacy and civic education of women through primary, secondary and vocational training to the highest level of education; b. Participation in policy and decision making by women; c. Recognition of the economic value of women’s work, both in traditional work (home and child care which is uncompensated) and in that work inside and outside the home done for cash or in exchange for goods or services; d. Increased provision for health education, sanitation, nutrition, family education, family planning and other welfare services. 3. Constant monitoring of all programs, projects and activities. This monitoring to be in accordance with the current legislation, with implementation to include: 6 The “current” reference is to the Percy amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1973 (S. 1443; P.L. 93–189), which Nixon signed into law on December 17, 1973. The amendment added a Section 113—Integrating Women Into National Economies—to the act. The “pending” reference is to the International Development and Food Assistance Act (H.R. 6714), which contained an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act directing the President to submit to Congress a report on the impact of development programs, projects, and activities on the integration of women into the developing economies of countries receiving U.S. development assistance. Carter signed the International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1977 (P.L. 95–88; 91 Stat. 533–552) into law on August 3, 1977. 7 Delegates to the World Conference of the International Women’s Year, held in Mexico City June 19–July 2, 1975, approved a World Plan of Action designed as a “general guide” toward eliminating discrimination against women. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–14, Part 1, Documents on the United Nations, 1973–1976, Documents 175–185. See also Document 342.
