rested. In answering the first contention of the note of December 26, 1923,
regarding the meaning of the words “in gold” they have, in so doing,
refuted the second which, as the Chinese note itself admits, refers solely to
the manner of execution of the obligations subscribed to by the Chinese
Government in 1901. The character and the total amount of the debt owed
by virtue of an obligation cannot depend upon the means adopted for the
settlement of this debt.
After having recalled this principle of law which is certainly recognized by
the Chinese Government, the eight Ministers consider it their duty to take
up the principal points of the portion of the notes of December 26, 1923,
which concern the exchange of letters of July 2, 1905. The arrangement
resulting from this exchange confirmed and carried out Article 6 of the
Final Protocol which it had completed. Such as it is, it answers perfectly to
their present needs and the Signatory Powers have never thought of
modifying it.
 
In recalling the circumstances which preceded and brought about the
exchange of letters of 1905, the note of December 26, 1923, makes it
evident that at that time the Chinese Government endeavored to secure
payment of the arrears of the Indemnity of 1901 in silver and that it was
obliged to recognize its obligation to pay “in gold”. This fact furnishes a
new argument in favor of the ruling “in gold” as it has been set forth above.
This is worth noting in passing.
It would be possible to dispute the correctness of this statement of the
Chinese note to which the preceding paragraph refers. But the eight
Ministers limit themselves in this instance to the repairing of one omission
in the said recital and of noting that the arrangement of 1905 had for aim
and object the solution of the problem presented by the changing of silver,
the currency of China the debtor, into gold.
China, having no gold, has had to buy and still has to buy with the silver
she possesses, that is to say, with Taels, the gold necessary for the service of
the Indemnity of 1901. The method of this transaction not having been
