500 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III ting on with the negotiations. In response to a direct question he denied that France will adopt a spoiling posture aimed at killing the MTN by pressing the Commission negotiators to drag the thing out. Like Laboulaye, however, he said that the French intend to fight over every point of interest to them and will not feel pressured by the December deadline. 6. Comment: While none of the foregoing is especially new or surprising, it does provide further confirmation that Giscard is personally controlling the French MTN negotiators. At the appropriate time, Barre and Deniau might be helpful in working matters out. But I believe that judgments about this can be made only as specific situations develop during the fall. Meanwhile I suggest the best course will be to proceed with business as usual in Geneva; to keep in touch with the French and maintain good personal relations on MTN matters; and to try to create a situation in which pressure from within the Community—especially Schmidt—can be brought into play before we have to lock horns with them directly. Schmidt and Giscard are to meet bilaterally on September 14–15 and we hope that the FRG can again make clear its commitment to a successful MTN. End Comment. Hartman 160. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, September 12, 1978 SUBJECT Letter to Fukuda Attached at Tab A is a draft reply to the letter from Prime Minister Fukuda (Tab B)2 that you saw. The reply has been cleared with State, Treasury, CEA, and Jim Fallows’ office.3 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, 1–12/78. No classification marking. Sent for action. 2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is a September 2 letter from Togo to Carter transmitting a September 2 message from Fukuda on Japan’s economic stimulus package. Carter initialed at the top of Togo’s letter. 3 In a September 22 note to Carter, Brzezinski noted that he had held back the draft letter “until the conclusion of the Camp David Summit and in the belief that it would be
