Chapter 2, January–June 1989 171 the paper and have not been reviewed by any agency. The approaches in this paper focus on ways to improve stability: MIRV warhead sublimit; warhead-­to-missile ratio limit; silo-­based MIRV ban; silo-­based MIRV-­limit; total silo-­based ICBM ban; future production ban on MIRV ICBMs; and immediate portal monitoring of mobile final assembly facilities.10 You might find it useful to encourage the discussion to proceed along the lines of the categories of problems potential initiatives might address. Three categories are:11 — Maintain or Increase Current Warning Time. The ban on short time-­of-­flight missiles has been suggested. Other initiatives such as the Weinberger-Yazov idea (never finally agreed) to notify strategic exercises, might be considered.12 — Minimize or Eliminate Military Consequences of ICBM Silo Vulnerability. Several types of limits or bans on silo-­based warheads or MIRVed warheads have been suggested. These approaches all tend to encourage a shift to mobile ICBMs or SLBMs and thus are in tension with some of the measures designed to address mobile ICBM verification problems (see below). Also, a production ban on future MIRV ICBMs would attempt to have these forces, fixed and mobile, “whither away” over time.13 — Minimize Consequences of Mobile ICBM Cheating. This category includes a ban on MIRV mobiles, and/or low mobile warhead limits.14 Both types of measures make more difficult any shift away from vulnerable silos and may encourage greater reliance on silo-­based ICBMs. An additional measure, to install now INF-­like portal monitoring systems at mobile final assembly facilities, would address a problem all agencies agree exists: the longer we wait for START, the greater will be 10 Gates underlined the latter portion of this sentence beginning with “MIRV warhead sublimit,” drew a vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside it, and wrote: “MIRVed mobile ban.” 11 Gates drew a bracket in the left-­hand margin atop this section and circled “Three categories are:” In the left-­hand margin he wrote: “Are these the right problems? Any others at that strategic level?” 12 Gates underlined “The ban on short time-­of-­flight missiles has been suggested” and “strategic exercises” and wrote the number 1 and circled it in the right-­hand margin beside this section. 13 Gates underlined “a production ban,” wrote the number 2 and circled it in the right-­hand margin beside this section, and drew a vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this section. 14 Gates underlined “ban on MIRV mobiles” and “or low mobile warhead limits,” wrote the number 3 and circled it in the right-­hand margin beside this section, and drew a short vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this sentence.
