Foreign Relations of the
United States, 1958–1960
Volume V
American Republics
Microfiche
Supplement
Editor
Harriet D. Schwar
Editor in Chief
John P. Glennon
Department of State
Washington

DEPARTMENT OF STATE PUBLICATION 9896
Bureau of Public Affairs
Office of the Historian
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington, D.C. 20402

About the Digital Edition
In creating this digital edition, the Office of the Historian focused
on maintaining the original structure of the microfiche supplement
while aligning with the current standards of the Foreign Relations series.
Numerous documents are partially or completely illegible; those that
were known to have had such problems during the preparation of the
microfiche were stamped: “Best copy available” and the editors have
indicated gaps in legibility by inserting “[illegible in the original].” All
brackets, except those indicating illegible or redacted text, are in the
original.
During review, the editors discovered the following problems with
images in the microfiche edition and made the following corrections:
Documents in the Nicaragua chapter (NI–1 to NI–26) have received
the normalized prefix of “NI–” to the document identifier rather than
the mix of “NI–” and “HU–” prefixes that were previously used in the
microfiche version.
Documents in the Chile chapter (CH–1 to CH–41) have received
the normalized prefix of “CH–” to the document identifier rather than
the mix of “CH–” and “CI–” prefixes that were previously used in the
microfiche version.
Cross-references to the Foreign Relations series have been corrected
and expanded throughout the footnotes.

SUBJECT
United States Policy Toward Latin America
Assistant Secretary Rubottom. Secret.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  3
Problem
To analyze United States policy toward Latin America in the light
of present-­day economic trends.
Discussion
1. Trade is the cornerstone of our relations with Latin America.
When high-­level trade is sustained with resulting good prices, most fac-
ets of our relations with the area are good. In 1955 and 1956 total trade
between the United States and Latin America reached an approximately
7½ billion dollar annual figure, almost balanced in each direction.
2. In the last quarter of 1957 Latin American total exports to the
United States began to slump, with prospect of a decline in 1958 of at
least seven percent. The problem has been especially critical in lead,
zinc, tin and copper. Coffee, the most vital commodity of all, started
to decline but this was stopped by the main producers holding cof-
fee off the market; most experts are predicting serious trouble ahead
for the coffee market. Although we assisted financially Mexico,
Bolivia, Chile and Peru, which were affected by the metals decline,
this was offset by the profoundly negative impression created by the
Administration-­sponsored Bill last year for increased tariffs on lead
and zinc.
The one country where we have had a serious trade problem for
generations—Argentina—­because our products are not complemen-
tary, may very likely slip back into its traditionally anti-United States
position unless we are able, through large loans and other means, to
overcome this fact-­of-­life situation.
3. While in the past we have opposed vigorously any trade
between Latin America and the Soviet bloc in strategic materials, we
have not opposed other trade. Although Latin American trade with
the Soviet bloc, about one percent of the area’s total trade, decreased
Latin America will attempt to sell more to the Communists if the
present decline in exports to the United States continues. We should
not and do not oppose such trade in non-­strategic items, except with
Red China, although we would expect Latin American Governments
to be wary and to avoid political pitfalls. Brazil is now considering
whether to resume diplomatic relations with the USSR, undoubtedly
as a part of the price for increased commercial relations, with the out-
come uncertain. The resumption of relations with the USSR by Brazil
would certainly be a political setback for the United States but it may
be unavoidable.
4. In addition to trade, our economic policy toward Latin America
has been based on private investment and loans, with grant aid only
for emergencies. This policy, while never wholly palatable to Latin
America, was sound and the results paid off to Latin America’s benefit

while times were good. With trade slipping and prices of some com-
modities sharply down, this policy, while still valid as far as it goes,
will require some strengthening in order to improve both its real and
its public relations impact. Latin American Governments and peoples
tend to judge our policies as much on a comparative basis as on an abso-
lute basis. Thus, we shall have to be especially vigilant in weighing the
impact of decisions in other areas on Latin America.
Recommendations
1. We should administratively earmark a portion, not less than
15%, of the Development Loan Fund2 for Latin America.
2. We should take a more positive and flexible position in the
Eximbank toward loan applications from Latin America, with empha-
sis on longer-­term loans.
3. We should review our policy of opposing the establishment
of an Inner-American Bank. It may be feasible to use the funds for
our contribution, say one-­third, to such a fund; we would thus have
a controlling role in the bank; probably no step by the United States
in the financial field would have as much propaganda impact as
this one.
4. We should emphasize to Latin America the necessity of avoiding
political penetration by the Soviet Bloc as they undertake to expand
their commercial dealings with the Communists.
5. The Administration should be prepared to withstand domes-
tic pressures to restrict imports, either by tariffs or quotas, of Latin
American products for in so doing it can offset to a degree the bad
effects of such measures, if voted by Congress; if the Administration
cannot do this, the Department should be prepared to face the conse-
quences of worsening relations with its closest friends and neighbors
in Latin America.
2 The development Loan Fund (DLF) was originally established within the
International Cooperation Administration by the Mutual Security Act of 1957 (71 Stat.
355), and it became an independent corporate agency of the United States under the pro-
sibilities subject to the foreign policy guidance of the Secretary of State. Its functions
involved, inter alia, provision of investment capital for specific development projects in
developing areas through loans or certain types of credits directly to private enterprises
or governments. For documentation on the activities of the Fund during the period 1958–

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  5
ETA–3.
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State1
Washington, January 31, 1958.
SUBJECT
Economic Policies—Latin America
The following comments relate to the portion of the Secretary’s
statement which was assigned to E in Mr. Howe’s memorandum of
January 24.2
I. Latin American Exports.
In our economic relations with Latin America, the most import-
ant problem facing us is the decline in demand and prices of Latin
American exports which directly affect their budgetary and economic
development plans. Related to this, is the growing protectionist senti-
ment in the United States, stimulated in part by the current fall off in
our domestic economic activity, which threatens to restrict their access
to the United States market. All of this makes it easier for Russia to
increase its commercial relations with the area.
This problem can best be attacked on a commodity by commodity,
rather than on a general, basis. The most urgent facet of the general
problem is what we can do if, as expected, the Tariff Commission rec-
ommends soon increased tariffs or quotas on lead and zinc. The Latin
American countries most affected would be Mexico and Peru. We shall
soon be faced with a similar problem regarding copper which is of great
importance to Chile.
My suggestion is that we consider at once the position we take
with respect to lead and zinc. It would be best from a foreign relations
standpoint if we were not to impose additional tariffs or restrictions
on the import of lead and zinc, but it is possible that the President may
consider himself committed to tariff action in response to a report by
the Tariff Commission. On the assumption that the President will feel
so committed, we should develop a program along the following lines:
(1) Explore the feasibility of our participating in an international lead and
zinc study or commodity group built around a competent secretariat which
would make objective studies of trends in supply and demand and rec-
ommend measures by exporting countries to keep them in approximate
balance. Our participation in such a group would be of great psycho-
logical and political advantage to us in the underdeveloped countries.
by Assistant Secretary Mann.
2 See Document ETA–1.

We would not expect it to perform miracles in stabilizing prices but
we could hope that over a period of years the Secretariat could intro-
duce at some degree order in the situation. The difficulty is opposition
within the United States, on doctrinaire grounds, to any commodity
arrangement, and probable opposition on similar grounds by Canada
and other industrial countries. Nevertheless, it would be of great value
in our relations with lead and zinc producing countries to be able to
offer this as a means of easing the blow which they will feel they have
sustained when we raise the tariff on lead and zinc.
(2) Avoid by all means the imposition of quotas on the import of lead and
zinc. This is necessary because the marginal producers of lead and zinc
in the United States will urge quotas, as probably the only means of sal-
vaging their position. Quotas would be administratively very difficult,
and from a policy standpoint extremely injurious.
(3) Seek to develop effective legislation to take care of industries and
communities in the United States which have been seriously affected by
exhaustion of resources which they were exploiting, or which have oth-
erwise suffered economic depression through circumstances beyond
their control. Action on this front will demonstrate to other countries
that we seek to solve our own problems through domestic action, and
not through transferring the burden of adjustment to countries less able
to bear it than we. We are making a more detailed study of the possibil-
ities in this field.
(4) Continue to consider stockpile acquisition through direct purchase or
through barter as a possible means of assisting the lead and zinc indus-
try. We now have a large stockpile, and it may be too large, in public
security terms. The special stockpile committee3 has just reported to
Gordon Gray that the stockpile should not be used for domestic price
support purchases, but we have used it for this purpose rather exten-
sively in the past few years, and we cannot taper it off too quickly. It
still has some validity in lead and zinc.
As other commodity problems arise, notably copper, a similar
analysis should be undertaken, and a program should be developed
which will enable us to avoid the kind of restrictive action which many
people consider inevitable in lead and zinc. With respect to commod-
ities which we do not produce, such as coffee, we should change our
attitude and be willing to consider, on their merits, proposals for com-
modity stabilization. This change would be vital in connection with the
chief Latin American commodity, coffee.
3 Apparent reference to the Special Stockpile Advisory Committee established
in October 1957 to review U.S. stockpile policies. A joint Department of State-United
States Information Agency message containing information about the formation of the

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  7
II. Financial Assistance.
As dollars earned by Latin American exports decline, it will be even
more important to increase aid through the World and Exim-Banks and
through the Development Loan Fund. ARA and E are jointly working
on collecting and appraising projects with a view to determining which
ones are eligible for DLF financing.4
4 A note from Rubottom to Howe, dated January 31, attached to the source text,
reads as follows: “I concur in substance, but I would like to discuss one or two parts of
the paper with Mr. Mann himself.”
A handwritten notation from Mann to Howe on Rubottom’s note reads as follows:
“I think R[ubottom] will want to leave open the possibility of a quota instead of a tar-
iff & other details that can very well be decided until we have the report of the Tariff
Commission.”
ETA–4.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Inter-
American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom) and the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Mann).1
Washington, March 26, 1958.
SUBJECT
Transmittal of Task Force2 Paper on U.S. Economic Policy Toward Latin America
1. Yesterday the Secretary called for the memorandum on a
revised U.S. economic policy toward Latin America. The assignment
was made on January 24 just before the Secretary went to the Baghdad
Pact Meeting and the delay has been caused by two things: (a) rapidly
developing petroleum situation, and (b) frequent absences of key per-
sonnel from Washington.
2. The Task Force feels that its work has been completed so far
as possible. Supporting papers on lead-­zinc (Tab A), copper (Tab B),
Secret. Drafted and initialed by Turkel.
2 On January 31, Assistant Secretaries Rubottom, Mann, and Gerard Smith of the
Policy Planning Staff (S/P) agreed to establish a task force to review the entire range of
U.S. economic policy toward Latin America. Representatives from the two geographic
bureaus and S/P staffed the Task Force, and drafted the report and all supporting papers.
Documentation relating to the work of the Task Force is in several Department of State lot
Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553.

petroleum loan policy (Tab C), and financial assistance (Tab D) are
transmitted herewith. A supporting paper on coffee is being revised
and will be ready in two days. It will be Tab E.3
3. Early in March we obtained approval from all geographic
bureaus on the draft then submitted. Changes since then have been
so minor that I think it need not be resubmitted. The Planning Staff
and Ambassador Randall also approved. Ambassador Dreier approved
but commented that the changes from existing policy mean little more
than a “willingness to study these problems”. He hoped we could gain
credit for a positive decision by announcing a new policy.
4. The Task Force does not presume to say how the new policy
should be announced if the Secretary approves thereof. It is my hope
that there will be no announcements of policy change but that we will
forge ahead with action bit by bit until, a few months hence, Latin
America will wake up to the realization that a somewhat changed spirit
animates our relationship. I should hope that we would then say that
we have always had this sense of solidarity: it only seems to be greater
now when the worsened economic situation of our neighbors requires
greater efforts by the United States to help them.
Attachment
Review of U.S. Economic Policies Toward Latin America4
Washington, undated.
Problem
What changes should be made in U.S. economic policies toward
Latin America as a result of the decline in commodity prices, the open-
ing of a Soviet economic offensive in this area, and the rise of protec-
tionist sentiment in the U.S.?
Summary
This memorandum deals with financial assistance, commodity
and trade problems, and policy toward Latin American trade with the
Sino-Soviet Bloc.
With respect to commodity and trade problems, the most signifi-
cant recommendations are the following, which place increased empha-
sis on possible commodity study groups or stabilization arrangements:
(1) adopt, if possible, measures other than tariff increases to provide
3 None of the supporting papers mentioned here are printed, except Tab C.
4 The source text is marked “Final Draft.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  9
relief for domestic lead-­zinc industry aid, if a tariff increase proves
unavoidable, limit its scope and duration and indicate our willingness
to join a multilateral study of a lead-­zinc stabilization agreement; (2)
oppose any increase in the currently stipulated tax on imported copper
and be prepared to discuss the possibility of establishing a study group
looking towards an international copper agreement; (3) study the feasi-
bility of a western hemisphere oil commission to review the oil supply
and demand situation; and (4) indicate U.S. willingness to cooperate in
a multilateral coffee study group on a world-­wide basis.
As to financial assistance, the more important recommendations
are: (1) that the Eximbank continue its development loan program in
Latin America and be prepared, if necessary, to make assistance avail-
able supplementary to IMF assistance, to help meet temporary pay-
ments problems; (2) that the reasons for the recently low volume of
IBRD loans to the area be investigated and, if indicated, that efforts then
be made to increase IBRD operations; (3) that U.S. public loans be made
to state petroleum enterprises for certain very limited purposes when
U.S. foreign policy objectives thereby can be served; and (4) that we
study the desirability of an Inter-American development bank.
In regard to the Sino-Soviet Bloc economic offensive in Latin
America, it is recommended that the U.S.: (1) continue its existing pol-
icy of not opposing expansion of trade-­in non-­strategic commodities
with the European Soviet Bloc; (2) maintain efforts to persuade individ-
ual countries, as appropriate, to minimize or eliminate their trade and
financial arrangements with Communist China; and (3) alert countries
to the political and economic pitfalls associated with certain aspects of
trade with the Sino-Soviet Bloc.
Commodity Problems
As producers of primary products, the Latin American countries
are perhaps more interested in stable and remunerative prices for their
commodities than in any other aspect of our economic relations. They
feel they are particularly vulnerable because in most of the countries,
foreign exchange earnings depend on only one or a few commodities.
Generally, raw material prices decline sooner and stay depressed longer
than do the prices for finished products. The traditional U.S. position
has been strongly opposed to international commodity agreements.
Wheat and sugar are exceptions.
Efforts have been made in the recommendations below to ease
gradually into a changed position on commodity agreements.
1. The lead-­zinc problem is an important one for which there is no
easy solution. It seems realistic to assume that the Tariff Commission
report will probably recommend maximum increases in duties and
possibly even import quotas. Yet if increased protection is granted to

the lead-­zinc industry serious injury will be done to U.S. relations with
a considerable number of countries in Latin America and elsewhere.
Since the summer of 1957, when the Administration sponsored a
bill providing for increased protection for lead and zinc,5 there have
been important developments affecting the U.S. position of leadership
in the world, and it can well be argued that a new situation now exists.
Therefore, a new and exhaustive search has been made in the
Department for an acceptable alternative. A program has been devised,
consisting of assistance of various kinds for the communities, workers,
and companies involved in the lead-­zinc industry, and it is being put
forward separately for consideration at a high level in the Department.
Opinions differ as to whether there is a worthwhile chance of getting it
accepted in Congress.
On this basis, it is recommended:
(a) that the United States adopt, if possible, measures other than
tariff increases or quotas to provide relief for the domestic lead-zinc
industry, and
(b) that if a tariff increase proves to be unavoidable, every effort
should be made to limit its scope and duration. When the tariff increase is
announced there should be a simultaneous announcement that the U.S. is
prepared to participate in an international study group for lead and zinc.
2. Copper
(a) Oppose the pending bills which would increase the tax on
imported copper, and
(b) in response to requests, if made, indicate to supplying countries
a willingness to discuss copper prospects, including possible establish-
ment of a regular study group looking toward an international copper
agreement.
3. Petroleum
Events in the petroleum field are moving rapidly. By the Voluntary
Oil Import Program6 the Administration is trying to reduce imports
into Districts I–IV to 12 per cent of domestic production, and has also
imposed a limitation on imports into District V. This additional import
reduction into Districts I–IV, coupled with the problem of trying to get
the major oil companies to relinquish portions of their quotas to new
respectively, to the House Committee on Ways and Means, and the Senate Finance
Committee; they were not acted upon during the session.
6 In July 1957 a voluntary oil import program was recommended by President
Eisenhower’s Special Committee to Investigate Crude Oil Imports for the purpose of
Economic Developments, Lot 70 D 467)

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  11
importers, threatens the continuance of the voluntary quota system
which to date has been remarkably successful.
Considerable pressure is being exerted on the Administration to
convert the voluntary program to a mandatory program. While restive
under the voluntary program, Venezuela has indicated that conversion
to a mandatory program would be considered a violation of the U.S.–
Venezuela trade agreement, and that it was studying the imposition of
retaliatory measures in that event.
The seriousness of the problem to our relations with Venezuela and
Canada subsequently moved the United States to suggest high level con-
sultation by all three governments. Accordingly, early in March, consul-
tations were held in Venezuela7 with high level Canadian observers.8
The U.S. delegation sought to obtain acquiescence to the continued
imposition of unilateral import quotas by the U.S. under Article 7 of the
Trade Agreements Act,9 and on a mandatory basis if that should be nec-
essary, on the ground that a serious price decline would be imminent in
the absence of such controls. No definite decisions or agreements were
reached. Venezuela reserved the position that it objected in principle to
restrictive measures on its petroleum exports, and that additional restric-
tive measures (e.g. mandatory controls) would give grounds for their
consideration of retaliatory measures. The advantage of such consulta-
tion was affirmed by all parties and the desirability of their continuance
as required. Both Venezuela and Canada have indicated their interest in
the creation of a more permanent type of inter-Governmental consultative
body for a continuing review of petroleum matters of mutual interest.
Recommendation
It is recommended that:
(a) to meet the immediate problem, the type of inter-Governmental
consultation undertaken be continued, and
(b) study be undertaken of the feasibility of a western hemisphere
oil commission which would keep the western hemisphere supply and
demand situation under constant review.
4. Coffee
(a) At the appropriate time in the near future indicate that the
United States is prepared to cooperate in a multilateral coffee study
group on a world-­wide basis, and that
Ambassador to Venezuela attended as an observer. Documents pertaining to this subject
8 At this point, the source text was hand-­corrected to read “. . . observers also present.”
level of imports of any product when he found that increased imports were impairing or
threatening to impair the national security. For text of the Act, see 69 Stat, 162.

(b) the United States would be prepared to consult with the
Preparatory Group of the International Coffee Convention, signed at
forum acceptable to the Latin American and African coffee producers.
Financial Assistance
The Latin Americans persistently contend that existing sources of
financing are inadequate, in the light of their enormous needs of for-
eign capital for development, to attain a satisfactory rate of economic
development. Many are irritated by our insistence that the major con-
tributions to such development must be made by private enterprise,
Latin American as well as foreign. Without changing this cornerstone
of our policy on financial assistance, or the hard criteria of the existing
banking institutions, there is much which can be done to satisfy the
legitimate and reasonable aspiration of these countries.
Our loan policy is already undergoing some changes and the rec-
ommendations below, although seemingly novel, will merely maintain
or somewhat accelerate the existing trend. For example, our present
policy states that we make grants of soft loans in Latin America only
when a country finds itself in a temporary emergency which it cannot
meet with the resources at its command. The establishment of DLF and
PL 48011 have already rendered part of this rule obsolete. The contin-
uance of grants to Bolivia and Haiti for years have strained the term
“temporary emergency” and yet nobody would seriously contend that
we can withdraw grant aid from these two countries. Guatemala may
also be in this category. In essence the rule said, “Regardless of our
assistance policies in other areas, in Latin America there is no grant aid
except in case of temporary emergency.”
Steps have already been taken to bring our NSC policy statement
into accord with the facts and practice. It is expected that the rule will
be dropped and decisions made on a case basis as overall U.S. interest
require. It is not anticipated that any more money will be spent as a
result of dropping this rule.
Recommendations:
1. Continue the recent and satisfactory acceleration of the Export-
Import Bank activities in Latin America. (It is assumed that the lending
authority of that Bank will be extended as requested).
10 Reference is to the International Coffee Conference, held at Rio de Janeiro, January

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  13
2. If, as seems probable, commodity prices continue to decline and
balance of payments problems worsen the U.S. (through the Eximbank
or Treasury) should be prepared increasingly to extend temporary bal-
ance of payments support, in concert with such support from the IMF
(private banks where possible) upon evidence that the countries con-
cerned are taking reasonable self-­help measures.
3. Determine the reasons for the relatively low volume of recent
IBRD loans to Latin America and, if so indicated, take appropriate steps
such as high level representations by the Department to IBRD manage-
ment to induce an increased volume and broader range of IBRD loans
to Latin America (including increased financial and technical assistance
to national development financing agencies).
4. Taking into account world-­wide requirements, employ DLF
credits in Latin America in accordance with the criteria of the DLF.
5. Participate actively in the study called for by Resolution XVIII
of the Buenos Aires Conference concerning the desirability for estab-
lishment of an Inter-American development bank.12 Particular attention
should be given to the type of operations appropriate to such a bank and
capital contributions to it, as well as management and voting rights.
Petroleum Development Policy
There has been in force an informal, but nevertheless rigid, prohi-
bition against U.S. financial assistance to foreign government petroleum
agencies. It is recommended that the rule be changed as follows:
(a) In the light of developing circumstances, we should work care-
fully in the direction of limited and selective loan assistance to petroleum
projects of foreign governments, subject to the condition that foreign pol-
icy objectives will be served, and particularly in the expectation that the
attitude toward American private capital will be improved by such loans.
(b) Loan assistance may be granted for surface geological work,
transport, storage, refining and marketing. Except for exporter credit
facilities, the loan assistance contemplated will not be granted for
exploratory or developmental drilling.
U.S. Trade with Latin America
The very cornerstone of our relations with Latin America is trade.
When trade is maintained at high levels and commodity prices are
12 For text of the resolution, see Economic Conference of the Organization of American
United States of America With Related Documents (Department of State Publication 6679,

remunerative, nearly all facets of our relations with Latin America are
good.
In the last quarter of 1957 Latin American total exports to the United
States began to slump, with prospect of a decline in 1950 of at least seven
per cent. The problem has been especially critical in lead, zinc, tin and
copper. Coffee, the most vital commodity of all, started to decline but
this was stopped by the main producers holding coffee off the market;
most experts are predicting serious trouble ahead for the coffee market.
Although we extended financial assistance to Mexico, Bolivia, Chile
and Peru, which were affected by the metals decline, this was offset
by the profoundly negative impression created by the Administration-­
sponsored bill last year for increased tariffs on lead and zinc.
Recommendations:
It is recommended that:
(a) The Department continue to emphasize to Congress and business
leaders the importance of a continuing stable and liberal trade policy as
an instrument for attainment of broader U.S. foreign policy objectives.
Conversely emphasize damage to U.S. trade, investments and interna-
tional relations generally which are caused by restrictive actions.
(b) Resist strongly any tendencies within the U.S. Government to
yield to protectionist pressure and oppose, so far as possible, any spe-
cific restrictive actions, except as clearly justified in the national interest.
(c) Review within the Department the present policy against nego-
tiation of reciprocal trade agreements on a bilateral basis.
(d) Review within the Department the U.S. policy toward Latin
American market integration proposals and participate freely in joint
study projects on this subject.
Soviet Bloc Trade
While making determined efforts to evaluate the precise scale and
objectives of Soviet Bloc economic offensive in Latin America:
(a) Maintain the existing policy that the U.S. is not opposed to
expansion of trade in non-­strategic commodities with the European
Soviet Bloc, but encourage individual free-­world countries, wherever
feasible and desirable from a foreign policy standpoint, to minimize
such trade or financial arrangements with Communist China.
(b) Continue to induce Latin American governments to adhere to
relevant COCOM security trade controls, as applied to the Sino-Soviet
Bloc, and

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  15
(c) Try to make countries which engage or contemplate engaging in
trade with the Sino-Soviet Bloc aware of political and economic pitfalls
associated with certain aspects of such trade with the Soviet Bloc, with
particular attention on risks of dependence and political penetration.
If, nevertheless, trade is expanded significantly, or in sensitive
items, such as oil well supplies, we shall have to review the problem
and consider countermeasures. In the absence of a concrete case, it
would be dangerous to attempt specific guidance at this time.
Tab C
Petroleum Development Policy13
Washington, March 20, 1958.
1. Basic Considerations Underlying the Proposed Change in Policy.
(a) Maximum development of petroleum resources in friendly for-
eign countries will strengthen their economies, reduce the burden of
their foreign exchange earnings, and contribute to the mutual defense
strength of the allied and friendly nations.
(b) In certain countries, national policy and legislation limit the
extent of foreign private capital participation in the petroleum industry,
and reserve certain areas of the industry (e.g., exploration and devel-
opment) to official petroleum entities. Failure of these official entities
to obtain capital in the amount required to carry out operations on a
desirable scale has:
(1) Given strength to the propaganda arguments advanced by their
nationalistic elements in these countries, although without foundation,
that the United States Government and foreign oil companies desire the
liquidation of these government petroleum entities, and this has served
to mobilize national support to their monopoly position in the industry.
(2) It has, moreover, resulted in national acquiescence to the actions
of such petroleum monopolies prejudicial to the operations of the pri-
vate foreign oil companies in the marketing and distribution phases
of the industry to which they have been limited. This has reduced
thereby the profitability of the private foreign oil company operations,
threatened their capital investment, limited their expansion, and conse-
quently retarded the country’s economic development.
(c) It is believed that maximum development of the petroleum
industry in any country can only be attained by encouragement of the
competitive force of private capital. Therefore, effort should be made to
13 Drafted by Nestor C. Ortiz of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic
Affairs on March 20.

encourage countries which reserve a large segment of their petroleum
industry to government entities to permit foreign oil company partici-
pation on reasonable terms.
2. Favorable Results Anticipated from the Proposed Change in Policy.
(a) Improvement in the political climate of such countries towards
a more reasonable attitude for admission of private capital to assist in
developing their petroleum resources. This will result from the fact that:
(1) The propaganda argument of the nationalistic elements that the
U.S. Government and foreign oil companies desire the liquidation of
government petroleum entities will be nullified;
(2) The limited assistance proposed for the U.S. Government by
loans to these government petroleum entities or more liberal exporter
credits to American firms in selling supplies to them will strengthen
the political support behind the responsible business and political
elements in these countries desirous of obtaining a legislative change
which would permit maximum development of the country’s petro-
leum resources by attracting the foreign oil industry participation
needed to carry out the scale of operations required; and
(3) Refusing to risk U.S. public funds in loans assistance to the
exploration and development phases of the industry will encourage
wide public support to the contention of the reasonable business and
political elements in these countries that this phase of the industry is
particularly suited to private risk capital, which must be attracted by
terms competitive with those existent in other world petroleum pro-
ducing areas.
(b) By this improved political climate the petroleum monopolies
will find it politically possible to encourage collaboration by foreign oil
companies in mutually satisfactory working arrangements to carry out
such exploration and development as joint ventures, or to release large
areas of the country for concessions to foreign petroleum companies on
terms similar to those in effect in other petroleum producing countries.
(c) Making such loans contingent upon a reasonable attitude
towards foreign private capital presently invested in the petroleum
marketing and distribution phases of the industry will strengthen the
latter’s long-­term position in the country and the profitability of their
operations.
(d) The extension of long-­term exporter credits to American firms
and/or U.S. public loan assistance for such petroleum projects will
assist in maintaining a Western Hemisphere orientation by these coun-
tries, and counteract the penetration efforts of the U.S.S.R. and its satel-
lites into this strategic industry.
(e) The more rapid development which will result for the petro-
leum industry in these countries will relieve the serious burden which
the increasing petroleum demand of these countries is placing on their
foreign exchange earnings.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  17
ETA–5.
Memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of State
for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Secretary of State.1
Washington, March 31, 1958.
SUBJECT
Coffee Problem
High coffee prices have stimulated production in Latin America
and in other areas, particularly Africa, with the result that coffee pro-
duction is rapidly outdistancing consumption. The demand for coffee
is relatively inelastic and a price reduction will not stimulate consump-
tion enough to prevent a decline in total income.
Recognizing this, the seven principal coffee producing countries
of Latin America have been holding supplies off the market in a joint
effort to maintain the price in a range of 50 to 60 cents a pound. The
Governments of Colombia and Brazil, which produce more than half the
world’s coffee, and which depend upon it for 60 and 77% respectively of
their foreign exchange, are both in balance of payments difficulties which
could become critical if there should be a further decline in coffee prices.
The price of Colombian coffee has already fallen about 33% and Brazilian
about 10% over the past year. Both governments have also shouldered a
heavy fiscal burden in undertaking to finance the supplies of coffee with-
held from market. African producers are not party to Latin America’s
efforts to maintain prices. There is danger that the marketing agreement
will collapse in the near future, and that coffee prices will decline sharply
as each country tries to dispose of its own surplus carryover.
The long-­term solution to the problem must be a decline in coffee
prices sufficient to curb plantings and bring supply back into equilib-
rium with requirements. It is in the United States interest as well as
that of the producing countries, however, to accomplish this objective
gradually rather than through a sharp break in coffee prices which
would create serious political, economic and social problems in 7 Latin
American countries.
The Latin American producing countries have been urging the
negotiation of an international coffee agreement as a means of stabi-
lizing prices for the past three years. Failing to obtain support from the
United States for this approach, they have recently established a World
Coffee Organization primarily to stimulate consumption through a
trade promotion program but also to study economic trends of the
Co-drafted by Assistant Secretary Mann and Jean H. Mulliken of the Office of Inter-
American Regional Economic Affairs. Assistant Secretary Rubottom and Legal Adviser
Loftus E. Becker concurred in the memorandum.

industry and to serve as a forum for discussion of coffee problems.
Membership is presently limited to producing countries; however, it
is understood that consumer representation would be welcomed, and
that provision would be made for the admission of consuming coun-
tries on a limited basis, without obligation to finance the trade promo-
tion activities but with full participation in the economic research and
informational activities of the organization.
By indicating an interest in participating in an international coffee
study group, the United States would obtain the following benefits:
1. It would reassure the coffee producing countries regarding our
interest in their welfare and our willingness to discuss with them com-
modity problems in which we have no interest as a producer.
2. It would give the United States an opportunity to influence the
producing countries to develop coffee programs which are consonant
with long-­term equilibrium between supply and demand.
3. It might strengthen somewhat the current marketing position of
the producing countries by indicating that the world’s principal con-
sumer is cooperating with them in devising a solution to the problem
of surpluses.
It should be recognized, however, that an offer by the United States
to participate in multilateral discussions would not solve the immedi-
ate problem.
It would not be the intention of the United States in such multilat-
eral discussions to consider participating in or financing any buffer stock
or retention plans which might be proposed. Similarly, we do not pro-
pose to discuss price with the Latin Americans at this time because to
suggest a reduction in current high price levels would be resented espe-
cially since price decreases would largely be absorbed by governments
rather than producers. On the other hand, if there should be a decline in
prices below what we consider to be the danger point, it would prob-
ably be necessary for us to impose import controls to maintain prices
at a level fair to the producer and consumer. Unless and until there is a
price break, our intention is to resist Latin American pressure for United
States import controls. In any case the imposition of United States import
controls raises certain legal questions concerning the need for legislation
which require further study.
Our proposal to participate in the study group raises a policy ques-
tion in view of a 1955 decision of the Council on Foreign Economic
Policy that we should not participate, or make any implied commit-
ments regarding participation in an international commodity agreement
“until approved at the inter-­agency level within the Executive Branch.”
(Tab A).2 We anticipate opposition to a departure from our present policy
in this regard.
2 Not printed as an attachment.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  19
A more detailed statement of the coffee problem is attached as Tab B.3
Recommendation
That you authorize the Department to propose to the CFEP United
States participation in an international coffee study group, to be com-
posed of important producing and consuming countries, on the basis
described above.4
Concurrence
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
Approved_______ ________5
Disapproved______________
3 Not printed.
4 In a memorandum to Clarence B. Randall, Chairman of the Council on Foreign
Economic Policy (CFEP), dated May 5, 1958, Douglas Dillon, Deputy Under Secretary of
State for Economic Affairs, recommended that the CFEP authorize participation by the
May 20, the CFEP adopted action 569, authorizing the Department of State to participate
in an international coffee study group, and, as an exception to general policy, to discuss
an international coffee agreement, providing that it did not imply U.S. assistance in polic-
ing such an agreement. The minutes of the CFEP meeting and record of action are in
Eisenhower Library, CFEF Records.
On May 30, 1958, U.S. officials proposed informally to representatives of some of the
principal coffee producing states in Latin America the formation of a Study Group on Coffee.
Following a series of informal consultations, the Study Group was organized in Washington
on June 23, with twenty-­two members and one observer (Netherlands). (Current Economic
ETA–6.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretaries of State for
Economic Affairs (Mann) and Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, April 10, 1958.
SUBJECT
Review of Latin American Economic Policy
You have asked for a review of our economic policies toward Latin
America, with particular reference to commodity problem and to the
Confidential. This memorandum was sent through Dillon. It was drafted by Mann and
Harry R. Turkel of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. A hand-­
written notation on the source text indicates that Rubottom signed it and passed it on to
the Bureau of Economic Affairs on April 11.

Soviet economic offensive. Following an intensive re-­examination we
have prepared the following brief summary of the principal current
facets of our economic relations with Latin America. We should like the
opportunity of reviewing these matters with you as we share your con-
cern at certain aspects of our economic relations with Latin America,
and believe that the short review which follows represents the begin-
nings of some new directions which could ultimately improve these
relations substantially.
Commodities and Trade:
The economies of many Latin American countries, and their bal-
ance of payments, depend upon the export markets for primary prod-
ucts. Coffee, copper, oil, lead and zinc are important export industries
which are in difficulty. Our traditional aversion to international com-
modity agreements, [illegible in the original] international discussions
of commodity problems which might imply a willingness to [illegible
in the original] participating in such agreements, has given an impres-
sion of lack of sympathy for the economic problems of countries depen-
dent upon primary products. It is important that the U.S. take steps to
[illegible in the original] this impression. In the case of coffee, and lead
and zinc, recommendations have been made that we seek agreement
within the Government for the U.S. to participate in the multilateral
examination of [illegible in the original] and demand trends in these
commodities. This should have important psychological and political
advantages, and might in the long-­run promote [illegible in the original]
readjustment between supply and demand.
In the case of lead and zinc we are also exploring within the
Government various measures for assisting the domestic industry,
including [illegible in the original] payments to producers. In the case
of coffee, the producing countries have withheld substantial stocks
from the market; current prices are still well above producers’ break-­
even points and should probably come down still further so as to
reduce the incentive for expanding production. Unless and until there
is a [illegible in the original] price break, Latin American pressures for
such extreme [illegible in the original] import [illegible in the original]
should, we think, be resisted, although we will continue to examine
the legal and other questions involved [illegible in the original] to be
prepared to set quickly in case of emergency. The long term question of
whether commodity stabilization agreements are desirable in the case
of these commodities is [illegible in the original] that can be reviewed in
the light of future developments and of the results of our participation
in the above mentioned international study groups.
Oil and copper present somewhat different problems. As you know,
we have successfully resisted the imposition of mandatory controls
over oil imports. Our consultations with Venezuela and Canada prior

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  21
to the recent strengthening of the voluntary control system increased
their understanding of our problem. In the case of copper our current
information is that the Department may be able successfully to oppose
the pending bills to increase the tax on imported copper. Recently the
price of copper has been relatively stable and two of the three largest
U.S. producers also produce in foreign countries.
It should be emphasized, however, that if the markets for these
commodities deteriorate further we may have to consider additional
measures. We shall watch this situation closely and make further rec-
ommendations as circumstances warrant.
Since the very cornerstone of our economic relations with Latin
America is trade, it is imperative that the U.S. refrain from imposing
undue restrictions upon our own imports. The extension of the Trade
Agreements Act as requested by the Administration will have very ben-
eficial effects on evidence of our intentions, provided it is not accom-
panied by increased resort to restrictive measures affecting individual
commodities.
Financial Assistance:
Although the needs for development capitol in Latin America
are enormous, their immediate financial problems are closely related
to the commodity problems discussed above. Thus, Brazil, Chile
and Colombia are pressing so for what amounts to balance of pay-
ments assistance to tide them through periods of depressed commod-
ity prices. It is necessary that we respond to those situations, while
[illegible in the original] the same time maintaining pressure, through
the International Monetary Fund, for needed internal reforms and
endeavor to encourage policies which will help stabilize their econ-
omies. The United States is prepared, in principle, to extend financial
assistance to these three countries and dimensions are, or soon will
be, underway with their representatives regarding specific amounts
and related matters.
It should be emphasized that balance of payments assistance to
Latin America and other areas is a temporary expedient which results
in no additional economic development, and has little lasting effect
except as countries take advantage of it to improve their own economic
policies. Neither the Export-Import Bank nor the Development Loan
Fund are designed to extend this kind of assistance. The International
Monetary Fund is equipped to do so although tin resources would
have to be enlarged to enable it to become fully effective. We believe
the U.S. should consider a further subscription to the end of some-
thing like 41 billion which, on the basis of the original subscriptions,
would be matched by 2 billion from other countries of which $500
million would be in gold and dollars. We would like to explore this

within the U.S. Government and perhaps submit a specific recom-
mendation at a later date.
Latin Americans persistently contend that existing sources of
public capital are inadequate. Our experience, however, in that there
is a dearth of well planned and engineered projects eligible for financ-
ing, but no dearth of financial resources. The Export-Import Bank
has recently accelerated its activities in Latin America, and with the
additional lending authority it is now seeking should be in a position
to meet all reasonable requirements. The level of International Bank
lending in Latin America has been low, although recently the Bank
has been somewhat more active in that area. We will continue our
efforts to induce an increased volume and broader range of loans to
Latin America—­including increased financial and technical assistance
to national development financing agencies. An encouraging factor is
that the first investments of the International Finance Corporation have
been in private enterprises in Latin America.
We now have the Development Loan Fund which can consider
projects in Latin America for which other financing is unavailable,
and will be in even better position to do so if the additional resources
it is now seeking are forthcoming. One problem in Latin America
has been that some countries, for a variety of reasons, have tended
to exceed their borrowing capacity. In these situations they should
have access to the Development Loan Fund within limits imposed by
its criteria and world-­wide commitments, since the Fund can accept
repayment in local currencies.
For some years the Latin American countries have agitated for the
establishment of an Inter-American Development Bank. At the Buenos
Aires Economic Conference last summer, a resolution was adopted call-
ing for a study of the desirability of establishing such a bank. We feel that
the United States should actively participate in this study, without any
commitment as regards our ultimate participation in the bank. Although
the United States has opposed its establishment, we may wish to recon-
sider our position as a result of the further study if sentiment develops in
favor of an institution which is truly international in character, i.e., on the
capital contributing as well as capital receiving aids.
Regional Integration
Various proposals for economic and customs unions in Latin
America have been considered from time to time, and the Latin
American countries have observed very closely the developments in
Europe toward regional economic integration. However, circumstances
in Latin America are quite different from those in Western Europe, as
Latin American economies are not generally complementary and the
volume of trade between them is quite small. Nevertheless, there is

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  23
considerable scope for regional groupings which would provide larger
markets and would combine the special circumstances, talents and
resources of two or more countries.
An example is provided by Salvador and Honduras, where the
excess population and capital of Salvador could be useful in develop-
ing the resources of Honduras. If a true common market or free trade
area between these two countries could be achieved it might serve as an
example and stimulant to others. The principal obstacles are Honduras’
fear of domination by Salvador and the adjustment that a few, small
industries in both countries would have to make. These might be over-
come, with some political risk to us, if the U.S. actively supported such
an arrangement and helped them devise practicable solutions to spe-
cific economic problems; some financial assistance from us might also
be necessary. We think the potentialities of such an experiment would
justify an effort on our part.
Soviet Bloc Trade
Although Soviet bloc trade missions have been active in Latin
America, there have as yet been no Soviet bloc approaches of the mag-
nitude and nature of their approaches in other areas such as Syria,
Egypt, Ceylon, India, and Indonesia. We shall, however, continue to
watch this situation closely, and endeavor to evaluate the precise scale
and objectives of the Soviet bloc economic offensive in Latin America.
Meanwhile, the United States should not oppose the expansion of trade
in non-­strategic commodities with the Soviet bloc. We should, however,
try to make countries which engage or contemplate engaging in trade
with the Soviet bloc aware of the political and economic pitfalls associ-
ated with certain aspects of such trade, with particular attention on the
risks of economic dependence and political penetration.
The unsatisfactory condition of certain primary commodity mar-
kets has increased the vulnerability of Latin America to Soviet bloc
offers to take such commodities. If the Soviet economic offensive in
Latin America is expanded significantly, particularly in [illegible in the
original] fields such as petroleum development, we may wish to con-
sider other countermeasures. Our policy against financial assistance for
petroleum development because private capital is available if allowed
to enter, gives the Soviet bloc a field which it may exploit. Failing such
exploitation, the present does not appear a propitious time for changes
in this policy. Should it be possible to make limited changes in the
future without generating reactions in the U.S. which would endanger
other important elements of U.S. foreign economic policy, we should be
prepared to consider certain types of petroleum loans such as exporter
credits and loans for transport, storage, refining and marketing facil-
ities. However, should the Bloc show that it can enter this field in an
effective manner or otherwise exploit this situation, we will wish to

review the need for changes in this policy on an emergency basis, as, for
example, recommending that the Export-Import Bank extend credits
to United States exporters of petroleum equipment, including refiner-
ies and pipelines. Only if it later becomes necessary would we wish to
reconsider financing petroleum exploration and development by for-
eign governments.
ETA–7.
Letter from the Managing Director of the Development
Loan Fund (McIntosh) to Milton S. Eisenhower1
Washington, August 7, 1958.
Dear Dr. Eisenhower:
In response to your request that those of us who had the honor
of accompanying you on your recent mission to the Central American
countries2 give you a memorandum with our comments regarding U. S.
programs and policies in any of the countries visited, I am very glad to
submit some comments of mine with the hope that they may be helpful.
It seems unnecessary for me to refer to the present political and
economic situations in the various countries, both because you are per-
sonally well informed in this connection, and also because you already
have rather complete information contained in the reports submitted
to you and to the other members of the mission by the various gov-
ernments and by our Embassies and our ICA Missions. Instead, I am
pleased to submit the following suggestions regarding possible courses
of action which I feel we should consider in connection with certain of
the problems we are facing in the Central American area. Incidentally,
for ease of reference in this letter, I am including Panama among the
Central American countries.
Fund 1958.” Copies of this letter were also sent to Under Secretary Dillon, James H. Smith,
Jr., Director of the International Cooperation Administration (ICA), Assistant Secretary
Rubottom, Rollin S. Atwood, Regional Director for Latin American Operations, ICA,
Henry A. Hoyt, Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, and Bayard
King of the Office of Middle American Affairs. The source text is unsigned.
2 Milton Eisenhower visited the countries of Central America between July 12 and
August 1, 1958, as the personal representative of the President; for documentation, see

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  25
From the brief survey we were able to make of the Central
American area, I am personally convinced that the countries involved
need economic assistance from an external source at this time. The econo-
mies of each of the Control American countries have been adversely
affected by the serious drop in the price of coffee and in some cases
also by lowered production and declining sales of bananas. I believe
that each of the countries is in a position to do more for itself than it
has done; more could and should be done by the governments and by
the wealthy citizens. Nevertheless, I feel that they are in acute need of
economic aid and that it is in the interest of the United States that we
extend some economic assistance to the Central American countries
at this time.
In my opinion, economic assistance should be given to the Central
American countries in the form of loans from three sources, namely:
1. The Export-Import Bank
2. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
3. The Development Loan Fund
Although the lending activities of the above named institutions are
already coordinated to some extent, particularly through the National
Advisory Council, I feel that a greater and well-­coordinated positive effort
is desirable. Conferences should be arranged between executives of
the three lending institutions to study the economic problems of the
Central American area, to compare notes and opinions, and particu-
larly to consider projects in each country which would most quickly
and effectively aid the economy of the country. More particularly, I feel
that in the proposed conferences between the three lending institutions,
the following factors and conditions should be studied:
1. The present economic and financial condition of each country.
2. Economic projects most urgently needed in each country.
3. Estimated capacity of each country to repay additional loans in
dollars and possibly in local currency.
4. Recommended allocation of essential projects to the three lend-
ing institutions, or possible participation by DLF and the Export-Import
Bank and/or the International Bank wherever this seems advisable.
In my opinion such a joint study would be of considerable value,
and it should be possible to reach an agreement among the lending
institutions as to the approximate amount of loans to be considered by
each institution and the specific projects to be covered by each of such
loans.
In addition to the extension of economic assistance by the
three lending institutions, I feel that ICA (International Cooperation
Administration) should be urged to increase, if possible, the amount of
its technical assistance in each of the Central American countries. In my
opinion it would be helpful if through ICA some experts could be sent

to the Central American area to give advice to the various countries
in connection with the possible diversification of agricultural crops in
each country in an effort to broaden the economic base and to lessen the
degree of dependence on coffee.
I also feel that the development of a common market in the Central
American area is a highly desirable and constructive step. An organiza-
tion, namely ODECA, has already been created for this purpose,
but progress is being made very slowly. The creation of a common
market, with the elimination of customs barriers, free movement of
labor between countries, the possible establishment of a single com-
mon currency, the allocation of industries to specific countries, and
other necessary steps can only be brought about by the efforts of the
Central American countries themselves, but I feel we should give
them all possible encouragement and assistance. Perhaps new loans
and technical assistance can be extended in such a manner as to sup-
port these regional efforts. Further in this connection, I suggest that the
State Department contact the OAS (Organization of American States) and
suggest the possibility of the OAS sending one or more qualified persons to
Central America to work with and advise the present ODECA staff so that
more rapid progress may be made in bringing about a common market in the
Central American area.
I trust that the above suggestions may be of some value. Let me
take this opportunity to tell you how such I appreciated the honor of
accompanying you on your mission to the Central American countries
and how much I enjoyed the opportunity of serving under your direc-
tion. The trip was both interesting to me and valuable to the Fund,
and was an experience which I will always recall with a great deal of
pleasure.
Sincerely yours,
Dempster McIntosh
Managing Director
Copies to:  Hon. C. Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary, State
Hon. J. H. Smith, Jr., ICA
Hon. Roy R. Rubottom, ARA, State
Mr. Henry Hoyt, ARA, State
Mr. Bayard King, MID, State
Mr. Rollin Atwood, C/LA, ICA

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  27
ETA–8.
Minutes of the 269th Meeting of the National Advisory
Council on International Monetary and Financial
Problems1
Washington, August 26, 1958.
Secretary Robert B. Anderson (Chairman), Treasury Department
Mr. Julian B. Baird
Mr. Elting Arnold
Mr. Philip Schaffner
Mr. Henry J. Bittermaan
Mr. Ralph Hirschtritt
Mr. Ralph V. Korp
Mr. C. Douglas Dillon, State Department
Mr. John Parke Young
Mr. Emerson Ross
Mr. Walter Williams, Commerce Department
Mr. Marshall M. Smith
Governor Wm. McC. Martin, Jr., Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System
Mr. Arthur W. Marget
Mr. Robert S. Sammons
Mr. Lynn U. Stambaugh, Export-Import Bank
Mr. Vance Brand
Mr. Walter C. Sauer
Mr. Harry R. Rowntree
Mr. Walter Schaefer, International Cooperation Administration
Mr. Hale T. Shenefield
Mr. Frank A. Southard, Jr., International Monetary Fund
Mr. William F, Doering, Department of Agriculture, Visitor
Mr. Arthur G. Kevorkian, Department of Agriculture, Visitor
Mr. Maurice Stans, Bureau of the Budget, Visitor
Mr. Bartlett Harvey, Bureau of the Budget, Visitor
Mr. Hal Lary, Council of Economic Advisors, Visitor
Mr. Edmond C. Hutchinson, Development Loan Fund, Visitor
Mr. George H. Willis, Secretary
Mr. C. L. Callander, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Allan J. Fisher, NAC Secretariat
1 Source: Treasury Department Files, NAC Minutes. For National Security Council Use
Only. The source text is designated “Draft of Minutes.” A table of contents is not printed.

1. Proposed Inter-American Banking Institution
The Chairman referred to the draft paper2 which had been distrib-
uted as the basis of a charter approach to an Inter-American Banking
Institution,3 and said that the primary problems appeared to be the
kind of institution which would be set up, and the way in which the
capital would be provided. He asked the other Council members for
comments.
Mr. Dillon said that in view of its political objective the proposed
Bank should be organized as an Inter-American Institution with control
by the Latin Americans. The United States approach should be as flex-
ible as possible. One unresolved question was whether the Institution
should make hard, soft, or mixed loans. While no rigid formula
should be adopted at this time, the United States should decide which
approach it preferred, subject to any necessary accommodation to Latin
American views. He inclined to the view that the Bank should make
mostly soft loans, and should not compete with existing institutions
making hard loans.
Mr. Dillon continued that the kind of loans would affect the raising
of the capital. The Bank would probably be unable to borrow substan-
tial amounts in the private market in the absence of a U.S. Government
guarantee. If it made soft loans, such borrowing would be out of the
question. If the Bank were a soft loan institution, replenishment of cap-
ital, although not the original capital contribution, should come from
the Development Loan Fund, which he thought should develop into a
central source for soft loan capital. Mr. Dillon thought that the question
of U.S. representation was related to the location of the Bank. If it were
located in Latin America, it would not be feasible for the U.S. Executive
Director of the International Bank to be the U.S. Executive Director of
the Inter-American Bank. He also raised the question of whether the
management of the Inter-American Institution should be similar to that
of the International Bank, or should have a greater flavor of foreign
policy, with policy guidance tied in more closely with the Development
Loan Fund. He thought the paper provided a good start for consider-
ation of these various problems.
Mr. Stambaugh commented that Latin America was the most
valuable and important foreign trade area of the United States. The
ability of the Export-Import Bank to provide credits had always been
an important factor in retaining markets in Latin America, as well as
in other parts of the world, and the United States should avoid setting
2 Not found with the source text and not further identified.
3 On August 12, Under Secretary Dillon announced that the United States was
prepared to consider the establishment of an inter-American development institution.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  29
up an institution that would in any way handicap American indus-
try in competing with lower-­cost foreign industries. Mr. Stambaugh
continued that if Latin American economic problems could be solved
simply by providing more credits, a new institution would not be
needed. The Export-Import Bank believed there was need for a new
institution with functions different from those of the existing institu-
tions. The problems of obtaining the local currency for development
projects and for budgetary financing, were chronic in Latin America.
The new Institution could usefully confine its financing to such inter-
nal expenditures, and should also be able to give technical advice and
to assist the Latin American countries in planning their development
programs.
Mr. Williams inquired as to the need for the proposed Institution,
and whether Dr. Milton Eisenhower and Vice President Nixon had been
consulted. The Commerce Department had also considered whether
the Institution might not more appropriately be a Latin American than
an Inter-American Institution with the function of providing local cur-
rency for local currency needs.
The Chairman commented that the Latin American feeling of
having a special relationship with the United States had been weak-
ened by U.S. participation in regional organizations in other areas,
such as NATO and SEATO. On several occasions during the past
several years, the Latin American countries had proposed a regional
Inter-American Bank, to include the United States. The United States
had opposed such a bank on the grounds that resources could not be
increased simply by multiplying institutions. The recent determina-
tion of the President to offer the support of the United States for an
Arab Bank involved for the first time U.S. support of such a regional
financial institution.4 Accordingly, it was decided to announce sup-
port of a new Institution before the announcement concerning an
Arab Bank was made in the United Nations. The Chairman then
stressed the importance of avoiding failure of the new Institution. It
should be thought of as a financial institution subject to a minimum
of political influence.
Mr. Martin questioned the need for the proposed Institution, and
agreed with Mr. Stambaugh’s remarks about existing institutions. He
added that a financial institution to be successful should be divorced
4 In his address to the third emergency special session of the U.N. General Assembly
on August 13, 1958, President Eisenhower proposed, inter alia, consultations between the
Secretary-General and representatives of the Arab states of the Near East to determine
whether they could reach agreement on the establishment of a regional development
institution, and he also indicated that the United States would support a “soundly orga-
nized” institution. For text of the President’s address, see Department of State Bulletin,

from political influences, but noted that the new institution was being
born in a political atmosphere. He agreed with the importance of a
flexible approach, and of endeavoring to learn the views of the Latin
Americans.
Mr. Schaefer commented that ICA had found difficulty in nego-
tiating in Latin America on a multilateral basis. Mr. Stans inquired as
to what initiative the Latin Americans had taken on the matter. The
Chairman replied that the creation of an Inter-American Bank had
been high on the agenda of recent Inter-American meetings. Dr. Milton
Eisenhower had indicated that the Latin Americans felt “shuffled
around” from bank to bank, and had suggested that there should be
one central place for contacts.
The Chairman continued that many important questions would
have to be considered. These included whether financing would be
provided for housing; whether it should be a “soft loan” institution,
in the sense of lending dollars with repayment in local currency; what
would be the source of a constant stream of dollars, and who would put
up funds in addition to the United States; whether the Latin American
countries would make a single or a yearly contribution; what use would
be made of Latin American currencies contributed to the Institution;
and whether the Institution should lend for oil development in Latin
America, and many other questions. The question of whether a new
institution was needed was pertinent, but the demands of the Latin
Americans would not be satisfied by increasing the resources of exist-
ing institutions. However, the United States could not afford to back an
institution which was not soundly conceived and operated to provide
a basis for healthy growth. It would be imperative not to impair the
functioning of existing institutions, and there should be the closest kind
of association with these institutions, including both the International
Bank and the Export-Import Bank. The Chairman concluded that it
would be unwise to raise any of these issues formally with the Latin
American countries at too early a date, although informal bilateral dis-
cussions might be useful.
With respect to the time schedule, Mr. Dillon observed that
Buenos Aires Conference Resolution XVIII directed the Inter-American
ECOSOC to study and report on the needs of Latin America for capital,
the possible sources of such capital, and related questions. The report
to the 21 governments should be ready about the first of October.
Bilateral talks could follow receipt of the report, with details to be
negotiated in Inter-American Economic and Social Council, followed
by a formal ratification meeting. The Secretary of the Council noted
that Resolution XVIII contemplated a meeting of financial representa-
tives. Mr. Dillon said that the representatives should meet only after
informal talks had been held. He mentioned that an Inter-American

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  31
Conference would be held in Ecuador about January, 1960,5 and that
the Latin Americans would like to have the Inter-American Bank mat-
ter settled well before that meeting. He suggested, therefore, that it
would be desirable to have a high-­level conference early in 1959.
The Chairman suggested that the Staff prepare a paper that would
present various alternatives with respect to the creation and operation
of the Institution, together with the problems and issues raised by each,
for subsequent consideration by the Council. This was agreed (see Staff
Council Minutes No. 271).6
[Here follows discussion of agenda item 2, “Proposed Increase in
IBRD and IMF Resources.”]
5 Reference is to the proposed Eleventh Inter-American Conference, scheduled to
convene in Quito. The meeting was postponed several times until March 1961, when it
was postponed indefinitely.
6 None of the documents cited here are printed; copies are in Treasury Department
Files.
ETA–9.
Minutes of the 271st Meeting of the National Advisory
Council on International Monetary and Financial
Problems1
Washington, September 1958.
[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1 and 2, dealing respectively
with proposed Export-Import Bank credits to Turkey and Argentina.]
3. Inter-American Development Banking Institution
The Council then discussed the paper prepared by the Staff
Committee outlining alternative approaches to the establishment of
an Inter-American Development Banking Institution (NAC Document
No.  2383). The Chairman said he expected that the Latin American
countries would want to proceed with the planning of the Institution.
He suggested that during the absence from Washington of many inter-
ested persons for the meetings of the International Monetary Fund
1 Source: Treasury Department Files, NAC Minutes. For National Advisory Council
Use Only. The source text is marked “Draft of Minutes.” It is undated and contains no list
of participants. A table of contents is not printed.

and the International Bank in New Delhi,2 discussions with the Latin
Americans on the Bank should be minimized, and work should pro-
ceed toward the development of a United States position, with the
understanding that the position would not be made final until after
October.
The Secretary reported to the Council on the Staff Committee dis-
cussions and reviewed briefly the main points raised in NAC Document
Mr. Waugh stressed the importance of avoiding too early a for-
malization of the United States position on the Bank, since the pattern
might become a precedent for other regional banks. He also empha-
sized the need to determine the specific purposes of the Institution. He
had been impressed by the lack of planning in Latin American devel-
opment programs, and by the internal financing problems of these
countries. He felt that most of the problems that would face the new
Institution would arise in countries that were unable to handle their
internal financing problems. The Latin American countries wanted low-­
cost housing, schools, hospitals, hotels, and local currency financing
for projects financed by the Export-­import Bank and the International
Bank. They did not need for their development programs more dol-
lars than were available from existing institutions. He felt it was of the
utmost importance to develop clearly the ways in which the new Bank
would avoid competition with existing institutions. He believed that in
view of the prospective large United States budget deficit the Congress
would scrutinize very closely any proposals for new institutions, and
felt this was a further reason for developing carefully the way in which
a new institution would operate.
Governor Szymczak4 said that the basic views of the Federal
Reserve Board were reflected in the document and its supplement. He
agreed that the Bank should supplement rather than compete with
existing institutions. The most vital point was that the Bank would pro-
vide an opportunity for Latin American countries to obtain experience
in lending money. In response to a question by the Chairman, Governor
Szymczak said that the Institution should not accept deposits, in view
of the long-­term character of its loans. Mr. Southard commented that
lending experience by Latin American countries would be a useful
by-­product of the Bank, and said that experience in the International
Monetary Fund indicated that Latin Americans can be critical of the
proposals and performance of Latin American countries.
is in Department of State decimal file 398.13.
3 Not printed; a copy is in Treasury Department Files.
4 M. S. Szymczak, Member, Board of Governors, Federal Reserve Board.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  33
Mr. Smith5 expressed agreement with the views of Mr. Waugh. He
felt that a clear idea of the objectives of the Institution, particularly in
the field of development, was needed, as well as a view of the extent to
which the Bank could make funds available at reasonable interest rates.
Mr. Dillon expressed concurrence with the Chairman’s views on
the time schedule. He felt that October should be used to develop the
United States position, following which talks could begin with the
Latin Americans to ascertain what kind of bank they desired. He agreed
with the Staff emphasis on technical assistance activity, which really
involved improvement of planning, and suggested that these activities
be referred to as development planning so as to avoid confusion with
existing technical assistance programs. He saw the task as having two
parts, first to work out the objectives of the Institution, and second to
determine what should be in the articles of association. He recalled that
the basic motive was political, to meet the Latin American desire for a
special association with the United States, and expressed preference for
a flexible approach to the purposes of financing, currency of repayment,
and similar matters. He expected it would be difficult to define the idea
of supplementing and not competing with the existing institutions. He
felt that the form of capitalization would depend to some extent on the
kinds of loans to be made, and agreed that the Bank should not accept
deposits. He felt the suggestion of limiting the Bank to economic devel-
opment projects should be sharpened, but that too categorical a view
should be avoided. He suggested that the drafts prepared by the Staff
include draft policy statements for internal U.S. consideration.
Mr. Schaefer6 agreed that the new Institution’s activities should
supplement those of existing institutions and noted that the paper
offered no suggestions for using foreign currencies now available to
the United States.
Mr. Reid felt that principles to apply to development banks gener-
ally were needed, and hoped that the United States would not go so far
in the Latin American case as to prejudice our position in other areas.
On the illustrative figures in the paper for the amount of capitaliza-
tion, he felt it was difficult to determine amounts without a clear idea
of the Bank’s objectives. He noted that the prospective increase in the
resources of the International Bank and International Monetary Fund
presumably would affect the needs of Latin America and therefore the
capitalization of a new Institution.
The Chairman summarized by saying that the Staff work through
October should not be considered binding on any agency with respect
5 Marshall M. Smith, Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Department of
Commerce.
6 Walter Schaefer, Assistant to the Director for Finance, ICA.

to policy, but that the drafting would help to sharpen up the issues for
decision. The pattern for the Bank, he continued, should be considered
different from the pattern of other regional banks in that the United
States would be a member. The pattern announced for the Arab Bank,
that the United States would support it if the Arabs would take the ini-
tiative but that the United States should not be a member, would be the
pattern for all regional banks except the Latin American. He suggested
that the role of the Export-Import Bank and the International Bank be
protected.
Referring to the paper, the Chairman thought that the draft of II
(Purposes of Financing) should be along the lines of point 5, the flexi-
ble approach, and that the draft of III (Currency of Loan Repayment)
should follow point 3, the flexible policy. On IV (Capitalization) the
drafting should follow B, the partially paid-­in approach, with the ini-
total paid-­in capital. On VI (Voting Rights) he preferred alternative (b)
or (c), with policy decisions to be made by the Governors under the
requirement of 2/3 of the votes, and other decisions to be made by the
Executive Board, possibly with a lesser proportion of votes required.
Under VII (Technical Assistance Activities) the draft should be respon-
sive to Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s suggestion that the Institution counsel
and advise applicants to the Export-Import Bank and the International
Bank. The Chairman concluded that the drafting along these lines
should take place with a minimum of consultation with foreign gov-
ernments and with no indication that any decisions had been reached
by the United States.
Mr. Waugh suggested that Section VII should be called “Financial
and Development Planning,” and should be moved to a place earlier in
the paper. He also commented that if the Bank did not sell securities, the
Latin American countries would have to make contributions annually.
Mr. Dillon agreed that the Inter-American Institution should be
considered different from other regional financial institutions. With
respect to voting rights and policy decisions, he agreed that policies
should be made by the Board of Governors, probably by a two-­thirds
vote, but he noted that this raised the question of a U.S. weighted vote,
which needed careful consideration. In order to avoid the necessity
of seeking the support of any Latin American country on any major
issue, the United States might seek a 34 percent vote in the Board of
Governors. He expressed general agreement with the procedures sug-
gested by the Chairman, but noted that it also might be desirable that
the Staff prepare position papers for later negotiations with the Latin
American countries.
The Chairman stated that the drafting should deal specifically
with such questions as whether loans would be made to wholly-­owned

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  35
subsidiaries of governments, whether the Bank would lend for housing
and other non-­productive purposes, and similar questions. He added
that any international agreement on a charter for the Bank should
be reached outside the forthcoming meeting of foreign ministers in
Washington, but within the OAS.7 With respect to a suggestion that the
OAS ask the Inter-American Economic and Social Council (IAECOSOC)
to draft the charter, the Chairman said that the drafting was a task for
specially qualified financial experts rather than the usual delegates to
IAECOSOC.
Mr. Dillon agreed the drafting of a charter should not be done by
the staff of IAECOSOC, although it could be done under the aegis of
that organization. The drafting should be done by specially designated
representatives of governments, including ad hoc financial experts.
Ambassador Randall8 commented that no difficulty was expected in
IAECOSOC, since the United States had already made clear its view
that the drafting should be done by a specially qualified group.
7 The Foreign Ministers of the American Republics met in Washington, September
including the establishment of an inter-American development bank. At the meeting,
U.S. representatives took the initiative in obtaining agreement that the Inter-American
Economic and Social Council (IA–ECOSOC) should convene a specialized commit-
tee to draft articles for the new institution. For text of the Communiqué on this sub-
ject approved at the meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, October 13, 1958,
8 Harold M. Randall, U.S. Representative to the IA–ECOSOC.
ETA–10.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to Milton S. Eisenhower1
Washington, November 19, 1958.
Dear Milton:
Three draft replies to your letter of October 27 2 have been over-
taken by the swift march of events. Moreover, I’ve had difficulty
consulting with some of the officials concerned with economic and
Personal. Source text is a carbon copy bearing Rubottom’s typed name.
2 Not found in Department of State files.

financial matters due to their prolonged preoccupation with the
­IMF-IBRD meeting in New Delhi and other matters like the Colombo
Plan Conference.3
Now, however, we are at grips with the Latin American economic
problems in the Special Committee of the Council of the OAS4 which
convened Monday.5 Attached is a copy of Doug Dillon’s very good
speech of yesterday with certain key parts underlined for your con-
venience.6 The fact that we are engaged in our meeting demonstrates
again the rapidity with which we are moving in our efforts to find con-
structive solutions, on a cooperative basis, to Latin America’s problems.
This is truly an operational phase of our relationship.
You should know that a rather serious problem has arisen with
the Treasury Department over the handling of the discussions regard-
ing the Inter-American Development Institution. We are pledged,
and have constantly reiterated this pledge as in the case of Dillon’s
speech, to negotiate and draft the outline for this Institution in the
Committee of Experts of the Inter-American Economic and Social
Council which will convene on January 8. Treasury, at least the work-
ing level officials there, holds that this precludes any discussion prior
to that meeting. The Latin Americans are determined, with possi-
bly two exceptions in Mexico and Cuba, to discuss the Institution at
least along general lines during this present meeting of the Special
Committee of the OAS Council. I do not see how we can avoid lis-
tening to their observations, and perhaps expressing a few views
ourselves as to its general character and outline without in any way
committing our Government. The Treasury Department is against
this and even complained about the references to the Institution in
Dillon’s speech, simply in the form of questions which will have to
be faced by us all.
3 Reference is to the 10th ministerial meeting of the Consultative Committee of
the Colombo Plan, representing 18 countries and 3 dependent territories in South and
4 The Special Committee to Study the Formulation of New Measures of Economic
Cooperation was established under the auspices of the Council of the Organization of
American States pursuant to a recommendation approved at the informal meeting of
the 21 Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, held in Washington, September
decimal file 363.
5 November 17.
6 No attachments were found with the source text. For the text of Under Secretary
Dillon’s address before the Special Committee on November 18, see Department of State

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  37
I want you to know about this matter because we may have to
enlist your quiet support if the issue becomes more serious. Tom Mann
and I intend to see Secretary Anderson today or tomorrow, if possible.
If we are unable to resolve the problem, we shall have to take it up with
the Secretary, with Doug Dillon’s support, of course.
I am certain that we have nothing to lose, and much to gain, by
taking a positive approach on the discussion of this Institution, without
committing ourselves to anything, especially bearing in mind that it is
only six or seven weeks until the other committee will meet in January.
Great resentment will build up against us if we should attempt to hold
back discussion of this Institution in this present forum, in fact, I doubt
that we would succeed.
I think that the prospect mentioned under point no. 3 of a bifur-
cated development institution offers real hope. None of the Latin
American countries are going to want to put in money to be repaid in
some other kind of currency; therefore, most of them want the strictly
banking side of the institution to be a hard loan entity. Mexico, Cuba
and Venezuela have been very outspoken on this point, as you might
expect, in view of their relatively hard money. On the other hand,
everybody wants to be able to get soft loans through the institution
and we, of course, are the only source of that kind of money. We could
lend money from the DLF to the institution and it could make soft
loans. After a few years, it would have repayments coming in in the
various kinds of currency which could be revolving and our contribu-
tions could cease.
With warmest regards,
Very sincerely yours,
R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
Enclosures:
1. Memorandum
2. Mr. Dillon’s speech.

ETA–11.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, November 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Inter-American Development Institution
Problem
To identify the United States with Latin American aspirations for
this Institution, within reasonable limits, and to obtain Treasury support
in the NAC for the kind of Institution which will attain our objectives.
Discussion
On Tuesday, November 25, the NAC is meeting to adopt the
U.S. position to be taken regarding the Inter-American Development
Institution. A considerable amount of staff work has already been done
by the technicians in State and Treasury, and we have until January 8,
at which time the Special Committee of the Inter-American Economic
and Social Council will convene to chart the outline of the Institution,
to complete our work.
As we were plainly told in advance, the special Committee of
the Council of the OAS which began its sessions in Washington last
Monday, November 17, has spent about half of its time so far discuss-
ing the general outline of the proposed Development Institution, even
though we had made clear in advance our inability to make any com-
mitments regarding it and our strong feeling that discussion of the
Institution should be in the other forum.
While the delegates last week also stressed intro-­regional and
international trade, and technical cooperation, their main thrust has
been to overcome the shortage of development capital. While the prin-
cipal countries having convertible currencies state that the new entity
should be both sound and permanent and, hence, operate on a basic of
repayment of loans in the currency borrowed, all emphasized that the
U.S. must be the major contributor. I would think that any contribution
less than $100 million would be out of the question. Eventually, such a
hard loan institution might be able to sell bonds in the investment mar-
ket and grow to substantial proportions as has the World Bank.
Regional Development Inst. Confidential. A hand-­written notation on the source text,
which is on unsigned carbon copy of the original, states that this memorandum was not
sent forward. A typed note indicates that the original bore the following hand-­written
notation, dated November 24, by Under Secretary Dillon, through whom it was routed:
“Mentioned orally to Secretary and received guidance.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  39
However, the overwhelming majority of the Latin Americans are
thinking of a development institution engaging also in soft loans, includ-
ing loans for social overhead projects. They are thinking of U.S. help in
economic development financing through loans of a combined magni-
tude not realizable by a bank to which Latin America could contribute
even half of the capital. They are thinking in terms of $300 to $400 million
annually for the next ten years, in addition to maintenance of the current
leading activities of the IBRD and the Eximbank. Obviously we will be
unable to meet that kind of request but we shall have to deal with the
problem of profound disillusionment unless we can devise some means
of meeting this aspiration for a soft loan institution.
Messrs. Dillon, Mann and I have discussed that probably the
most feasible approach might be to establish an institution with two
departments, one to operate along sound banking lines and to make
only hard loans, and (2) a completely separate department that would
make soft loans and that would be authorized to borrow from the U.S.
Development Loan Fund, say, at the rate of $100 million per year. The
latter department would be able to lend funds for certain important
overhead projects, like schools, and hospitals, and could also lend
money for the local currency costs of projects for which the hard loan
department would lend to cover import requirements.
The Department has prepared a position paper which will be made
available to the other members of the NAC at its meeting on Tuesday
when this subject will be discussed. Attached is a copy.
Recommendation:
That you authorize Mr. Dillon support an institution which would
make hard loans but with a department which could also handle soft
loans and would be authorized to borrow from the DLF, at the NAC
meeting on Tuesday, November 25;
That yon also take an early occasion to inform the President of
your views that this kind of institution is absolutely necessary to meet
both the urgent economic problems in Latin America and the political
problems created by their increased expectations of U.S. assistance.
[Attachment]
Paper Prepared in the Department of State2
Washington, November 24, 1958.
In order to permit the institution to make some loans of con-
vertible currencies repayable in local currencies to assist in financing
2 No classification marking.

appropriate projects, it should be given authority to borrow for such
purposes from the U.S. Development Loan Fund. Funds borrowed
from the DLF would be segregated from other resources of the institu-
tion and otherwise handled on a distinctive basis in order to preserve
the integrity of the Institution’s capital and the separate character of its
other lending operations. Purposes of financing, terms, conditions and
other relevant aspects of transactions involving funds borrowed from
the DLF would be subject to determination in specific loan agreements
between the institution and the DLF. In this way the United States
Government could exercise adequate control over the expenditure of
such funds without resort to special provisions in the institution’s char-
ter or in the voting rights of members.
ETA–12.
Minutes of the 273rd Meeting of the National Advisory
Council on International Monetary and Financial
Problems1
Washington, November 25, 1958.
Secretary Robert B. Anderson (Chairman), Treasury Department
Mr. Julian B. Baird
Mr. Tom B. Coughran
Mr. Nils A. Lennartson
Mr. Philip P. Schaffner
Mr. Elting Arnold
Mr. Henry J. Bittermann
Mr. Ralph V. Korp
Mr. E. Jay Finkel
Mr. C. Douglas Dillon, State Department
Mr. Thomas C. Mann
Mr. John M. Leddy
Mr. William V. Turnage
Mr. John Parke Young
Mr. Harry R. Turkel
Mr. Alexander M. Rosenson
Mr. Phil R. Atterberry
Secretary Lewis Strauss, Commerce Department
Mr. Henry Kearns
1 Source: Treasury Department Files, NAC Minutes. For National Advisory Council
Use Only. The source text is marked “Draft of Minutes.” On January 26, 1959, NAC
Secretary Willis circulated a memorandum to the members of the NAC containing
revisions in the list of participants and in par. 2 of the text of the minutes. (Treasury
Department Files, NAC Minutes)

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  41
Mr. Marshall M. Smith
Mr. Clarence I. Blau
Governor Wm. McC. Martin, Jr., Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System
Governor M. S. Szymczak
Mr. J. Herbert Furth
Mr. Samuel C. Waugh, Export-Import Bank
Mr. R. H. Rowntree
Mr. Dempster McIntosh, Development Loan Fund
Mr. Robert M. Cabot
Mr. Walter Schaefer, International Cooperation Administration
Mr. Hale T. Shenefield
Mr. Charles Warden
Mr. Thomas P. Doughty
Mr. Frank A. Southard, Jr., International Monetary Fund
Mr. John S. Hooker, International Bank
Mr. Max Myers, Department of Agriculture, Visitor
Mr. William F. Doering, Department of Agriculture, Visitor
Mrs. Katherine Wiley, Department of Agriculture, Visitor
Mr. Larry F. Thomasson, Department of Agriculture, Visitor
Mr. Bartlett Harvey, Bureau of the Budget, Visitor
Mr. Hal B. Lary, Council of Economic Advisers, Visitor
Mr. George H. Willis, Secretary
Mr. C. L. Callander, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Victor A. Mack, NAC Secretariat
1. Inter-American Development Banking Institution
The Council considered the paper submitted by the Staff Committee
on policy issues involved in the Inter-American Development Banking
Institution (NAC Document No. 2431). The Secretary of the Council
reviewed the Staff Committee discussion, pointing out that the basic
assumption of the Working Group was that the institution would be
a conservative financial institution which would revolve its funds
through a banking operation. If this broad principle were altered to
emphasize the possibility of soft loans, the paper would have to be
modified. The Staff Committee had discussed the question of currency
of repayment and agreed this matter required further Council consid-
eration. Another important issue was whether the authorized capital
should be $600 million as outlined in the paper, or $1 billion as sug-
gested by the State Department in the Staff discussion. The Secretary
noted that these questions also involved the question of U.S. voting
power in the institution.
The Chairman asked for the views of the Department of State.
Mr. Dillon recalled the political motivation of United States support

for the institution, and informed the Council that the Latin American
participants in the meeting of the Special Committee of the Council of
the Organization of American States (OAS) were insisting on discuss-
ing the details of the new institution despite United States efforts to
confine the discussion to general matters. The Latin American dele-
gates felt they did not have significant resources to contribute to the
institution, and that the main Latin American need was an increase in
capital availability from outside Latin America. It appeared that Latin
American hard currency contributions would be insufficient to have
much effect, and that hard loans by the new institution would tend
to reduce the possibility of loans from the Export-Import Bank and
the International Bank. Accordingly the State Department felt that the
United States must make additional funds available to the new insti-
tution for loans involving repayment in local currencies. State felt that
and that the United States should offer to contribute half the hard loan
currency.2 Mr. Dillon continued that in his view Latin American coun-
tries would be expected to look to the new inter-American institution
for soft loans, and the Development Loan Fund would not make loans
to Latin American countries except in special circumstances. The new
institution would have broad authority to borrow, which would make
it possible to borrow from the Development Loan Fund should that be
considered appropriate at the time. On a 50/50 basis the initial capital-
ization might be $500 million, in addition to the borrowing from the
DLF. The institution should also have more freedom in the technical
assistance field than the Working Group recommended, particularly
in assisting Latin American countries in preparing economic develop-
ment programs.
Mr. Mann, commenting on the meeting of the OAS Special
Committee, said that some Latin American delegates were seeking
a United States commitment for a “Marshall Plan” for Latin America
involving some 2½ to 3 billion dollars. It was felt important for the
United States to present the non-­controversial aspects of the Inter-
American Bank and if time permitted some of the major points, in
order to avoid a formal request for such an aid program and wide-
spread criticism of the United States.
The Chairman commented that the United States had been
exporting large sums of dollars in a variety of ways over the preced-
ing 10 years, and that it was necessary to consider the extent to which
2 The following two sentences replaced a single sentence in the original draft min-
utes, which read as follows: “The institution should have the right to borrow in private
markets and should also be able to borrow from governments, specifically from the
Development Loan Fund, which could make a $100 million line of credit available for
project loans repayable in local currencies.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  43
continued exportation of U.S. dollars and gold was desirable. The pro-
posal for an Inter-American Bank envisaged a revolving financial insti-
tution, but the Latin Americans were saying that the institution could
not be established unless the United States put up the money. A division
of contributions would need to be worked out, but it was imperative
that the Latin Americans have a real and hard sense of contribution.
He preferred a ⅓–⅔ ratio because it was consistent with the idea of an
international institution, and agreed that if the contributions were on a
50/50 basis the capitalization should be smaller than if it were ⅓ and ⅔.
He would be willing to consider soft loan authority for the institution,
but would oppose creating a soft loan institution with a commitment
of constant replenishment by the United States without participation
by the Latin Americans. United States participation must be by direct
appropriations from Congress on the basis of a clear understanding
of the amount and nature of the capitalization and the dividing line
between hard and soft loans, and a clear understanding that further
appropriations would be necessary in the future. The Chairman agreed
that the institution should have the right to borrow in private markets,
and that the emphasis should be on project loans, with the possibility
of other types of loans to the extent feasible.
Secretary Strauss commented that he had a number of questions
concerning the institution, including the need for it, but that he would
in the first instance seek the answers from his staff.
Mr. Waugh expressed surprise at the turn of the discussion of the
institution away from the hard loan approach. He questioned the notion
of U.S. veto power, recalling that the initial approach involved con-
trol by the Latin Americans. He also questioned the proposal that the
Development Loan Fund lend to the institution to enable it to make
the same type of loans that the DLF could make bilaterally. He did not
see that any approach was being made to the main Latin American prob-
lem of financing social overhead projects. He outlined the view of the
Export-Import Bank’s Board of Directors: that the Inter-American Bank
would necessarily involve competition with existing institutions; that the
competition of a bank which made only hard loans would be preferable
to competition of a soft loan institution; and that the charter of the Inter-
American institution should require that its loans offer reasonable assur-
ance of repayment in the same currency in which the loans were made.
This would permit hard loans in Latin American currencies. Mr. Waugh
continued that if the Inter-American Bank made soft loans it would
interfere with and perhaps drive out sound loans by private lenders said
existing public institutions and would require periodic new appropria-
tions by the United States. Any soft loans of U.S. funds should be made
only by agencies controlled by the United States. Mr. Waugh felt that the
matter should be discussed with interested Congressional committees

before commitments were made. He concluded that if the United States
contributed all or nearly all of the money to this institution it would cre-
ate troublesome precedents in the case of other regional institutions.
The Chairman said that as a matter of principle a sound bank
required sound loans with repayments in the currency lent. However,
if the Department of State believed that on this basis it would not be
possible for the institution to be established, then the soft loan possi-
bility could not be ruled out. The problem then would be to get the
soundest possible institution in such a framework. This would require
participation in contributions by all the members. The DLF should
deal with borrowers bilaterally rather than through the Inter-American
Bank, and any soft loan capital contributed by the United States should
be provided by direct appropriation by the Congress.
Mr. Martin expressed agreement with the views of Mr. Waugh.
He felt that a 50/50 capital contribution basis was inappropriate for an
international institution and that soft loans were really more like grants
than loans and that repayment would in effect be made by printing
money. He felt that the best long run politics was to make the insti-
tution successful, and that the United States should not retreat from
the principle that the institution was expected to make its way as an
earning institution. He did not insist that loans be solely for projects or
rule out social overhead loans, and he felt that if there were to be soft
loans, they should be so financed that the capitalization of the institu-
tion would not be increased.
Mr. McIntosh expressed a preference for a maximum United
States contribution of 1/3 and felt that it would be preferable for the
Development Loan Fund to deal directly with Latin American borrow-
ers rather than delegating control over its operations in Latin America.
Governor Szymczak commented that the Latin Americans appeared to
be talking about two different things, a bank and an aid program.
Mr. Dillon said that the Latin Americans have avoided the word
“bank” in talking about the new institution, and he referred to an OAS
publication on financing of economic development in Latin America.
He thought the Latin Americans would now be satisfied with project
loans, including social overhead projects, and loans to local develop-
ment banks. He agreed that in a financial institution on a hard loan
basis the United States share should not exceed 1/3, but he felt this
would not satisfy the Latin Americans. Therefore, State felt the United
States should go to a 50/50 basis for hard loan capital, plus additional
soft loan capital on a loan basis. This would leave the United States in
the position of not having more than a majority of the voting power.
The Latin Americans might match our soft loan contribution with their
own currencies. To the extent that the institution would lend for social
overhead projects, it would not compete with the Export-Import Bank,

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  45
the International Bank, or private capital. He agreed that the institution
should not have the right to additional appropriations every year, and
that the matter should be discussed with the interested Congressional
committees.
Mr. Hooker suggested that the DLF could cooperate with the
Inter-American institution, which could prepare soft loan projects
for DLF consideration, but without itself making soft loans. He also
wondered whether the Latin American delegates to the OAS Special
Committee were the appropriate people to make decisions about the
Inter-American Banking Institution.
The Chairman said that the main point was that the Inter-American
Banking Institution should be regarded as a financial organization, and
that the Latin Americans must realize that the institution would run out
of funds unless the Latin Americans contribute more than the United
States. If it depended only on United States contributions it would not
be a financial institution even though it would be so regarded.
With respect to the meeting of the OAS Special Committee, the
Secretary of the Council commented that there were still some appar-
ent differences of opinion among the Latin Americans about the nature
of the institution. He also noted that the OAS document on financing
Latin American economic development had been produced by its sec-
retariat, and that the attitudes of the Latin Americans toward it were
not known.
Mr. Mann asked the advice of the Council with respect to tactics
on the drafting group which had been set up by the Special Committee.
The Chairman said that it was not possible to make an immediate deci-
sion on all the issues in the institution and that the best course appeared
to be to tell the Latin Americans that we would try to produce an out-
line of the new institution by the first of the year, and that this would
require bilateral consultation with individual countries and consulta-
tions with Congressional committees.
[Here follows discussion of agenda items 2 and 3: “International
Monetary Fund and International Bank” and “Other Business.”]

ETA–13.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, December 19, 1958.
SUBJECT
Priorities for DLF Loans in Latin America.
Mr. Turnage2 has invited our attention to the fact that with the
scheduled allocation of $21.75 million for Argentina the remaining
free balance of appropriated DLF funds will total $73 million. He has
requested the views of ARA as to the priorities appropriate for pro-
cessing outstanding Latin American loan applications in relation to this
balance as a guide for the DLF staff. I am pleased herewith to respond
to this request.
You will recall that last February Mr. Mann and I discussed with you
the importance in terms of our relations both with Latin America and
with the Congress of assuring adequate consideration for applications
from that area in DLF loan approval action. At that time, we suggested
the DLF establish an administrative target of 10 to 15% for loans to Latin
American applicants. You agreed with this assessment and objective but
wisely pointed out the administrative difficulties and potentially inad-
visable implications of earmarking any specific percentage of DLF funds
for a particular country or region. You emphasized the uncertainties as
to the likely volume of meritorious economic development loan appli-
cations from Latin America at that time and I fully concurred in your
observations. Since then there have been filed with the DLF applications
by Latin American countries in volume in excess of our earlier suggested
administrative percentage target. These have been recognized by the
DLF staff on examination to qualify for DLF financing. This circumstance
reflects both the initiative of the Latin Americans and their increased
dependency on external financial assistance.
In my memorandum to you of November 14 I reaffirmed my con-
cern for the need to assure an adequate flow of DLF funds to the ARA
region,3 particularly in light of increasing Congressional interest in
this subject. Discussions in the “Committee of 21”, with which you are
Drafted by Harry Conover, Deputy Director of the Office of Inter-American Regional
Economic Affairs.
2 William V. Turnage, Deputy Director, Office of International Finance and
Development.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  47
thoroughly conversant, have since that date further underscored the
importance of such DLF action in terms of improvement in U.S. rela-
tions with the other American Republics.
The DLF Board has so far approved loans to Latin American appli-
cants totaling $18,940,000. I recommend prompt and favorable action
on an additional seven applications in the amount of $27,840,000 as a
minimum. Even including the $21.75 million for Argentina, which is
a very special case, the combined total for Latin America would thus
appropriation.
The priorities for Latin American projects in relation to the remain-
ing $73 million DLF balance are as follows:
1. Uruguay
Telecommunications
$5,500,000
2. Haiti
Artibonite Valley
5,000,000
3. Guatemala
Industrial credit
5,000,000
4. Bolivia
El Alto Airport
3,000,000
5. Chile
Pudahuel Airport
6,300,000
6. Costa Rica
Agricultural credit
2,500,000
7. Nicaragua
Matagalpa public utilities
540,000
$27,840,000
Brief comment on the status and significance of each of these proj-
ects is attached hereto as Tab A.4 Your attention is invited to the fact that
I have not included in the foregoing list a number of other important
project applications which are well along in the DLF staff processing
and which have both valid political and economic justifications. Should
any DLF funds remain after earmarking my recommended total of
$27,840,000 for Latin America, I would urge consideration be given the
following additional Latin American projects in the priority sequence
listed below. In any event the following priorities are recommended for
DLF staff work in connection with now Congressional appropriations:
1. Haiti
Sugar mill
$3,000,000
2. Bolivia
San Aurelia sugar mill
500,000
3. Paraguay
Telecommunications
1,000,000
4. Panama
Telecommunications
3,050,000
5. Guatemala
Housing finance institution
2,000,000
The foregoing are offered as recommendations for work planning
purposes at this time. Developments between now and the availability
of new DLF funds very likely will merit modification and review.
4 Not printed.

ETA–14.
Circular Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to
all Diplomatic Posts in the Other American Republics1
Section  2 of this telegram sets forth an outline of preliminary
U.S. views, subject further consultations with members of Congress,
regarding the structure, capitalization and functions of the proposed
inter-American development institution. You requested transmit this
outline to government to which you accredited together with state-
ment incorporating points stated below. In course transmittal you
should make sure that communication is brought to attention of high-­
level financial and economic officials of foreign government who will
presumably be responsible for determining financial policy issues
involved.
Points to be included in U.S. statement follow:
1. Since inauguration Operation Pan America and announce-
ment by Under Secretary Dillon at IA-ECOSOC on August 12, 1958 of
U.S. willingness to support inter-American financial institution U.S.
Government has been giving intensive study to best means establishing
such institution on basis (a) to assure effective support L.A. economic
development, (b) to serve as instrument economic cooperation genu-
inely inter-American in character, and (c) to inspire confidence in long-­
run technical and economic soundness of institution which essential its
future growth.
2. During its study U.S. Government has taken account discussions
and at meeting of Special Committee of 21 during November-December
1958.
3. As result its consideration, U.S. has come to conclusion that in
order assure success inter-American development institution should
reflect certain basic principles:
A. Primary funds to be administered by institution should be uti-
lized for loans repayable in currency lent (i.e. “hard loans”). Funds to
be administered by the institution on basis repayment in currency of
borrower or other flexible basis (i.e. “soft loans”) should play secondary
Sent in two sections; drafted by John M. Leddy, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs, and signed by Dillon. The telegram was cleared with the
Treasury Department, OFD and ARA in the State Department, and the NAC approved
its substance.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  49
role and such funds should be segregated so as to avoid any impair-
ment of credit of new institution in capital markets.
B. Contributions to funds for both hard loan operations and soft
loan operations should come from all the American states and vot-
ing power of any state should be broadly related to size of its capital
contribution.
C. United States Government should not repeat not have majority
vote in management of funds for hard loan operations. However, with
respect funds for soft loan operations U.S. recognizes limited extent to
which Latin Americans able to contribute and hence U.S. willing accept
majority contribution and majority vote in respect this department of
institution’s operations.
D. Capitalization of institution should take account limited capac-
ity Latin Americans contribute gold or dollars to paid-­in capital. Hence
reasonable portion L.A. contributions to funds for both hard and soft
lending operations should be acceptable in local currencies.
E. Payment of capital subscriptions should be spread over rea-
sonable period of years. This desirable view (a) fact that institution
will require initial period organization before operations can begin;
and (b) desirable maximize total capitalization without undue finan-
cial strain on governments any particular year.
F. Some portion total capital subscriptions should be in form con-
tingent liability on governments meet obligations of institution. If
institution soundly administered, this should enable it in time to raise
capital through issuance bonds in private securities market.
4. As indicated Under Secretary Dillon’s statement at Committee
institution should play effective role in assisting member governments
in field development planning, including selection development prior-
ities and preparation projects. While U.S. unable elaborate further this
suggestion now, anticipate will be able do so at meeting of financial
experts in January.
5. U.S. would appreciate consideration by foreign governments of
its proposals re inter-American development institution in preparation
for January meeting and would hope to receive comments before then
if practicable.
6. Understood that U.S. participation in institution to be negotiated
of course subject Congressional approval.
You also requested inform appropriate officials that U.S. delegation
will be headed by T. Graydon Upton, Assistant Secretary of Treasury,
who will be assisted by economic and financial experts. Inform re dele-
gation of govt to which you accredited appreciated soonest.

Outline of Proposed Inter-American Development Banking Institution
Capitalization (figures in millions of dollars):
and 300 callable only to meet obligation (i.e. constituting guarantee
fund for floatation bonds similar to IBRD’s callable capital portion).
Paid-­in capital (one-­third payable immediately, the balance in sub-
sequent installments): U.S., 150; L.A. gold or dollars, 150; L.A. local
2. “Soft” operations authorized capital 150 as follows (one-­half
payable immediately, second half commitment to be paid in subse-
Total capital 850.
Voting:
On basis above figures, U.S. would have roughly 40% of votes
in respect of funds contributed for “hard” loans and roughly 60% in
respect of funds contributed for “soft” loans.
Herter
Acting
ETA–15.
Memorandum from the Deputy Director for Operations
of the International Cooperation Administration
(FitzGerald) to the Director of that Agency (Smith)1
Washington, December 23, 1958.
SUBJECT
Proposed Inter-American Development Banking Institution
Insofar as I understand what is contemplated, the establishment
of an Inter-American Development Banking Institution seems to have
limited value. Perhaps my doubts as to its usefulness would be reduced
or eliminated if I could see how it fitted into the already existing
attached to a memorandum from ICA Director Smith to Under Secretary Dillon, dated
January 21, 1959, which reads as follows: “I am attaching a memorandum written to me
by Dr. FitzGerald, which sets forth some of the questions which come to mind concerning
certain aspects of the proposal.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  51
institutions now making loans in Latin America, particularly the IBRD,
the Export-Import Bank and DLF. It would also help if one had some
general idea of the likely loan terms, i.e., interest rate, length of loan,
etc. It is possible that the loan conditions contemplated would enable
the proposed bank to complement, rather than replace IBRD and Ex-Im
on the one hand and DLF on the other, although, as I understand it,
DLF would discontinue all direct loaning activities in Latin America
and local currency repayable loans would be handled by the special
loans department of the proposed bank.
According to the NAC paper, the ordinary loans department,
in addition to dollars, would receive and lend local currencies to be
repaid in the same currency as lent. This would appear to be of mar-
ginal value in Latin America. The only instance I know in which bor-
rowing countries would be able to repay the local currency of another
Latin American country easier than dollars would be in the case of
Paraguay and possibly Bolivia. These two countries might be able to
repay Argentine pesos easier than U.S. dollars.
Unless the loans contemplated by the ordinary loan department
involve a much longer repayment period than IBRD and Ex-Im Bank
typically provide, I do not see how there could be very much business
done over and above that which the IBRD and the Ex-Im Bank are pre-
pared to do. Almost inevitably, it seems to me, the IBRD will reduce the
ceiling on the loans it would make to any particular Latin American
country to the extent that that country undertakes repayment obliga-
tions in dollars or other convertible currency through the proposed
Inter-American Banking Institution. The trouble is not that IBRD and
Ex-Im Bank do not have authority to make substantially larger loans
to Latin America, but, rather, the capacity of Latin American countries
to repay these loans. Adding another banking institution would not
increase that repayment capacity.
Nor, in general, will the requirement that the Latin American
countries contribute part of the capital of the proposed Institution
increase the total capital available for borrowing by the Latin American
countries. Perhaps any contributions by Venezuela might be a net
contribution because of its relatively large foreign exchange reserve,
but surely in the case of most other countries—Brazil, or Argentina,
or Ecuador—­contributions by these countries to the capital fund will
inevitably reduce almost pro rata the capital availabilities within the
country. Much the same considerations apply to the special loans
department. Latin American countries traditionally are chronically
short of local currency, so they are likely to be unenthusiastic about
contributing local currency to the proposed Institution. I think they
would be doubly reluctant to contribute from their already limited

dollar reserves capital for the special loans department that would
be repayable in the local currency of the borrowing country. I simply
cannot imagine that this proposal will be looked upon with any favor
at all by the Latin American countries.
Presumably the argument for the proposed institution is that the
necessity for making a capital contribution will instill in Latin American
countries a greater sense of financial responsibility and take a great deal
of the odium from the United States which we have acquired because of
our unwillingness to meet all the requests of the Latin American coun-
tries for loans. I am not at all sure that this will be the result. As long as
each country gets back in loans no less than the capital it contributed,
then any additional borrowings are “gravy” and the pressure to get
them will be as great as ever. As soon as the Institution runs out of
money, the pressure again will be on the United States to make further
capital contributions.
I feel that a great deal more thought needs to be given to the pro-
posed Inter-American Banking Institution than has so far been given
it; particularly, its relationship to other lending agencies. I realize that
the United States has publicly committed itself to participating in a
regional institution, but this does not require us to jump in with our
eyes closed.
D. A. FitzGerald
Deputy Director for Operations
ETA–16.
Editorial Note
On January 7, 1959, Acting Secretary Dillon approved a request
contained in a memorandum from Assistant Secretary Mann, dated
January 5, for authority to negotiate and draft an agreement with repre-
sentatives of the other American Republics for the establishment of an
inter-American development institution. A copy of the memorandum,
with the Under Secretary’s hand-­written authorization is filed under

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  53
ETA–17.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Economic Development, Office of Inter-American
Regional Economic Affairs (Rosenson)1
Washington, January 30, 1959.
SUBJECT
Inter-American Bank
PARTICIPANTS
Asst. Secr. Upton
Mr. Willis
Mr. Rosenson
Mr. Mario Mendivil, Argentina (Chairman of Conference)
Mr. Ignacio Copete, Colombia (Chairman, Subcommittee I)
Mr. Felipe Herrera, Chile (Chairman, Subcommittee II)
Mr. Rafael Glower, El Salvador (Chairman, IA/ECOSOC)
This conversation took place at a dinner in Mr. Upton’s residence
on January 29th. Mr. Upton encouraged his Latin American visitors
to give him their views on our proposals regarding the Bank, which
they did quite readily. Each one spoke only for himself but there was
considerable agreement among them, and they expressed the belief
at various times that the majority of the other delegations held views
similar to theirs. They of course made an exception for Brazil, which
they regarded as a special problem in the current negotiations. They
expressed the hope that the U.S. would undertake the task of bringing
the Brazilians into line, but received no encouragement on this score.
The conversation revolved almost entirely around the capital
structure of the “A”, or hard-­loan, department (the subject of the “B”
department was touched on only at the end). It will be recalled that the
U.S. has proposed the following capitalization for the “A” department.
Paid-In
U.S.
L.A. in dollars
in local currency
Callable
U.S.
L.A.
Total “A” capital

The concessions sought by the Latin Americans, according to those
present at this conversation, may be summarized as follows:
1. Increase in U.S. Subscription to Callable Capital
It was suggested that the U.S. should increase its callable (i.e.,
whether, if the U.S. did increase its subscription to this type of capi-
tal by some amount, the Latin American countries would be willing
to make a similar increase. The answer was in the affirmative, and Mr.
Herrera said that they would expect to match our increase in full.
It was clear that of all the points raised by the Latin Americans,
they placed the greatest emphasis on this matter of an increase in ­callable
capital. They indicated that they had no complaint whatever over the
size of the U.S. cash subscription.
2. Reduced Latin American Dollar Subscription
Mr. Copete proposed that instead of Latin America and the U.S.
each putting up one-­half of the paid-­in dollar subscription to the “A”
department, the U.S. should put up 60 percent and Latin America 40
percent. The reduction in the Latin Americans’ dollar subscription
would be compensated by an increase in their local currency subscrip-
tion. This would have the effect of lowering the Latin Americans’ dol-
lar contribution from 150 to 100 and increasing their local currency
contribution from 100 to 150. The U.S. dollar subscription would remain
unaffected.
3. Stretch-­out of Payments
Copete, supported by Mendivil, felt that the Latin American dollar
subscription should be stretched out to five or six installments, with the
U.S. still required to pay up in three installments. Herrera demurred,
saying he thought the installments would be small enough anyway. He
thought that (2) and (3) might be considered as alternatives.
4. Voting Power
The Latins agreed that there should be a direct relation between
size of subscription and voting power, but they felt that a straight pro-
portional relation would give the U.S. too dominant a voice. It was sug-
we would be entitled on a proportional basis. This view was defended
on grounds of “psychology” and the tradition of juridical equality of
countries in the American system. The Latins left the definite impres-
sion that they attach much importance to this point.
Mr. Upton, while not committing himself on any part of the fore-
going, made clear that we regard our suggestions for the structure of

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  55
the “B” department as an integral part of our proposals on the Bank. He
accordingly invited the Latins to give him the benefit of their views on
this question also. However, because of the lateness of the hour it was
agreed to defer this part of the discussion to another early occasion.
ETA–18.
Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Economic
Development, Office of Inter-American Regional
Economic Affairs (Rosenson) to the Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, February 4, 1959.
SUBJECT
Inter-American Bank: Issues
A second informal and “off the record” meeting was held on the
evening of February 2 in the home of Mr. Rafael Glower to continue
the discussions which took place several nights before at Mr. Upton’s
home.2
It will be recalled that at the previous informal meeting the Latins
asked for four concessions from the United States proposals. These
related to: 1) increase in U.S. subscription to callable capital, 2) reduced
Latin American dollar-­subscriptions, 3) stretch-­out payments, and 4)
voting power.
At the meeting of February 2 the discussion narrowed down to
essentially two issues, i.e. the nature of the soft-­loan department of
the institution, and the amount of callable capital in the hard-­loan
department.
Several of the Latins present thought that the soft operations of the
Bank ought to be separated from the hard loans even more sharply than
contemplated in the United States proposal which called for two sepa-
rate departments within a single bank. It was suggested that there should
be a special “Fund”, organizationally entirely separate from the Bank but
administered by the latter as a trust. This idea had been put forward ear-
lier in a session of Subcommittee I by representatives of Venezuela and
Development Bank 1959.” Official Use Only. The source text is an uninitiated carbon copy.
2 Apparent reference to the meeting held on January 29; the memorandum of con-
versation of the meeting is Document ETA–17.

Ecuador. The idea of a “Fund” has also been urged consistently by the
Brazilians. Mr. Herrera said that he contemplated a Fund in which the
original subscription would be compulsory and more or less in the pro-
portions suggested by us. Thereafter the Fund would depend on volun-
tary subscriptions.
It seems clear that the notion of a Fund which would receive large
repetitive allocations from the United States but only a nominal orig-
inal subscriptions from the Latin American countries has a double
appeal. There are a few countries, notably Brazil, which would hope
to receive massive loans from this source on what would be a virtu-
ally grant basis. On the other hand, the convertible currency coun-
tries (Central America, Mexico, Venezuela, etc.) would be relieved
of contributing currencies equivalent to dollars and getting little or
nothing in return. The latter point of view was frankly set forth by
Mr. Montealegre who said that the Central American countries were
already getting their soft loans free the DLF and therefore had no
interest in a “B” Department in the Bank and could not afford, with
their extremely low standards of living, to lend money for develop-
ment to the big countries.
Mr. Upton indicated firmly that the United States could not enter-
tain the idea of a Fund constituted on a basis of voluntary contribu-
tions. Thereafter the subject was not pursued much further. I gained the
impression that only a very few countries are likely to make an all-­out
effort to obtain our agreement to a Fund. On the other hand, many if
not most of the Latin American countries may push for a Fund at least
temporarily for tactical reasons.
Mr. Herrera inquired whether we had given any further thought
to the question of voting power. Mr. Upton explained our position on
weighted voting but hinted that this is an area in which we may have
some flexibility.
The Latins then returned to the question of an increase in callable
capital. Mr. Upton explained the great difficulties he would encoun-
ter, both in the Executive Branch and on the Hill, in any attempt to
increase the United States commitment to the Bank over on a contin-
gent basis. However, the Latins seemed to have their hearts set very
strongly on this point and refused to take “no” for an answer. They
argued that with the small initial paid-­in capital it was important to
have a substantial guarantee backlog to permit the Bank to grow; they
argued that for domestic political reasons in their own countries they
cannot go back without some concession from the original United
States positions, etc. etc.
Mr. Upton pleaded the impossibility of going beyond the pres-
ent position of the United States Government. He suggested that
the main thing to do at the present time is to keep working on the

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  57
articles of agreement and “keep things moving” so that differences
could be narrowed down. The Latins tried to get him to say that his
position on callable capital was the United States position as of the
present moment, but this he refused to do. Nevertheless, I believe
he succeeded in leaving the impression with the Latins that if they
were reasonable on other parts of our proposal (and in particular as
regards the B Department), we would not be absolutely adamant on
the matter of the callable capital.
ETA–19.
Memorandum from the President’s Special Assistant
(Paarlberg) to the President’s Personal Secretary
(Whitman)1
Washington, March 5, 1959.
ing the Inter-American Development Banking Institution. The meeting
lasted about half an hour.2 Secretary Anderson led the group. Others
present were Dillon, Stans, Paarlberg, Upton and Willis.
Secretary Anderson outlined plans briefly. He indicated several
issues and indicated the positions proposed for the United States:
1. Relatively modest beginnings, and growth after the institution
has proved itself.
2. A strong role for top management in judgments regarding indi-
vidual loans.
3. Procurement, with loaned funds, from the free world.
4. Vote on a weighted basis.
With these points the President agreed.
Secretary Anderson indicated that the matter had the concurrence
of Dr. Milton Eisenhower.
Secretary Anderson indicated that embassies of the twenty-­one
Latin American countries would be notified of our intentions and that
ranking members of the appropriate Congressional Committees would
likewise be notified.
Don Paarlberg
Special Assistant
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
meeting was “Off the Record.”

ETA–20.
Memorandum Prepared for the President1
Washington, March 5, 1959.
FINAL PROPOSAL BY THE UNITED STATES WITH
RESPECT TO THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT
BANKING INSTITUTION
A Specialized Committee of Government Representatives has
been negotiating since January 8, 1959 on a U.S. proposal for an Inter-
American Development Banking Institution. A large part of the draft
charter has been completed, but a number of major issues are outstand-
ing. It is important from the U.S. viewpoint that the negotiation be com-
pleted during the next two or three weeks.
The key problem in this situation is the position of Brazil regarding
the size of the capital of the new institution.
The original U.S. proposal called for total initial resources of $850
million, with the U.S. subscribing $400 million. This consisted of $700
million for ordinary loans and $150 million for “soft loans.” Three hun-
dred million dollars of the total was not to be paid in but was similar
to the callable capital of the International Bank, and would in effect
constitute a guarantee fund against which the Bank could borrow in the
money market. Provision was made for appropriate installment pay-
ments of paid-­in capital, and for a moderate part of each paid-­in capital
subscription to be accepted in the form of national currencies, the rest
being payable in gold and dollars.
The Brazilian representative initially proposed a total capital of $5
billion and later suggested bilaterally to the U.S. an initial capital of $2
billion for ordinary loans, plus a special fund for “soft” loans, to which
contributions in unspecified amounts would be made in national cur-
rencies. He has also called for a review of the capital structure at the end
of three years to provide for increases to this total.
While most of the other Delegations have been prepared to accept
the view that it is important to establish the organization rather than
to insist upon a very large initial capital, it is evident that these other
Delegations are extremely reluctant to proceed much further until they
are satisfied that every effort has been made to reconcile the positions
of the U.S. and Brazil, especially with regard to the capital of the institu-
tion. At the same time, there is a general feeling among the Delegations,
which the U.S. Delegation shares, that a strenuous effort should be
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Official Use Only.
The source text bears the following hand-­written notation by President Eisenhower:
“Approved in principle, 5 Mar 59.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  59
made to conclude the work of the Specialized Committee in the next
few weeks.
In an effort to reach an understanding which the Brazilians as well
as the other Delegations might accept, we propose, subject to your
approval, to offer a final integrated package proposal which would not
be subject to any further concession as a result of Brazilian or other
pressure. If you approve, we should like to present this proposal to
the other Delegations, with an indication that it has been approved at
the highest level. We would like to indicate that if this proposal is not
found acceptable, and the drafting of the charter is not completed here
in Washington by the end of March, we think it unlikely that we can
obtain Congressional approval for any institution at this session of the
Congress. In this event, because of budgetary considerations, no funds
would become available from the U.S. for the institution under any
conditions until the second half of the calendar year 1960.
With respect to capitalization, we would now propose that:
1. The initial capital of the bank should be $1 billion, to which the
U.S. would subscribe $450 million, $250 million to be paid in install-
ments and $200 million in callable capital; and
2. The charter should specify that an additional $500 million would
be added to callable capital after all installments of initial paid-­in capi-
tal had been paid and provided the increase was approved at that time
by a 3/4 majority of the total votes in the Board of Governors, i.e., U.S.
would have a veto. This would raise the total capital of the Bank to $1.5
billion. The U.S. would be morally committed to subscribe an addi-
tional amount of approximately $200 million in callable capital after
three to five years, unless at that time we had very strong reasons for
rejecting such an increase.
We have been reluctant to make this institution too large because
(1) our influence over the use of our money once it has been committed
will be limited; (2) we do not wish to have the operations of the new
institution impinge too heavily upon the Latin American lending activ-
ities of the Export-Import Bank and the International Bank; and (3) we
are limited by the Budget statement to providing not more than $300
million in new obligational authority at the present time and are also
required by the Budget to limit our expenditures in fiscal year 1959 to
not more than $100 million and to have no authorization or expenditure
in fiscal year 1960.
In putting forward these proposals on capitalization we also pro-
pose to take the following positions as parts of a package:
1. Some countries have expressed a desire to eliminate the pro-
posed soft loan operation. We will indicate our willingness to transfer
our subscription to the bank’s Class A (hard loan) resources, if other
countries are willing to do likewise.

2. We feel it is essential to insist upon a reasonably strong role
for the management in relation to the Board of Directors and upon
weighted voting in the latter.
3. We would insist upon maintaining our long standing principles
with respect to avoiding excessive competition with private enterprise.
4. We intend to insist on including a provision which would enable
the bank to limit or prohibit expenditure of its funds in communist
areas.
5. The U. S. Delegation will continue to insist upon the general use
of weighted voting procedures closely related to the value of capital
subscriptions by member countries.
A memorandum has been prepared setting forth the elements of
this proposed package which might be made available to the other
Delegations as a statement of our position.2
2 No memorandum matching this description has been found.
ETA–21.
Circular Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to
all Diplomatic Posts in the Other American Republics1
Washington, March 7, 1959.
1024. PERSONAL ATTENTION CHIEF OF MISSION
REF DEPCIRTEL 793 December 212
Following is summary of statement made Friday March 6 by U.S.
to Specialized Committee considering establishment Inter-American
Banking Institution:
U.S. has considered carefully all suggestions expressed by other
delegations Specialized Committee. In light these views and to con-
clude successfully deliberations U.S. wishes submit certain important
amendments to its original proposal. It is stressed these amendments
have been discussed highest level in our government and are presented
as integral unit.
Drafted and signed by James A. Lynn, Assistant Chief of the Economic Development Division;
cleared with W and ARA in the State Department, and with the Treasury Department.
2 See Document ETA–14.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  61
U.S. urges draft charter be completed ASAP permit presentation
U.S. Congress. Proposed that final act of conference be signed before
end March by representatives all governments at closing session
Washington. Alternatively, final act could be initialed in Washington
case final act open for signature at BA but without change or further
negotiation. U.S. will wish make immediate legislative preparations
basis initialled text. If should prove impossible do this by nearly April
U.S. feels would not be possible obtain Congressional approval funds
during current session. In such case U.S. subscription to capital could
not be expected before second half calendar year 60.
1. Total Capital
U.S. agrees increase initial capital institution from $850 million
to $1 billion. Additionally charter would indicate intent participating
governments increase total capital to $1.5 billion if Board Governors
approves by qualified majority already provided for U.S. draft charter
(i.e., three-­fourths total voting power) after payment all installments
initial subscriptions paid-­in capital.
Initial paid-­in capital for ordinary loans (Class A) to be subscribed
three installments, total $150 million by U.S., $250 million by Latin
Americans, sixty percent of this in gold or dollars and forty percent in
national currency.
Callable capital U.S. $200 million, Latin America $250 million.
2. Class B Capital.
U.S. prepared subscribe $100 million to Class B capital provided
Latins subscribe $50 million. All subscriptions fifty percent gold or dollars
and fifty percent national currency. Payment in two installments.
U.S. prepared agree Class B voting to be based on weighted votes
under Class A provided two-­thirds majority required for decision.
If Latins prefer, U.S. prepared agree to substitute QUOTE Fund
UNQUOTE for Class B capital with subscriptions and voting described
above.
If Latins prefer, U.S. prepared eliminate special loan operations and
transfer corresponding subscriptions both U.S. and Latins to Class A.
FYI We indicated in presentation present proposal thought this
matter largely overtaken by events in view Subcommittee 1 report day
before favorable to $150 million QUOTE Fund UNQUOTE. End FYI
3. Deferred Class A Callable Capital
3 Apparent reference to the Second Sessions of the Committee of 21, held in Buenos

As indicated 1. above U.S. prepared add provision in Charter spec-
ifying increase in callable Class A capital of $500 million thus raising
total capital resources to $1.5 billion if approved Board Governors by
qualified majority provided in U.S. draft (i.e. three-­fourths total vot-
ing power) after payment of all installments Class A paid-­in capital.
Purpose would be indicate clear intention member governments effect
such an increase with final decision reserved to time specified. U.S.
share would be forty percent or $200 million and Latins 60 percent or
$300 million.
4. Use of National Currency
Currency any member country held by Bank however acquired
would be usable for payments in territory of member without restriction.
5. Weighted Voting
Decisions within Board Governors and Board Directors based on
weighted vote proportionate subscriptions with limited adjustment to
provide some unit votes each country. These adjustments would reduce
U.S. vote to approximately forty percent. Provisions in draft charter
requiring special majorities or some questions to be retained.
6. Management and Board of Governors
U.S. believes able strong management essential successful borrow-
ing in capital markets under callable provision. Normally sound prac-
tice that applications be reviewed by management and presented to the
Directors by management. However recognize Latins wish assurance
Board of Directors will be active, and hence U.S. would agree in special
circumstances Board of Directors by majority vote might request man-
agement bring any pending application to Board for its decision.
7. Relationship to Availability Funds From Private Investment
SUBJECT
Suggested Reply to President Betancourt’s Request for Support of Caracas as the
Site of the Inter-American Development Bank
On April 1, 1959, President Rómulo Betancourt of Venezuela
addressed to you a cable urging support of his Government’s proposal
that Caracas be selected as the site for the Inter-American Development
Bank. The original Spanish text of the cable was received at the White
House on April 2, the same date the working group meeting in this
city decided on Washington as the site for the new institution by a final
vote of 18 to 3. A translation of President Betancourt’s message was
forwarded to the White House on April 4.
I enclose for your consideration a suggested reply to the mes-
sage from President Betancourt. If you approve, this message will be
cabled to our Embassy at Caracas for immediate delivery to President
Betancourt. Since the Venezuelan President’s message arrived too late
to receive adequate consideration and the final decision by the working
group was contrary to his desires, recommend that we take no initiative
in making public this exchange of messages.
CHRISTIAN A. HERTER
Attachment
Letter from President Eisenhower to President Betancourt2
Washington, April 9, 1959.
Dear Mr. President:
I am most grateful to you for your personal initiative in bringing
directly to my attention your proposal to establish the Inter-American
Development Bank in Caracas.
Presidential Handling. Drafted by Carl E. Bartch, Officer in Charge of Venezuelan Affairs,
Office of East Coast Affairs.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  65
Your views and the forthright manner in which you expressed
them made a deep impression on me. I truly regret that your telegram
did not reach me until after the working group made its decision on
Washington as the site for the new institution.
Although this circumstance precluded my consideration of your
message before the decision was taken, your Government’s views were
well known to our representatives, and I assure you that those views
were given most careful consideration.
But after study of all factors, the United States Government felt
obliged to conclude that the technical and practical advantages of hav-
ing the institution located in Washington, at least in its initial stages,
would greatly facilitate the successful establishment of this import-
ant venture in hemispheric cooperation. In reaching that conclusion,
we had in mind the desirability of selecting a site that would be near
the New York money market and existing banking and financial
institutions, including the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, the International Monetary Fund, and the Export-Import
Bank of Washington.3
I know that you share my deep personal interest in supporting
measures which contribute to the general welfare of all of the people of
this hemisphere. I look forward to the continued association of our two
nations in such important projects as the Inter-American Development
Bank as a means of achieving the objectives we consider essential to the
peace and prosperity of the Americas.
Thank you for making your views known to me in such a friendly
fashion; I hope that you will not hesitate to communicate with me in a
similar manner in the future.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
3 Department circular telegram 1092 to all diplomatic missions in Latin America, dated
March 26, 1959, discussing the location of the Bank, stated that a U.S. site would facilitate
ETA–24.
Editorial Note
The Articles of Agreement establishing the Inter-American
Development Bank were formulated and signed on April 8, 1959, by
representatives of the United States and the twenty other American

Republics which were members of the Organization of American
States (OAS). For text of the Articles, see United States Treaties and
The United States became a member of the Bank under authority
of the Inter-American Development, Bank Act (Public Law 86–147),
its instrument of acceptance with the General Secretariat of the OAS
the Secretary of State instructed all missions in Latin America, if they
perceived no objection, to approach the Foreign Office in their respec-
tive countries “at the highest appropriate level” calling attention to
the United States deposit of instruments, to convey the friendly inter-
est of the United States in the successful realization of the project, and
to remind them that the deadline for ratification was December 31,
for the United States on December 30, 1959. Subsequently, the Bank
held its organization meeting in San Salvador, El Salvador, February
aspects of initiating the Bank’s operations are located in OAS Files,
ETA–25.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State1
Washington, August 5, 1959.
SUBJECT
U. S. Policy Toward the Proposed Central American Economic Community.
I concur in ARA’s attached memorandum of August 4 subject to
these comments:
We have reached agreement with Treasury that the costs of tran-
sition and initial development in a Central American common mar-
ket can be financed by the DLF on a project basis in cooperation
with a “community fund” which can do planning and act as a spon-
sor of development loan applications. I personally think this is not a
bad arrangement and in some ways is preferable to setting up a new
1959.” Confidential. Drafted by Mann. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  67
development corporation at this time. The question of whether it may
later be decided by the Central Americans to set up a separate develop-
ment institution to borrow money and make loans on its own account
is not foreclosed at this time. The only issue is whether we should make
a commitment to finance through the DLF, sound projects totaling $15
million per country or whether we should say orally something like
this:
“The DLF does not ear-mark its funds and the availability of its
funds is dependent on annual appropriations by the Congress. So
official commitment can therefore be made. However the Department
will recommend to the DLF Board that sound projects facilitating tran-
sition and economic development in a new trading community based
upon GATT principles will be approved up to a level of $15 million
per country. This figure should not be considered as a calling if sound
projects are presented in excess of that amount. The speaker therefore
suggests it would be prudent for Central American planning to take
into account this attitude of the Department of State.”
If it is possible for the DLF to make a commitment of the kind
which Mr. Rubottom suggests, this would be frosting on the cake. If not,
I believe I could sell the alternative approach to Salvador, Honduras
and Guatemala which currently appear to be the possibilities.
Attachment
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) and the Assistant
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Acting
Secretary of State2
Washington, August 4, 1959.
SUBJECT
Central American Common Market
Discussions
In recent months, the United States Government has left the
impression throughout Central America that it would like to see the
countries in this area form a real common market and that the United
2 Confidential. Drafted by Turkel and John L. Gawf, Officer in Charge of El
Salvadoran and Honduran Affairs, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs.

States is willing to contribute material as well as moral support to this
end. Unfortunately, we have not as yet made much progress toward
fulfilling these expectations, and our continued failure to offer any-
thing tangible in the way of assistance can be expected to result in
a widespread feeling of disillusionment which will adversely affect
the whole range of our relationships with the countries concerned.
We are already faced with a rising tide of unrest, much of it of eco-
nomic origin, throughout the entire Caribbean area. It would be most
unfortunate indeed if the present political turmoil were to be further
intensified by a reaction of disillusionment toward the United States
Government over the apparent reversal of a policy which we have so
clearly endorsed.
The following chronically outlines the principal policy statements
which have created this impression:
have also supported a free-­trade area in Central America. We have also
made it clear that we are prepared, through the Export-Import Bank, to
consider the dollar financing required by sound regional industries in
Latin America.”3
mended that the United States “participation with the five republics
of Central America, and Panama, if possible, in a regional conference,
either at the enterprise, and private industrial enterprises, to take a pos-
itive approach in helping Central America and Panama to the end that
new industries, guaranteed from across to the entire market of the par-
ticipating countries, would be established.”4
3. In February, 1958 Messers. Frank and Turkel visited all the
Governments of Central America5 and stated that the United States
desired to see a real forward-­looking, trade-­creating common mar-
ket in Central America and was prepared to lend material as well as
support to bring it about rapidly. They urged starting with two or
three countries and then expanding it to five or six. The Frank-Turkel
mission aroused a tremendous amount of enthusiasm and the United
3 For the full text of Under Secretary Dillon’s statement before the Committee of 21,
4 For the full text of the referenced Report to the President on United States-Latin
5 The fact-­finding mission conducted by Harry Turkel and Isaiah Frank to survey
the feasibility of providing U.S. assistance for the establishment of a Central American
reported to the Department of State that the time was propitious for a decisive effort to
achieve a true Central American common market, starting with perhaps two or three
countries.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  69
States was asked to provide the countries with an outline embodying
the United States Government’s suggestions as to the form this orga-
nization might take. We have agreed to provide this outline.
4. At the close of the State Visit of the President of the El Salvador
on March 23, 1959, a joint statement of President Lemus and President
Eisenhower was made that they agreed that a Central American com-
mon market “costs make a significant contribution to the stimulation
of capital investment in these nations and to the steady improvement
of the welfare of the people. This subject will receive continued study
by the two Governments with a view to taking approximate action to
carry on these sound plans already contemplated.”6
The discussion between the two Presidents was even more enthu-
siastic than [illegible in the original] from the press release.7
Our immediate difficulty in carrying out the policy thus enunciated
is in obtaining Treasury’s concurrence in the paper we are preparing for
distribution to the five Central American countries, outlining in very
general terms to steps that should be taken to form a common mar-
ket. One of the principal issues with Treasury was whether we would
recommend the formation of a new Central American economic devel-
opment institution. To get a present to have agreed on a “Community
Fund” whose job it would be to facilitate the adjustment of the econo-
mies of the member states to the new common market conditions. This
fund would derive resources from a fraction of the [illegible in the orig-
inal] revenues of the member states, but these will obviously be inade-
quate to cope with the need for economic development.
We consider it essential that a [illegible in the original] of basic eco-
nomic development projects proceed concurrently with the transition
to an integrated economy. Moreover, we feel that it will be necessary
to give the governments concerned [illegible in the original] definite
advance indication that U.S. financial assistance will be available for
this purpose; otherwise, the current integration effort will never get off
the ground.
Treasury has suggested that we tell our embassies that if any of the
governments concerned express disappointment over the absence of
joint statement with President Eisenhower issued at the end of his stay in Washington,
on his visit, see Documents ES–4–5.
7 The referenced conversation took place at the White House on March 11; a mem-
orandum of that conversation, drafted by Assistant Secretary Rubottom is printed as
Document ES–6.

any commitment or indication of U.S. financial assistance in the paper
we submit to them, the Embassy should say that we contemplate that
the DLF will work closely with the Community Fund and would give
priority consideration to requests for financing sound development
projects including joint projects.
Both ARA and I feel that this line is inadequate to deal with the
expectations our policy statements have aroused. In order to effectively
carry out policy of supporting Central American Integration, we will
need to finance projects accounting to about $15 million per country
with the possibility that this might be execeeded if sound projects total-
ing more than this sum were submitted. It is not proposed that any new
regional Fund be established; however, it is felt that the time has come
for us to make concrete commitments to finance sound development
projects related to the integration effort from existing appropriations as
through existing agencies.
Within the Governments of the Central American countries enthu-
siasm for economic integration is high. Its need has been felt for a long
time. ARA has been active in the area and has taken some steps toward
furthering the integration effort although in a manner which we regard
as unsatisfactory. Even if we do not take this opportunity to lead and
guide this movement, it is very likely that it may find other means of
proceeding, but in a way which would be instrumental to United States
interests as well as in the long-­term interests of the countries themselves.
Recommendations:
That you discuss this matter with the Treasury Department with
a view to obtaining, in line of a Central American Development Fund,
(1) agreement that the U.S. will sympathetically consider the financ-
ing of sound development projects relating the integration effort, in the
amount of approximately $15 million per country, and (2) Treasury’s
concurrence in making this position known in a note of transmittal to
the governments concerned when the proposed recommends is sent.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  71
ETA–26.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the
Commercial Policy Branch, Office of International Trade
(Fishburne)1
Washington, November 18, 1959.
SUBJECT
Economic Integration in Latin America
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Raul Prebisch, Executive Secretary of ECLA
Dr. Esteban Ivovich, Chief of Commercial Policy Division of ECLA
Mr. Milic Kybal, Director of Washington Office of ECLA
E - Mr. Mann
OT - Mr. Hadraba
CPT - Mr. Fishburne
After a few words of welcome, Mr. Mann asked Dr. Prebisch to indi-
cate what he would like to take up in particular as the topic of discussion
during the meeting. Dr. Prebisch said that he wanted to discuss regional
economic integration in Latin America and was especially interested in
the views of Mr. Mann as to the merits of an over-­all approach to eco-
nomic integration as contrasted with a subregional approach. His own
feeling, he said, was that the subregional approach might prove to be
detrimental to the formation of an over-­all Latin American Common
Market. He did, however, make an exception for the Central American
countries since they are already fairly closely knit and have a long history
of attempting to attain economic integration. He based his objection to
the subregional approach on the fact that the market in a subregion is not
large enough for the growth of efficient industry, and protection would
inevitably grow up on manufactured products, such as automobiles.
Mr. Mann said that experience in Europe so far has been contrary
to the idea expressed by Dr. Prebisch. He cited the example of Benelux,
which is being integrated successfully into the European Economic
Community. He said that if a subregional group started out with the
proper concept of the advantages of competition, it would be easy for
that group to make the transition into the larger market; on the con-
trary, if the group started out with protectionist ideas, further integra-
tion would be very difficult.
Mr. Mann said that we have given encouragement to the Central
American countries to make a start on economic integration even if less
than all are ready to make a start. He said that we agree that it would
be best for all five countries to act together; but if that is politically

impossible, then the smaller number could make a start and set up their
arrangements by consultation in such a way that the other countries
could join later.
Dr. Prebisch said that ECLA had been requested to prepare a list
of products on which trade barriers should be reduced in the first step
toward Central American economic integration in mid-1960.
Mr. Kybal remarked that some sectors of United States public opin-
ion apparently fear that a Latin American common market might have
a trade diverting effect. Mr. Mann agreed that protectionist sentiment
exists in the United States and that there is some fear that regional
economic integration movements may harm the export trade of the
United States. He said that we realize that there will be future trade
benefits from regional common markets (e.g., the European Economic
Community); there is a feeling, however, that the short-­term results
may not be beneficial to the United States. It is important that regional
arrangements be nondiscriminatory and outward-­looking.
Dr. Prebisch said that the Latin American countries will import all
the goods they can pay for, so the United States need not fear a reduc-
tion of exports to Latin America because of any effects of regional eco-
nomic integration. He said that, with good fiscal, trade and monetary
policies, Latin America in a few years would be able to pay for its own
development. He said that if Latin America set up its own automobile
industry, over-­all purchases from the United States would not decline
but the pattern of imports would, of course, change.
Mr. Mann said that it would be wrong to create an artificial or
uneconomic industry in automobiles or any other product that could
never compete.
In reply to Dr. Prebisch’s remark that a subregional group might
be too small, Mr. Mann said that we should not be concerned about the
size of the initial group—­only that it be outward-­looking and based
on the idea of competition. He said that the division of the world into
a number of discriminatory blocs is contrary to the over-­all multilat-
eral principles of the GATT which we believe in. He said that in Latin
America we are concerned over the population growth and believe that
the formation of a true common market in Latin America can help solve
the economic problems connected with fast population growth.
Mr. Mann then asked Dr. Prebisch what he thought, of the idea of
an inter-American common market as suggested by Senator Mansfield.2
Dr. Prebisch said he did not believe public opinion either in Latin
America or in the United States was prepared for such integration. He
said that, in any such arrangement, Latin America would insist upon
2 Senator Mike Mansfield (D-Mont.) prepared the formation of a common market
for North and South America in a letter to Secretary Herter which was related to the press
on October 31, 1959.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  73
free access to the United States and Canadian markets but would not
be prepared to give the United States and Canada anything better than
preferential tariff rates. Mr. Mann remarked that this would be contrary
to the GATT.
ETA–27.
Letter from the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
Congressional Relations (Hoghland) to Senator Thomas
H. Kuchel.1
Washington, December 24, 1959.
Dear Senator Kuchel:
I read with interest your letter of December 1, 1959 to Under
Secretary Dillon,2 regarding stabilization programs in Latin America in
which the United States Government participates in cooperation with
international institutions and private banking groups.
In general such programs have achieved a substantial degree of
success in arresting inflation in Latin America and creating a firm basis
for sound economic development. There now exist nine such programs
in operation. The countries involved are: Argentina, Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay and Peru. Several addi-
tional programs are now under active consideration. In your letter you
state that Uruguay had decided not to participate in any stabilization
program under the International Monetary Fund. Actually, the country
in this case was not Uruguay but Brazil.
The information you request on the stabilization programs for
Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia and Paraguay is given in some detail in
the enclosure. I hope that this information will meet your request. Since
the financial affairs of other governments, international organizations
and private banks are involved, the material in the enclosure is not
intended for public use.
Sincerely yours,
John S. Hoghland 2d
Acting Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations
enclosed statement were drafted by Albert Post, Financial Adviser in the Office of Inter-
American Regional Economic Affairs, and cleared with the Bureau of Economic Affairs.

Enclosure
Statement Prepared in the Office of Inter-American
Regional Economic Affairs
ARGENTINA
In December 1958, the United States Government, private finan-
cial institutions and the International Monetary Fund announced cred-
its of $329 million to assist Argentina in its efforts to achieve financial
stabilization and economic development. This program, according to
the Eximbank, was one of the most comprehensive financial opera-
tions ever undertaken by the United States in Latin America. The $329
million of credits were broken down as follows: $125 million from the
Eximbank of which $100 million was to be used to finance purchases
from the United States of equipment for economic development proj-
ects, and the remaining $25 million was to be used to maintain the flow
of essential imports from the U.S. during 1959; a $25 million loan from a
consortium of U.S. private commercial banks to meet short term finan-
cial requirements; a $50 million exchange agreement from the United
States Treasury through the Exchange Stabilization Fund; a $25 mil-
lion loan from the Development Loan Fund; and a $75 million standby
arrangement with the International Monetary Fund. Previously the
Argentine government had arranged with the members of the Paris
Club (West Germany, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Great Britain,
France, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and The Netherlands) for sub-
stantial credits in order to deal with its commercial arrearages with
those countries. An arrangement was made whereby Argentina funded
debts owed to those countries, amounting to about $450 million, and
was permitted to repay them over a period of 10 years; debts to Japan
were included in these arrangements.
The $329 million of loans was made because Argentina agreed to a
full stabilization program with the International Monetary Fund. At the
time those loans were made the Argentina international payments posi-
tion was critical with gross foreign exchange reserves down to a his-
million at the end of 1954. In addition, because of heavy fiscal deficits
and virtually uncontrolled credit expansion, the price level in 1958 rose
by 32% while production actually declined. Under the International
Monetary Fund stabilization program the Argentine government com-
mitted itself to extensive alterations in its financial and economic sys-
tem and import and exchange controls were almost abolished and a
single fluctuating exchange rate was established; the budgetary deficit

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  75
was to be substantially reduced by the curtailment of expenditures and
the imposition of new taxes and other sources of revenue; commercial
bank credit was to be limited and at the same time internal subsidies
which had distorted the price structure were to be eliminated. As a
consequence of these radical steps which were necessary to eliminate
distortions in the economy, there was a sharp upward movement in
prices during 1959 because of the depreciation of the exchange rate, the
dropping of subsidy payments on basic articles of consumption, and
the continued necessity to increase wage rates. As a result the cost of
living increased by 75% during the first six months of 1959. However,
once the initial adjustments in the price structure were made and the
budgetary situation improved, there was a noticeable tendency toward
price stability. In July and August 1959 the cost of living increased by
price index began to decline in September. The government was also
able to keep new wage increases to relatively moderate levels. With
these a signs of stability, there was an inflow of private capital and
the foreign reserves of the Central Bank doubled in the four months
July—October. By the end of October 1959 exchange reserves were up
to $344 million gross. During 1959 money supply increased at a lower
rate than the previous year despite the increase in foreign reserves and
the free rate of exchange fluctuated between 80/85 pesos per dollar.
At the same time the Argentine government entered into large scale
contracts with foreign petroleum companies for the production of oil in
Argentina and it is envisaged that by 1961 Argentina will be about self-­
sufficient in that product, thereby saving almost $250 million of import
requirements per year.
All indications are that per capita national income in 1959 will be
somewhat less than 1958 but exceed the level of 1957. A large part of
this decline probably results from losses of production through strikes
against government efforts to maintain wage levels in face of rising
prices, but these strikes have lately diminished in number and inten-
sity. The national budget of Argentina in 1959 had a deficit of about
one half that of 1958; a large part of this reduction came from raising
rates for public services, such as, railroad fares, post office services, tele-
phone rates, etc. While there is still a budgetary gap a strong effort will
be made to obtain balance in 1960.
The stabilization program for 1960 has now been approved by the
International Monetary Fund which on December 2, 1959 made avail-
able a standby of $100 million to Argentina. Since that country had only
actually drawn about $40 million of the previous standby of $75 mil-
lion, in effect, this involved making available $65 million of new funds.
Under the International Monetary Fund standby Argentina committed
itself to balance the budget of the central government although it was

recognized that there would be a deficit in the overall public sector
accounts; that deficit was to be covered by non-­inflationary borrow-
ing. Ceilings are set on the level of domestic assets of the Central Bank
and a prudent policy was to be maintained with regard to bank credits
to the private sector. The existing single fluctuating exchange is to be
continued.
In addition to the International Monetary Fund standby fund,
Argentina is attempting to secure credits from the other participants of
the previous loan package arrangement. The Western European coun-
tries probably will make available between $75/80 million of which
about $50 million will be used to cover debt payments under the Parle
Club refunding plans so that the new money will come to about $25/30
million. Commercial banks in New York City have been approached
by the Argentines and they may make available about $50 million or
more. Of this amount some $41 million would have to be used to repay
maturing commercial bank credits during 1960. Also, the Eximbank
and the Development Loan Fund may make financial facilities avail-
able to Argentina. It is understood that the above loans are in various
stages of negotiations.
BOLIVIA
As a result of balance of payments deficits which exhausted
Bolivia’s foreign exchange reserves and a hyper-­inflation which cre-
ated social unrest and a reduced standard of living, discussions were
begun in 1954 looking toward stabilization effort. In December 1956
the International Monetary Fund provided $7.5 million to support a
stabilization program which included a grant of $10 million from ICA
in the form of procurement authorizations and a cash grant subject to
the supervision of the United States Operations Mission in Bolivia.
In addition, the United States Treasury made available to Bolivia
an exchange agreement of $7.5 million. This joint program required
the unification of the exchange rate at a realistic level, an attempt to
balance government expenditures and receipts in order to eliminate
inflationary financing from the Central Bank, a reduction in bank
credit expansion, and the removal of all economic controls and sub-
sidies except for a wage and salary freeze. Prior to the beginning of
the stabilization program the United States Government had given
million in 1956. Since the stabilization program has begun the United
States Government through the ICA has continued its grant program
$21 million in 1959. The stabilization program has been in continuous

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  77
operation since December 1956 and an International Monetary Fund
representative is resident in La Paz.
The stabilization program has been carried out with a consid-
erable degree of success considering the magnitude of the problems
and recent political history since 1952. The single rate of exchange has
been fairly stable at about 12,000 Bolivianos to the dollar; the cost of
living which rose by 178% during the year before the stabilization pro-
gram began, has increased by only about 20% in the past two years;
the government has followed an austerity plan in its expenditures and
has made some progress in its credit restrictions. However, the finan-
cial situation began to deteriorate again in the middle of 1958 when
pressures for wage increases resulted in numerous strikes and higher
public expenditures; at the same time public sector financial deficits
increased. Early in 1959 a revised standby agreement was negotiated
with the International Monetary Fund but the Bolivian government has
had some difficulty in complying with some of its provisions. The basic
difficulty was the government’s unwillingness to discontinue price
subsidies in commissaries operated by the nationalized mines, which
were creating a heavy financial burden. After considerable negotiation
in which the United States Government supported the International
Monetary Fund’s position, the commissary price issue was finally
resolved and a new standby agreement concluded in May 1959. This
standby is still in force.
Under the stabilization agreement of May 1959, Bolivia was given
a further drawing of $1.5 million by the International Monetary Fund
and to date has drawn $0.2 million of this amount. ICA grant assis-
tance has continued in the amounts indicated above and it is believed
that it may be possible to taper off grant aid over the next years. The
fundamental problem in Bolivia has been that production of the basic
export product, tin, has declined as a result of nationalization of the
mines, antiquated equipment, and worker indiscipline, so that foreign
exchange earnings have fallen off drastically from a total of $150 mil-
markets for non-­ferrous minerals have aggravated the problem, efforts
to diversify the export economy have been not very successful in view
of the political unrest, low level of income, large scale illiteracy, great
transportation problems, and the limitations of domestic resources.
COLOMBIA
As a result of excessive imports, heavy government expendi-
tures, and a sharp decline in the price of coffee, the new democratic
Government of Colombia which took over in 1957 found that it
had inherited accumulated commercial arrearages to foreigners of

$450 million, an inflated budget, and a greatly reduced foreign income.
Efforts to renegotiate the commercial arrearages had been made by
the previous Rojas Pinilla government but the further decline in cof-
fee income created a burden which the new government believed was
too heavy. Therefore, in June 1957 a standby agreement was entered
into with the International Monetary Fund which made available Fund
drawings of $25 million. Under this standby agreement the Colombian
government committed itself to policies which would limit rediscount
facilities to private commercial banks, devalue the Colombian peso to
a more realistic level, reduce the budgetary deficit, and set aside funds
for the liquidation of the commercial arrearages. In July the Eximbank
showed its support for this program by granting a credit for $60 million
and at about the same time commercial banks in New York made avail-
able a credit line of $27 million. Under this program Colombia has been
able to liquidate a large part of its commercial arrearages and to reduce
level of about $30 million in 1958.
There have been two renewals of the standby agreement with the
International Monetary Fund since the date of the original program.
Under these new programs more specific targets on budgetary expen-
ditures, central bank and private bank credit, and other economic indi-
cators have been set. In general Colombia has achieved a considerable
degree of success in adhering to its commitments with the International
Monetary Fund. The first renewal in May 1958 made available new
credits of $78 million from the Eximbank and $25 million from pri-
vate commercial banks in this country. Under the second renewal in
November 1959, Colombia obtained drawing rights of $41 million from
the International Monetary Fund and loans of $25 millions from private
United States banks and $25 million from the Eximbank. Colombia has
managed, despite the reduction in export income of between $580 mil-
only $460 million in 1958, to repay a large part of its commercial arrear-
ages and to accumulate a modest amount of international reserves. It is
estimated that the overall Colombian payments position has improved
by about $300 million since the beginning of the stabilization arrange-
ments. The loans made available by the Eximbank were and are used
for export of United States produced equipment to Colombia. In addi-
tion, under the authority of Public Law 480, agricultural surpluses val-
being supplied to Colombia.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  79
PARAGUAY
In March 1956 the Paraguayan government made its first real
effort to cope with an inflation which had raised the cost of living
nine-­fold between 1950 and 1956. The Paraguayan currency unit, the
Guarani, was devalued to 60 to the dollar from the multiple rates pre-
viously existing and a move was made to reduce internal monetary
expansion. This program was not successful and in August 1957 a
more complete stabilization program was put into effect in cooper-
ation with the International Monetary Fund which made available
a standby of $5.5 million. Since then this standby has been twice
renewed and now expires in August 1960. To date Paraguay has
drawn a net amount of $2.75 million under the International Monetary
Fund standby arrangements, making available a total of $2.75 million
which can still be drawn.
Under its agreement with the International Monetary Fund
Paraguay devalued the guarani to about 12C to the dollar and set up
a unified free exchange system. Internal stabilization measures were
put into effect involving a limitation on Central Bank advances to the
government and the private sector and the curtailment of credit by
the commercial banks. As a result of these stabilization policies the rate
of monetary expansion was reduced from an average of about 70% per
the first nine months of 1959. The cost of living only increased by about
3% in 1958. Production and investment have shown moderate increases
since 1957 as compared with the stagnation of the pre-­stabilization
period. Expert income has increased and there has been a modest
improvement in the foreign exchange position of the country. Gold
and dollar reserves which were virtually non-­existent in 1956 are now
at about $3 million. In the past few months, however, there has been
some deterioration in the internal financial situation owing to an undue
expansion of Central Bank credit. An International Monetary Fund
Mission is now in Paraguay discussing this matter with Paraguayan
officials in an effort to bring that government to closer conformity with
the stabilization objectives.
The United States Government has not participated in this pro-
gram directly on a financial basis although it has made available eco-
nomic development credits through the Development Loan Fund.
tural surpluses by an agreement signed in May 1956.

ETA–28.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Inter-
American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Washington, January 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Our Economic Analyses in a Nutshell.2
Argentina. An intense financial stabilization effort has improved
the balance of payments situation but led to large increase in cost of
living and fall in industrial production. Outlook for 1960 is for some
economic improvement over 1959 with greater price stability and some
revival in industrial and agricultural output.
Bolivia. A higher tin quota and prospects for increased output of
oil and other minerals (including gold) give grounds for expecting fur-
ther modest improvement in economic conditions. This is subject, how-
ever, to the continuation of a relatively stable political situation. On the
assumption of the continuation of present trends it should be possible
to make a further gradual reduction in U.S. aid.
Brazil. Although 1939 saw largest inflation since war, balance of
payments improved owing to excellent coffee export volume and some
curtailment imports. Economic expansion appears to have continued.
Expect international payments problem will again become urgent
about April–May 1960 as reserves are modest.
Chile. Owing to good copper prices and strikes abroad, has accu-
mulated sizeable dollar reserves. For first time in number of years, 1939
was period of economic growth. Government politics, however, have
tended aggravate inflation and failed take advantage of favorable eco-
nomic climate. As long as copper price is good, Chile will go through
1960 in payments balance but the problem of unbalanced budgets and
weak monetary policies will continue inflation.
Colombia. In 1959 economic growth was resumed after declines
since 1956. Cautious fiscal and monetary policies and good coffee
exports led to payments surplus of $45 million. For 1960 it is expected
that payments situation will not be so bright as imports are increased
& Miscellaneous.” Official Use Only. Drafted by Post.
2 A hand-­written notation on the source text by Assistant Secretary Rubottom reads
as follows: “Thanks. Very useful.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  81
to continue expansion in production. However, adequate financial
reserves are available to meet Colombian external needs.
Costa Rica. Despite weak coffee prices, managed to maintain ade-
quate reserve position because of large coffee crop. Government has
conservative financial policies. In 1960 lower export income likely to
require continued caution, if payments equilibrium is to be obtained.
cent decline in national income and foreign payments deficit of over
$50 million. For 1960, outlook is unfavorable as Government increases
controls over economy and resultant uncertainties. National income is
expected to stagnate and by next August—September an external pay-
ments crisis may shape up.
Dominican Republic. 1960 was the poorest economic year since the
end of the war on top of which Government faced heavy defense bur-
dens. If GCDR follow IMF stabilization program some improvement
may be expected since outlook for export crops is better. Heavy foreign
debt limits flexibility of Government and public works expenditures
cannot be too sharply curtailed.
Ecuador. Overall improvement noticeable in economy in 1959 with
production, exports, and foreign reserves up. Important in 1960 for
GOE to resist pressures from businessmen for expansionary monetary
policies which would threaten steady expansion of economy over past
decade.
El Salvador. During 1959 large increases in production compen-
sated for coffee price weakness. The economy is stable and well man-
aged and no problems on that score envisaged for 1960.
Guatemala. Continued lax monetary policies and budgetary deficits
with declining experts, led to a $15 million payments deficit in 1959 and
The GOG has already imposed import restrictions and limited bank
credit so that in 1960 the payments deficit is expected to be reduced
to $5 million. Continued effort, however, will be needed to achieve this
objective.
Haiti. 1959 was one of the most disastrous years in the economic
history of Haiti. A coffee crop of 50 percent of normal and government
overspending in face of low tax revenues, led to an intensified stabi-
lization program backed by $6 million of U.S. special grant aid. For
1960 a great improvement is expected, with a record high coffee crop
and Haiti should actually accumulate dollar reserves and have a 5%
increase in national income.
Honduras. Economic stagnation, marked by declining banana pro-
duction, was a basic problem in 1959. An IMF program was worked
out which has achieved budgetary balance and stopped the decline

in dollar reserves. However, the picture is gloomy for 1960; further
retrenchment may be necessary and the GOH will have to reduce its
fiscal budget for the year. New investment for electric power from the
IBRD may be helpful.
Mexico. While there was a general economic improvement in 1959
over the bad year of 1958, it has been very limited. Economic growth
has been slowed down or even stopped and imports sharply reduced
as export markets for cotton and Mexican, non-­ferrous metals have
been weak. The GOM faces the problem of resuming economic expan-
sion in 1960 in face of failure to increase foreign income. Although for-
eign exchange reserves have grown, they are inadequate to support
a large increase in investment without improvement in demand for
Mexican exports.
Nicaragua. With somewhat improved exports and production;
balance of payments showed modest improvement in 1959. Expected
that 1960 may be difficult year with cotton export availabilities down so that
may have to turn to IMF for financial assistance. U.S. loan to Central Bark
should alleviate situation.
Panama. Economic deterioration and unemployment are important
problems. Large fiscal deficits and inadequate taxes have caused some
loss in dollar reserves. Outlook for 1960 is for no significant change with
GOP being pressed for funds and structural problems continuing.
Paraguay. Modest improvement in balance of payments occurred
during 1959 but national income not increasing. Government controls
still hampering production, stabilization program has achieved finan-
cial objectives but without elimination state controls and additional
investment, expected that 1960 will see continuation 1959 conditions.
Peru. As result of drastic reduction imports obtained balance of
payments surplus of about $15 million in 1959 compared with deficits
for two previous years. Global output probably declined in 1959. Major
problem for 1960 will be budgetary equilibrium. With exports likely to
expand owing to new copper production facilities balance of payments situa-
tion should continue to improve in 1960.
Uruguay. A record payments deficit ($50 million) is expected in
1959 because of lack of export products and unwise state intervention
in the economy. Very likely national income shows a sizeable decline
in year. No significant improvement may be anticipated in 1960 as the GOU
has not yet shown desire to cope with its difficult economic problems or invite
IMF advice.
Venezuela. Owing to economic and political uncertainties there was
a sharp run on the bolivar, and dollar reserves fell by $400 million in
1959. Official announcements unfriendly to the private oil industry

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  83
have dried up capital inflows, while budgetary and monetary policies
have had adverse impacts. The drain on dollar reserves should slow down
to manageable proportions in 1960 as long as the GOV follows sound policies
and makes a real effort to deal with its internal problems. The outlook, however,
is not too good for any revival of economic growth.
ETA–29.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of
Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Washington, February 5, 1960.
SUBJECT
Discussion at Secretary’s Staff Conference—February 5, 1960
I feel that you should be aware of the following points that came
up at the Secretary’s staff conference on February 5.2
[Here follows discussion of two matters unrelated to U.S. loan
activities in Latin America.]
3. I stated that my colleagues on IA–ECOSOC yesterday had
referred to the February 4 front page article in the New York Times by
million per year to $250–300 million per year but without any increase
in the total. They said if this is so, obviously the priorities of other partic-
ipants must be reduced. Is this our support for Operation Pan America?
I said that I did not know about the alleged [illegible in the origi-
nal] or the accuracy of the article. My Brazilian colleague said that the
Brazilian Ambassador at the Pan American Society had recently stated
that Latin America had participated in DLF funds to the extent of only
which [illegible in the original] a stabilization loan, the real participa-
tion was around 5%.
& Miscellaneous.” Official Use Only. Drafted by Turkel.
by John A. Calhoun, Director of the Executive Secretariat, contains a brief mention of the
subject dealt with in this memorandum. (Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot 63 D 75)
3 E.W. Kenworthy.

I said to the Secretary that I had looked into the matter and found
there were two reasons for the low participation. Latin America had not
submitted many worthwhile projects and the second reason was that
they got a low priority since there was a general feeling that they were
much more creditworthy than other areas and should have applied
to the Eximbank. In any case, I stated, it was an unfortunate article to
come out on the eve of the President’s departure to Latin America.
The Secretary stated that it should not be forgotten that Latin
America gets a very high percentage of Eximbank loans. Was that not so?
I responded that normally Latin America does get a high percentage;
about 40% of all Eximbank loans. However, the level of loans in 1958 was
about $477 million (because it was a year of many stabilization loans)
but had dropped in 1950 to some $233 million. I added that I thought
the outlook was not good since the President’s Annual Economic Report
shows that it is expected this decline will continue and the justification is
that the Inter-American Bank will shortly come into operation. The only
trouble with this is that it would actually take quite a long time for the
Inter-American Bank to begin making a significant contribution to the
economic development of the Hemisphere and thus we were faced with
the immediate problem of securing a higher priority for Latin America in
the operations of DLF.
ETA–30.
Memorandum of Conversation, by Albert Post of the
Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs1
Washington, March 18, 1960.
SUBJECT
Courtesy Call by Mr. Felipe Herrera on the Under Secretary.
PARTICIPANTS
The Under Secretary of State
Mr. Felipe Herrera, President, IADB
Mr. Robert Menapace, Executive Vice President, IADB
General Robert Cutler, U.S. Executive Director, IADB
REA – Mr. Albert Post
Mr. Herrera stated that he had come to pay his respects to the
Under Secretary and that he had already made a courtesy call on the
Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Anderson. He indicated that he and his

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  85
associates had already been in contact with bankers in New York, the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and other
organizations that they believe should be contacted for the future oper-
ations of the IADB.
Mr. Dillon said that he hoped that the new bank was going to have
close cooperative relations with Mr. Black of the IBRD since Mr. Black
was wondering how the two institutions would work in the future
with regard to loans for Latin America. Mr. Dillon stated that he had
informed Mr. Black that he hoped that the two banks could work jointly
on some loans with each one taking up a participation. Mr. Herrera
thought this was a very good idea since he believed it would increase
the prestige of his institution and make available additional financial
resources, since the IADB had relatively limited capital.
Mr. Dillon said that he saw the new bank as filling three basic
requirements:
1. As an institution which was directly intended to meet Latin
American requirements and therefore close to the Latin American scene;
2. As being able to offer technical assistance in the development
of projects and plans which could then facilitate loans to individual
countries;
3. And, through its Special Fund, being able to assist countries
which have a narrow margin of credit-­worthiness and which could
later cooperate with the new International Development Association.
There was some discussion on the importance of the IADB main-
taining a good record on its regular banking loans. Mr. Dillon declared
that there might be some problems on such loans if the IBRD and the
new bank maintained different standards, but he was sure that there
would be a satisfactory way of working things out.
Mr. Herrera said that they were hoping to obtain the U.S. contribu-
tion to the Bank’s capital funds shortly and that he had discussed the
matter with Mr. Anderson. Mr. Dillon said that he understood that the
U.S. would make its capital contribution during the next fiscal year but
that if there was an adequate cash balance in the Treasury toward the
end of this fiscal year part of the U.S. capital would be paid in at that
time. Under the legislation, Mr. Dillon indicated, the Administration
could pay in the U.S. capital in either of the two fiscal years. Mr. Herrera
said he would like to have the U.S. capital paid in because he expected
to take a trip to Latin America shortly to discuss arrangements for pay-
ment of capital participations by other member countries.
Mr. Menapace and General Cutler said that they had received
excellent cooperation from U.S. Government officials in securing space
for their new headquarters. General Cutler said that they expected in
time to occupy the top four floors of the building at 801 19th Street and
that by May 15 two of those floors would be vacated and available for
occupancy.

ETA–31.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, March 31, 1960.
SUBJECT
Financial Assistance for Latin America
PARTICIPANTS
The Under Secretary
Vance Brand, Managing Director, DLF
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
I asked the Under Secretary if I could give a brief outline of my con-
cept of the problem regarding financial assistance to Latin America with-
out going into specific cases, and, on obtaining his favorable reply, I said:
Latin America did exceptionally well from an economic standpoint
during World War II and up until the last half of 1956, due largely to the
good prices obtained for the raw materials exported; a decline set in in
the last half of 1956 which was not arrested until the last half of 1959,
this having come about by virtue of improved world market conditions
and our own efforts in the commodity field, witness coffee and lead and
zinc; most Latin American leaders still adhere to our own belief that
investment and loans should be the main source of development capi-
tal, plus, of course, their own savings, but the longer we remain in the
grant-­aid business elsewhere in the world the more we will have to face
the factor of the “invidious comparison” since all our efforts to explain
the difference have been unsuccessful if we were to face the truth; unless
we step up the tempo of loans to Latin America and increase the priority
of the DLF in the area, we are almost certain to have amendments added
by the Congress requiring that we do certain things in Latin America
and we run the risk that certain countries, notably Guatemala, will suc-
cessfully appeal directly to the Congress for grant aid.
Neither Mr. Dillon nor Mr. Brand voiced any contrary view to
the above line. Both said that they felt that more needed to be done
for Latin America. Mr. Dillon referred to the recent letter of Graydon
Upton to me urging that we try to develop a “flow of funds” chart for
Latin America,2 showing repayments as well as loan disbursements in
view of his fear that this year and in the near future we may on a net
basis be lending little if anything to Latin America and this at a time
when they need more than ever before.
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations, Lot 64 D
199. Confidential. Drafted by Rubottom, and initialled for approval by Dillon on April 4.
2 The reference letter from Graydon Upton was not found in Department of State
files.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  87
Some discussion regarding detailed projects in the list prepared by
Mr. Rosenson ensued.3 Mr. Brand said that the Honduran project is the
only one ripe for decision. Mr. Brand recalled the earlier favorable atti-
tude, as did Mr. Dillon, of President Black of the IBRD toward coordi-
nated IBRD-DLF loan projects in Latin America, an attitude which seems
to have changed to negative recently. Mr. Dillon adduced one reason for
Mr. Black’s change was probably due to his desire that good economics
require that the countries themselves furnish the local currency for any
projects for which IBRD furnishes the foreign exchange costs. Mr. Brand
recalled that DLF had had lengthy discussions with IBRD on their joint
road project in Peru. The issue here was one of permitting the Government
of Peru to select the U.S. engineering firm of its choice rather than being
forced to accept a European engineering firm favored by IBRD whose
qualifications did not appear as strong to DLF. It was agreed that this
may have been a factor affecting Mr. Black’s current attitude.
Mr. Dillon suggested that the problem was a fundamental one and
required an additional meeting possibly with Secretary Anderson to
which all the pertinent agency heads would be invited.4 Messrs. Dillon
and Brand agreed with Mr. Rubottom that a stepped-­up consideration
of viable loan projects in Latin America by any and all U.S. lending
agencies, relative to their resources, was essential to improve our rela-
tions in the area. Mr. Brand noted that DLF has a positive and construc-
tive attitude toward Latin American loan applications that meet the test
of DLF’s statutory requirements.
Mr. Dillon suggested that we undertake to prepare the “flow of
funds” chart as a part of our campaign to achieve the above objective.5
We all agreed that one problem in our loan policies toward Latin
America was that we had taken essentially the commercial bankers
approach to the area, waiting for applications to come in, while our
good relations with these countries now require that we take some ini-
tiative in stimulating worthwhile projects for loans.
3 No “list” matching the description here was found with the source text.
pared a draft letter from Under Secretary Dillon to Secretary Anderson proposing such
a meeting. (ARA/REA Files, Lot 62 D 303, “Latin America, General Development and
Investment, Feb 1959–June 1960”) There is no information in the Department’s files, how-
ever, indicating that the draft letter was approved and sent out, nor is there any record of
a subsequent meeting with Secretary Anderson matching the description here.
5 A memorandum entitled “Flow of Public Loan Capital to Latin America” war sub-
sequently prepared by Rosenson under date of March 3. It showed, as of March 31, all
loan applications from Latin American countries pending with the Export-Import Bank,
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the Development Loan
Fund, and it also gave the total amount of credits authorized during the three year period
1957–1959 by each of these institutions to each country. A copy of Rosenson’s memoran-
dum is attached to a memorandum from Rubottom to Dillon, dated May 5, requesting
approval to use it as a basis for discussion at a meeting of the National Advisory Committee
Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs”)

ETA–32.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, May 17, 1960.
SUBJECT
Inter-American Development Bank
Regarding your question concerning the desirability of increasing
the funds which we supply to the Inter-American Bank, I have been giv-
ing thought to this matter for some time.2 It seems clear that in one way
or another we should increase our flow of capital to Latin America. It also
seems probable that the supply, of ordinary hard loans available from
the Export-Import Bank and the World Bank is substantially adequate to
meet the demand for this type of loan. The problem is to find more funds
for use on a flexible basis as is possible through our own Development
Loan Fund, or through the Special Fund of the Inter-American Bank. The
use of the Development Loan Fund in Latin America has been compli-
cated by the necessity of avoiding any appearance of competition with
the Export-Import Bank. For this reason I agree that it would be better to
use the Inter-American Bank as a channel for additional funds.
I mentioned this as a possibility at last meeting of the National
Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs, and the suggestion
seemed to root with general favor. Since the Inter-American Bank is only
beginning to get organized and will not be fully under way until fiscal
year 1962, it is not yet practical to do anything about this. However, it
would seem to me to be both appropriate and advisable to request extra
funds for this purpose in the next budget. If we make this decision and
it should seem advisable to do so we could inform the Latin American
countries of our intentions at the meeting of the Committee of Twenty
One which is scheduled for August.3
I do not feel that this course of action should result in a reduc-
tion in the request for funds for the Development Loan Fund. The
Development Loan Fund has used less than 10 percent of its funds
for Latin America and the needs of the underdeveloped countries in
Asia, and Africa at the very least will require the $700 million which
Drafted by Dillon.
2 A memorandum from President Eisenhower to Under Secretary Dillon, sent through
and noted by Secretary of State Herter, dated May 10, 1960, reads as follows: “In view of the
importance we attach to the Inter-American Bank and the desirability (I assume) of keeping
the Development Loan Fund out of this area, why would it not be a good idea to transfer
some of the capital we have been contemplating for the DLF to the Inter-American Bank”
3 Reference is to the Third Meeting of the Committee of 21, held in Bogotá, Colombia,

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  89
we requested this year. If we do not recommend additional funds for
the Inter-American Bank I think our request for the Development Loan
Fund should be increased by $150 to $200 million for the specific pur-
pose of increasing its efforts in Latin America. In the overall Mutual
Security Program this increase would be offset at least to some extent
by continued reductions in our front aid programs.
I discussed this briefly with Secretary Anderson some time ago and
I will now pursue the subject further with him4 and keep you advised.5
DOUGLAS DILLON
4 Under Secretary Dillon summarized the content of this memorandum in a tele-
Memoranda of Conversations. Lot 64 D 199)
5 A memorandum from the President’s Staff Secretary, Brig. Gen. Goodpaster, to
under Secretary Dillon, dated May 24, reads as follows: “The President has received your
memorandum of May 17, 1960 on ‘Inter-American Development Bank.’ He asked me to
tell you that he agrees generally that it would be better to use the Inter-American Bank,
rather than the Development Loan Fund, for soft loans in Latin America.” (Eisenhower
Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series)
ETA–33.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Policy Planning (Smith) to the Acting Secretary of State1
Washington, July 5, 1960.
SUBJECT
Possible New Initiative to Reflect President Eisenhower’s Concerns Expressed at the
There is attached a rough draft describing a possible political ini-
tiative which I believe reflects the President’s mood as stated in the
NSC last week.
1961.” Confidential.
concern about conditions causing social unrest and political instability in many Free
World nations, including several in Latin America, and the apparent inability of the
United States, in spite of its aid programs, to achieve stability throughout the world.
The memorandum of discussion of that meeting, prepared by Marion W. Boggs, reads
in part as follows: “The President then said he realized that an immediate answer to the
problem would not come out of this exchange of views. He felt that some concentrated
thinking was called for, however, and that changes in policy should receive serious con-
sideration. He was especially concerned with the situation in Cuba, at our backdoor.”
Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

To my mind, the most important thrust of such a move should be
to compensate for moves which may have to be taken against Castro.
I talked with Secretary Herter about this paper last Friday and he
said that he had mentioned to the President that we were working on
some such program. He felt that the President might like to have a look
at our efforts before taking off for Newport. (Tab A)
I mentioned this matter to Livie Merchant and Dick Rubottom last
week and I am sending copies of the attachment to them. Copies are
also giving to G, C, E and U/MSC.3
If you think this warrants further development, S/P will be glad
to participate.
Gerard C. Smith
Attachment - Tab A
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for
Policy Planning (Smith)4
Washington, July 5, 1960.
SUBJECT
Proposed New Initiative: “Stability Through Change”
1. There is need for a dramatic new initiative to refurbish U.S. leadership in
the free world.
Before May we were leading our allies in a major effort to engage
the USSR in negotiations. Our purpose was clear, and our leadership
was accepted. The collapse of the Summit and of the disarmament
negotiations ended that effort and set this purpose to one side.
Since then no new purpose of U.S. leadership has been defined
with the same emphasis. As a result, the impression has gained ground
that our leadership is lagging, that our policy is in a phase of drift.
To exercise leadership, we must lead toward something. That
“something” should be to strengthen the free world, by enlarging the
rewards and opportunities open to free men everywhere.
3 The source text bears the following hand-­written marginal notation by Smith,
dated July 7: “I gave copy of attachment to V.P. Nixon with Dillon’s OK after NSC mtg.”
Reference is to the 450th NSC meeting, held on July 7.
4 Confidential.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  91
A specific action is needed to define and dramatize that goal - an
action which will be significant both in itself and as a symbol of fur-
ther effort to come; an action which will capture men’s imagination and
mark the road we intend to travel in the period ahead.
2. The situation in Latin-America creates an occasion for just such action.
This area is passing through rapid social change. Dictatorships
and oligarchies which sought to repress this change are falling by the
wayside. In their place, two groups are contesting for leadership of the
continent:
Moderate groups, which seek to carry out needed reforms through
orderly methods.
Extremist groups, led and symbolized by the Castro government,
whose policies seem designed ultimately to detach Latin America from
the free world.
The most effective way we can intervene in this contest is by help-
ing the moderate groups’ programs to succeed. This means extending
help for such varied purposes as more schools, better paid teachers,
housing, land reform and land clearance projects.
Substantial U.S. help for these purposes will be the more needed
if we are forced to move against Castro. Adverse reactions may be less-
ened if we can then hold out a promising alternative to Castroism.
3. The August session of the Congress provides an opportunity to create that
alternative.
It had been intended to request extra funds for the Special Fund of
the Inter-American Bank in the next budget and to announce this at the
meeting of the Committee of Twenty One in Bogotá.
Why not make the request when the Congress reconvenes—­
perhaps in a substantially larger amount than presently contemplated?
Such a request might well receive the support of both candidates and
parties. It would permit us to channel the concerns which Castroism
generates in the U.S. in a constructive direction. It would enable us to
exploit the coming session for an affirmative foreign policy purpose.
The action could be taken—­like the original Congressional contribu-
tion to the Inter-American Bank in September 1959 - wholly apart from
the Mutual Security Program, it need not interfere with Congressional
consideration of that Program.
4. This action could have world-­wide impact and implications.
In presenting this request to the Congress, we could emphasize the
growing need for “social infrastructure” assistance—­not only in Latin
America, where we faced a particularly urgent problem, but elsewhere.

We could suggest that future Mutual Security Programs would be
geared increasingly to this need.
Our Latin American request could thus symbolize the “nation
building” goal that the U.S. set for itself in the period ahead.
This goal might be further dramatized in a major Presidential
address to the General Assembly this fall.
The President could recall his trips to Asia and Latin America, and
cite the first-­hand evidence which moved him to propose increasing aid
for such purposes as housing, health, agricultural, and education pro-
grams. He could call on all countries—­large and small—­to take action
to this end: bilaterally and through existing multilateral instruments.
He could announce that he would recommend enlarged U.S. programs
along these lines to his successor.
5. This course of action could be a triple play.
(a) It would do much in Latin America to contain the appeal of
Castroism and to offset the adverse effects of any U.S. action against
Castro.
(b) It would regain the initiative for the free world in this post-­
Summit lull, by directing free men’s efforts to a new and constructive
goal instead of to brooding about Communist pressures and proposals.
(c) It would enhance world-­wide respect for U.S. leadership, by
dramatizing our support of groups and programs which are designed
to improve the lot of the common man and thus to enhance “stability
through change”.5
[Here follows as outline for a Presidential message to Congress
concerning a new initiative for Latin America.]
5 In a memorandum to Smith, dated July 6, Rubottom stated in part the following:
“I will stand with you 100 percent on this recommendation and I believe the NACOIAA
will do likewise. At an appropriate occasion today I will tell Mr. Dillon something of my
supporting views.” He also informed Smith that ARA had set in motion a specific plan-
ning effort, and that the two would fully coincide. (PPS Files, Lot 67 D 548, “American
Republics 1960–1961”)

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  93
ETA–34.
Memorandum from Henry C. Ramsey of the Policy
Planning Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for
Policy Planning (Smith)1
Washington, July 6, 1960.
SUBJECT
Latin American Initiative: Mr. Mann’s Reaction
I showed Tom Mann the S/P memorandum of July 5 on a new
Latin American initiative last evening. After reading it and expressing
great enthusiasm, he made four points:
1. It would be “good politics” to ask for $500 million. Loans should be
soft. After a good deal of discussion, he concluded it would be best to chan-
nel the loans through the Inter-American Development Bank but, since
the Bank has not opened for business, he thinks Congress may demand
some DLF veto on loans over a certain amount. We should make clear
that the fund would finance social overhead projects and that it would
supplement hard loans through the World Bank, Ex-Im Bank and IADB.
2. Psychologically and politically, it is very important that the new
fund be earmarked for social overhead projects and be used as leverage
to develop sound projects.
3. We must carefully draft a broad statement which would make
it crystal clear that the U.S. purpose in making the fund available is
to enable countries to finance projects which will lead to a more equi-
table distribution of the national income. One of the criteria for loans
from the fund should be that they advance the well-­being of the lower
classes. Mann thinks we should use the fund as leverage to accomplish,
among other things, more equitable tax structures.
4. It is also highly important that we support land reform but
that we not set our sights too high or make it appear that land reform
will solve the un- and under-­employment problem. Mann thinks land
reform will alleviate the employment problem and is vital in view of
the population explosion but that we cannot expect new recipients of
land to rise above the subsistence level too soon. (His views on this
subject coincide with those of Milo Perkins.2)
1961.” Confidential. Drafted by Ramsey.
2 Milo R. Perkins was a foreign investment consultant who had held various posi-
tions in the Department of Agriculture, 1935–1941, and also served as Executive Director,
Board of Economic Warfare in 1941.

I think all these points are sound and I passed them on to Achilles3
and Rubottom and Mallory. Rubottom goes along with Mann and believes
that the IADB should be the chosen instrument. He thinks the fund might
be utilized to spur the Bank into opening sooner. All of us agree that
the above points can be woven into the President’s special message to
Congress and, thereafter, can be amplified by Mr. Dillon at Bogotá.
3 In a memorandum to Smith, dated July 5, Theodore C. Achilles, Counselor of
the Department of State, had expressed his “hearty agreement” with the basic idea of
the new initiative. We also stated his belief that the program should be described in
“human terms of benefit to the individual,” that it should serve as a pump-­priming
operation for local capital and a stimulus to Latin American governments to undertake
their own programs, and that it should focus on raising living standards. “In public
presentation,” he said, “maximum emphasis should be placed on the program being
good in itself and absolute minimum on its negative anti-Communist and anti-Castro
ETA–35.
Memorandum from the Deputy Coordinator for Mutual
Security (Bell) to the Acting Secretary of State1
Washington, July 6, 1960.
SUBJECT
S/P Memorandum on New Initiatives
At the risk of heresy I want to express opposition to the S/P proposal.
I am opposed because I think it exaggerates a need for “refurbishing
U.S. leadership”, provides an oversimplified and probably inadequate
answer to the problems of U.S. policy towards Latin American devel-
opment, underrates the difficulties of Congressional approval, ignores
the danger of failure, and assumes a global effect which would be prob-
ably confined in its beneficial aspects to Latin America and would risk
adverse repercussions elsewhere.
I do think our policy towards Latin America needs revision. My
staff has prepared a study on this subject which was recently transmit-
ted to ARA, S/P and C, and which attempts to address the problem in
a somewhat more thoughtful manner.2 I have very serious doubt that
1961.” Confidential. Drafted by Bell; copies were sent to Smith and Achilles.
2 For information on the referenced study, see Document ETA–32.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  95
we would find adding to the capital of the IADB a solution to our prob-
lems and the adoption of this course at this time might well make us
unable to attempt a more considered program later. If we want to have
a new program for Latin America, then I think a task force should be
immediately put to the job of developing a proposition which is defen-
sible. I would think the Congress would regard as somewhat hysterical
a proposal to add a large dimension of capital to an organization that
has yet to spend its first penny and that in all probability could not use
any additional capital for a long time.
ETA–36.
Notes of Telephone Conversation between the Under
Secretary of State (Dillon) and the Assistant Secretary of
State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

CDD said he wanted Mann to be sure he was clear in preparing
the new program on Latin America. He said he had told Mr. Achilles
that he thought Mr. Mann was the fellow who ought to take a hold of
it. CDD said he agreed with Mr. Mann that it ought to be big enough,
about $500,000,000, and should include Chilean reconstruction as a sep-
arate piece of the package of about $150,000,000. CDD said he didn’t
know whether there is any other place that we can use grants - the rest
of it is going for loans to the Inter-American Bank. He said it would
require a bit of talking with the Bank and that we have had trouble with
the Treasury on the size. CDD said that he was going to talk it over with
the Secretary and that he would back him up on this thing. He said that
because of the strong statement made by the President we have got to
come up with something. He told Mann he hoped he could push the
thing along. He mentioned that in the Inter-American Bank we have
veto power. Mann asked if we are still thinking about the fund being at
the U.S. end of this and CDD replied-­yes. Mr. Mann commented that
then we could use the veto power and don’t have to worry about DLF.
Mr. Mann said we should stick hard on the soft loan and CDD replied
yes. CDD said that Mann would have to take it on and that Jack Bell
would help him.
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations, Lot 64 D

ETA–37.
Memorandum from the Counselor of the Department
of State (Achilles) to the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Mann)1
Washington, July 9, 1960.
SUBJECT
New Latin American Program
Not knowing how much opportunity Mr. Dillon had to give you
his thinking on preparation of the new program before his departure,2 I
am putting on paper at the risk of repetition what he told me this noon.
1. He wants you to prepare the program.
2. It is to be ready for presentation when the Senate reconvenes
August 8.
million would be intended for Chilean reconstruction.
4. During the August part of the session we should seek authoriz-
ing legislation but not appropriations. He anticipates little difficulty in
obtaining authorizing legislation.
5. The “soft window” of the I.A.D.B. should be the primary instru-
ment. Since grants as well as loans will be necessary and the I.A.D.B.
should not make grants, some $50 million of the total should go to
I.C.A. for grants for purposes of the program.
6. The program should be presented to Congress neither as “one
shot” nor “annual”. Future authorizations and appropriations will nat-
urally be required but we should not present it as an annual program.3
(Prior to Bogotá Conference).” Confidential. Copies of this memorandum were sent to
Rubottom and Smith.
3 A task force was established under Assistant Secretary Mann’s leadership to pre-
pare the program and to secure interdepartmental agreement. The task force included
representatives from the Bureaus of Economic Affairs, Inter-American Affairs, and
Congressional Relations, the Policy Planning Staff, the Office of the Coordinator for
Mutual Security, ICA, and the DLF. Papers generated by the task force are contained
principally in ARA Files, Lot 62 D 302, “Latin American Program (Prior to Bogotá
Conference),” and ARA/REA Files, Lot 63 D 210, “Latin American Social Economic
Development Program July–Sept 1960.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  97
ETA–38.
Editorial Note
On July 11, 1960, during his news conference at Newport, Rhode
Island, at which Secretary Herter was present, President Eisenhower
commented on the basic ideas that would guide United States partic-
ipation in the forthcoming meetings of the Committee of 21 at Bogotá,
Colombia. He announced, inter alia, that the United States was commit-
ted to cooperative action aimed at helping Latin American governments
to achieve “soundly based” social and economic progress, accelerate the
trend already evident toward greater respect for human rights and prin-
ciples of democratic government, and improve the opportunities of the
bulk of the population in Latin America “to share in and contribute to
an expanding national product.” For the full text of the President’s state-
ETA–39.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)
and the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
(Mann)1
Washington, July 20, 1960.
I raised with the President yesterday the question of [illegible in the
original] having made a definite commitment to Secretary Anderson
that [illegible in the original] new funds would be asked for at the com-
ing session of Congress to implement his new proposals with respect
to Latin American development. I pointed out that we were very dis-
turbed that such a firm commitment had been made since this would
again open us up to the possible criticism that we had made a vague
recommendation but had not followed it up with something specific.
The President assured me that no definite commitment had been made.
He said that he had discussed with Secretary Anderson the [illegible
in the original] of increasing the Development Loan Fund appropria-
tion, with specific [illegible in the original] for Latin America, as well
as [illegible in the original] soft loan component of the Inter-American
Bank. [illegible in the original] said that [illegible in the original] raise
with Secretary Anderson that another [illegible in the original] should
1961.” Secret. Drafted by Herter.

not be set up with a very large sum of money, such as [illegible in the
original] million, earmarked for it.
It was [illegible in the original] from this conversation [illegible
in the original] we should go ahead with our [illegible in the original]
method of handling this matter, with a view to [illegible in the original]
recommendations to the President.2
Christian A. Herter
2 A hand-­written note from Ramsey to Smith, dated July 21, attached to the source
text reads as follows: “You will want to see this good news. I’ve sent copy to Achilles.”
ETA–40.
Memorandum for the Record, by Henry C. Ramsey of the
Policy Planning Staff1
Washington, July 25, 1960.
SUBJECT
New Latin American Aid Program: Meeting of July 24, 1960, at the Under Secretary’s
Home2
I was called around 2 o’clock yesterday (Sunday) afternoon by
Mr. Mann’s staff assistant (subsequently by Ted Eliot3) and invited to
attend a 5 o’clock meeting at Mr. Dillon’s home. Ted had flown up to
Newfoundland on Saturday with the product of the Mann task force,4
in order that Mr. Dillon might study the plan en route Washington
Sunday morning. Others attending were Mr. Achilles, Mr. Mann,
1961.” Confidential; No Distribution Outside S/P.
2 On July 23, Assistant Secretary Mann’s task force completed preparation of the
proposed new Latin American program, and an extensive briefing book for Under
Secretary Dillon containing supporting papers. In the covering memorandum to Dillon,
dated July 23, Mann stated in part the following: “The book represents our best efforts
to reach interdepartmental agreement on the major issues regarding the proposed new
Latin American Program. A lot of underbrush has been cleared away but there are
major decisions regarding three or four issues that should be taken only after discus-
sion. A discussion of approximately two hours on Sunday [July 24] afternoon with as
large or as small a group as you wish would, I think, be helpful. If not, I hope we can
meet soon thereafter.” ARA Files, Lot 62 D 302, “Latin American Program” (Prior to
Bogotá Conference).
3 Theodore L. Eliot, Jr., Special Assistant in the Office of the Under Secretary of State.
4 Reference to the briefing book and program proposal cited in footnote 1.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  99
Mr. Bell, Mr. Saccio (ICA), Mr. Hart (DLF), and Dixon Donnelly. No
representative of ARA had been invited.
Mr. Dillon had read the rather voluminous briefing book prepared
by the Mann task force. He noted that there was no firm agreement as
between Mann, ICA and DLF on the administration of the new pro-
gram. He invited Mann to speak.
Administration of Fund
Mann acknowledged that the task force had not been able to
reach agreement on how the new fund should be administered: some
preferred DLF, some the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB),
some ICA. He would advance a “revolutionary plan”—­the reactiva-
tion of the Institute of Inter-American Affairs,5 the appropriation of
funds to the IIAA, and the administration of the new program by
the IIAA through use of ICA, DLF, and especially IDB, as executive
agencies. Mann stated his belief that we should rely on the IDB to the
greatest extent possible.
This proposal held certain advantages. First, the IIAA was pop-
ular in Latin America, had done fine and pioneer work in technical
assistance under Nelson Rockefeller, was still associated with the
Rockefeller name and was a “politically good thing” to reactivate
(The IIAA lapsed as of June 30, but the consensus was that it could
easily be reactivated by Congress during the August session, or next
year). Second, since the Assistant Secretary for ARA chaired the IIAA,
putting both the funds and the power to act at his disposal made
sense administratively: it would permit ARA to marry political and
programmatic considerations and to act quickly and decisively and
would restore to ARA the power which had gradually eroded through
Departmental reorganizations in the postwar period. Mann empha-
sized that, if ARA was to have the power to negotiate, it must have the
power to administer the funds.
Achilles strongly supported Mann’s proposal. (It was obvious that
the two had concerted before the meeting, as the IIAA approach has
been Ted’s since his return from Peru.6)
Saccio, Hart and Bell then tried to shoot IIAA down. Their argu-
ments boiled down to three: (1) existing agencies could do the job if
given the money and the policy direction, (2) the executive agency con-
cept was spurious since the agencies would be serving two masters
5 The Institute of Inter-American Affairs was originally incorporated in 1942 and
became a U.S. Government corporation in 1947. It was established to aid governments
in the Western Hemisphere by promoting technical programs and projects for health,
sanitation and food supply.

and this would result in downgrading IIAA directives in controver-
sial fields, and (3) Mann’s proposal would inevitably lead to a new
super-structure of personnel in IIAA. These arguments had some effect
on Dillon.
Finally what Dillon decided should be done and which Mann and
Saccio agreed to was this:
IIAA should be reactivated and funds appropriated under the new
program should be granted to it. This would place firm control in State.
ICA in Latin America should be the field-­arm of IIAA in Washington.
A small (about four to six) staff should be set up in ARA, headed by a
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs, to run the IIAA and to
marry ARA-ICA (Latin America) to the closest extent possible. (Dillon
said he wanted this worked out in the other bureaus and areas also,
once ICA and State got together under one roof.) ICA, in turn, would
keep its Latin American program more or less separated from its other
programs. The purpose would be to compartmentalize Latin America
and put the whole special assistance, technical assistance and “social
infrastructure” program under the IIAA umbrella. This would be with-
out prejudice to other programs which DLF, Ex-Im Bank or the IRDB or
IMF now participate in.
Role of DLF
DLF came off rather badly. Dillon had some rather sharp things
to say about its inability to come to the rescue in the past in building
roads because of the local costs and “Buy-America” problems.7 I gath-
ered that Dillon did not feel that DLF had much of a role to play in the
social infrastructure field.
Amount of fund: Authorization or Appropriation
Dillon bought the $500 million figure (Mann pleaded unsuc-
cessfully for $1 billion) as a no-­year fund exclusive of what might
be asked for Chilean reconstruction. He laid down two conditions.
It should be explained to Congress that $500 million would be a
starter and that we would come back for more after we had studied
the matter further. We would, for instance, know more after Bogotá.
We would leave the question of Chilean reconstruction open for the
moment (Some thought we should go to Congress on this matter in
August, others that we should wait until next year).
7 “Buy American” provisions in U.S. legislation required U.S. Government agen-
cies in securing supplies for public use or for construction of public works within the
United States to purchase only domestic materials unless they were commercially
unavailable, their purchase would be inconsistent with the public interest, or their cost
was unreasonable.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  101
Dillon thought we might try to get an ICA increment of $50 million
during August for Latin America and outlined a strategy for obtaining
it at the last moment without going to Passman. No definite decision
was made.
He was fuzzy on whether to ask that the DLF appropriation be
increased from $550 to $700.
I concluded that he did not believe we could or should request any
appropriation during August, though he blew hot and cold on the sub-
ject. I believe he is thinking along these lines: Use the contingency fund
to the extent possible during the next six months and, possibly, ask at
the last moment for an ICA increment of $50 million.
Forward Approach
Dillon asked Mann to put this new plan down on paper. Since
the President was visiting Denver after his Chicago appearance,8
we should plan to approach the President early next week (week of
August 1). He said the President would probably “not be firm one
way or the other”, would probably say he was all for the plan if
Congress had no objection.
Hence it would be necessary to discuss the plan with the
Presidential candidates9 and Congressional leaders. It was agreed that
the plan should be put forward as a non-­partisan program. Dillon
seemed to feel that Treasury and Budget could be approached after the
plan had been outlined to the President.
Dillon laughingly observed that there should be no difficulty in
obtaining the Vice President’s concurrence, since “he and Nelson are
now for a confederation in the hemisphere and this is certainly a little
less than that” (a reference to the Nixon-Rockefeller platform talks of
last Friday evening).10
National Convention and to attend the Republican National Committee Breakfast,
respectively; on July 28 he visited Denver.
9 The respective candidates of the Republican and Democratic Parties were Richard
M. Nixon and John F. Kennedy.
10 Another memorandum of this meeting, without drafting information, listing the
conclusions reached by the participants is in ARA Files, Lot 63 D 210, “Latin American
Social Economic Development Program July–Sept 1960.”

ETA–41.
Memorandum of Conversation, by Rudy V. Fimbres of
the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs1
Washington, July 26, 1960.
SUBJECT
Visit of Felipe Herrera, President, Inter-American Development Bank, to South
America
PARTICIPANTS
Felipe Herrera, President, Inter-American Development Bunk
Robert Cutler, U.S. Executive Director, Inter-American Development Bank
Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary of State
Roy R. Rubottom, Assistant Secretary of State
Thomas E. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State
Theodore Achilles, Counselor
Henry Ramsey, S/P
Dixon Donnelley, U
Ambassador Harry R. Turkel, REA
Alex Rosenson, REA
Wymberly Coerr, WST
Alton Hemba, EST
Rudy Fimbres, ARA/P
(The meeting was arranged at the request of General Cutler to give
Department officers an opportunity to hear Mr. Herrera’s impressions
of his South American tour.)
Mr. Herrera commenced the discussion by mentioning that the
purpose of his trip was to discuss quota payments with member coun-
tries of the Bank, and also to recruit technicians for his organization. He
said that he had been impressed by the great interest in the Bank, and
the emotional attachment which people in South America have for it
despite the fact that few know the details concerning its structure and
proposed method of operation. Latin Americans fought for it for many
years and are particularly gratified that it will be a cooperative and
multilateral undertaking from which the United States—­which holds
40 percent of the quota—­asks no benefit.
He stated that the countries he visited presented a variety of
institutions through which the Bank could work. He, however, had
emphasized cooperation with private capital. There were complaints
everywhere of a shortage of capital, especially for local financing, which
some people blamed on IMF stabilization programs. Attacks on the IMF
have shifted, however, to national leaders, apparently because they
have made IMF policies their own. There was, particularly in Brazil,

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  103
disappointment that the Bank would not help increase the export of
capital goods through export financing.
On a country basis, he reported the following: Venezuela appeared
very unstable, the reduced money supply adding to this difficulty.
President Betancourt worriedly stressed the bad social conditions in
Caracas, the problem of unemployment, inflation, and the danger from
the Fidelistas and other leftist elements. There is a dire need for housing
and adequate water supply, according to Betancourt.
In reply to Under Secretary Dillon’s inquiry as to what Venezuela
had done to reduce its debt, Mr. Herrera replied that it had cleared its
short-­term debt, balanced its budget, and had kept its exports high.
Venezuela’s problems, he reiterated, remained inflation, unemploy-
ment, and pressure from the communists and the Fidelistas.
Peru and Colombia have strong leadership, and there is much sen-
timent for an agrarian reform and housing program. Everyone is puz-
zled concerning Ecuador, but agree that agrarian reform and housing
are also the two most pressing needs.
In Chile the people are of the opinion that the stabilization policy
should be relaxed but, despite this, the government is maintaining a
strong anti-­inflation stand. There has been a strong emotional response
to United States generosity, the recent earthquake disaster relief result-
ing in great U.S. popularity in the area.
Mr. Herrera then mentioned that 75 percent of the Bank’s quotas
had been paid, with Bolivia and Paraguay presenting the greatest prob-
lems in this respect because of their inability to pay their first instal-
ments on their small subscriptions. Mr. Dillon mentioned that the U.S.
should assist these two countries to meet their participation in the Bank.
Mr. Rubottom inquired whether Mr. Herrera was of the opinion
that Uruguay would come into accord with the IMF. Mr. Herrera said
that that was his impression, despite the slim chamber majority (one
vote) held by the Government. He added that the Government had
already instituted some reforms.
Mr. Dillon inquired when the Bank would become operative, and
Mr. Herrera replied that by October 1 the Bank would be in operation
and by the end of the year should commence making loans.
The Undersecretary asked whether the IDB would reasonably be
in position to administer monies entrusted to it by the U.S. Government
under the Latin American economic cooperation program contem-
plated by President Eisenhower.
Messrs, Herrera and Cutler replied in effect that by next June or
July—­presumably after the Congress had its first opportunity in the
spring to appropriate funds for the accelerated economic program—­
the Bank would be in a good position to administer any trust fund

transferred to it by the U.S. Government. They also foresaw that this
program would require the administrative cooperation of agencies
located in Latin America such as ICA, and the existent national orga-
nizations charged with economic planning in the different countries.
Mr. Rubottom asked Sr. Herrera if the new lending agency intended
to develop a special relation to one or two countries (he cited Honduras
as an example) with the intention of turning them into “show-­cases.”
The Bank President replied that he was in favor of this approach, and
in that regard had in mind Paraguay and Bolivia. He added that the
IDB should not be concerned with the political side of the Paraguayan
problem, and that $10 million in Paraguay, because of its purely agri-
cultural structure, could do wonders. Mr. Dillon agreed, commenting
that the new institution could ignore political factors whereas the U.S.
Government has no similar freedom of action.
Bolivia, said Sr. Herrera, should also receive special attention
aimed at diversifying its economy.
Mr. Mann discussed the subject of the pressures being put upon the
U.S. Government to finance budget and balance-­of-­payments deficits.
He was of the opinion that any funds transferred to the IDB should be
used wisely and that any local government costs financed by the Bank
should result in an easing of deficits in other areas. In line with Assistant
Secretary Mann’s misgivings on U.S. financing of budget deficits, the
Under Secretary said that the Bank should require recipient countries
to make the proper commitments to it so that any assistance given them
will not encourage continued budget and balance-of-­payments deficits.
ETA–42.
Editorial Note
The notes of the Secretary’s staff meeting, held on July 28, 1960,
at 9:15 a.m., concerning the subject of economic assistance to Latin
America, read as follows:
“2. Mr. Dillon thought his meeting with the Latin American
Ambassadors yesterday on OECD developments had been useful.
Some of their fears that the OECD would prejudice Latin American
interests seem to have been allayed. There was more interest in the
new program proposed by the President, and it was obvious that the
Ambassadors wanted a figure rather than generalities. Mr. Dillon added
that the new Latin American program had pretty well taken shape in
the Department and now would be discussed with Milton Eisenhower
and the interested agencies before being taken up with the President

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  105
next week. In answer to a question from the Secretary, Mr. Dillon said
that we hope early in the August session of Congress to obtain approval
of the framework in which the program will operate so that we will be
able to move ahead at the Bogotá meeting.” (Secretary’s Staff Meetings,
Lot 63 D 75)
ETA–43.
Memorandum from the Counselor of the Department of
State (Achilles) to Acting Secretary of State1
Washington, July 29, 1960.
The new “common man” program for Latin America should help
to fill a major gap in plans and resources for development of the area.
It will, however, deal only with one aspect of the larger problem of its
accelerated economic and social development. The larger problem is
both long-­term and urgent and will require very large resources.
I recommend that in formulating and implementing the program,
and at the Bogotá meeting, we give it major emphasis but keep it in
the broader context. (The Latin Americans certainly will.) While nat-
urally large amounts of straight “aid” will be necessary both for the
common man and broader programs, I would hope that we could think
and talk less in terms of “aid” than of “accelerated economic and social
development.” This means endeavoring to mobilize and coordinate
all available resources toward such accelerated development - private
investment both local and foreign, foreign loans both hard and soft,
U.S. grants and technical assistance, U.N. Special Fund and technical
assistance, the big foundations, U.S. insurance companies, building and
loan associations, etc.
There is plenty of room for everybody and they will all be needed.2
Drafted and initialed by Achilles.
2 A hand-­written marginal notation on the source text, addressed to the Acting
Secretary from his Special Assistant, John M. Leddy, reads as follows: “This is a much
larger idea than we can properly present at Bogotá & sounds like massive aid to achieve
‘take-­off’.”

ETA–44.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, August 1, 1960.
SUBJECT
Latin American Program.
To fulfill your announcement in Newport and to meet the need
for a positive United States approach at the September 5th meeting in
Bogotá, we should now press forward with a broad program for Latin
America designed to bring the benefits of economic and social progress
to a wider segment of the population.
To insure the success of this program and to enable the United
States to speak authoritatively at the Bogotá conference there is need
for bipartisan support. I suggest, therefore, that you consider laying
the program which is outlined in the following paragraphs before the
leadership of both parties at an early date.
The specific elements in the program which should be discussed
are the following:
a) Size of the Program: Given the magnitude of the need, I believe
that it should be couched in terms of a minimum of $600 million. It
should be made clear that this amount would not be expended in any
particular fiscal year but is intended to be used over a period of time
as sound opportunities for its use arise. It should also be made clear
that, depending on the impact of the program and on the performance
among recipient countries, this would be the first installment on a
long-­term program, and that additional amounts would, therefore, be
required in the future to meet demonstrated needs.
b) Use of Funds: Adequate “hard-­loan” funds for sound economic
development projects are already available in various national and
international lending agencies, such as the Export-Import Bank and
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Because
of the increasing difficulty most Latin American countries have experi-
enced in servicing “hard” loans, the Development Loan Fund has also
been extending “soft” loans for sound economic development proj-
ects in certain categories. There is, however, an immediate need which
has not heretofore been met for substantially more financing of social
development projects such as land settlement, improved land use, pilot
and self-­help housing, basic community facilities, and vocational train-
ing. While existing programs have reasonably met the capital needs of
industrial expansion, there has been very little foreign assistance avail-
able for social development projects. Although the primary responsi-
bility for social development must rest with the country concerned, the
Latin American countries are not in a position to carry the entire burden
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Confidential.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  107
of programs adequate to meet demonstrated needs. If such programs
are not initiated promptly, unrest with violent political consequences
is likely in a number of Latin American countries. Substantial United
States assistance is required to give reasonable hope of success. Such
United States assistance should go primarily to those countries that
are willing and able to undertake satisfactory programs of self help.
In this way United States assistance can promote the fiscal and tax
reform in Latin America which is a necessary prerequisite for success-
ful development.
c) Administration: The program should be so administered as directly
to facilitate the achievement of our foreign policy objectives in Latin
America. The responsibility and authority for directing the program
should rest in the Department of State. In determining the amounts
and terms of financial assistance under this program the Department of
State shall consult with the National Advisory Council on International
Monetary and Financial Problems.
The funds should be made available to the President as a Special
Fund to be used exclusively in Latin America and under flexible and
nonrestrictive provisions. These funds would be available in either
grant or loan form and would be used through such agencies as the
President may designate including the Inter-American Development
Bank.
Loans rather than grants would be made to the maximum extent
practicable. It is expected that the principal lending instrument
will become the Inter-American Development Bank which has an
inter-American character and will be in the best position to encourage
recipient countries to increase their own efforts to achieve maximum
economic growth and social progress. United States financial and tech-
nical assistance to Latin America can only achieve their purpose if they
are used to stimulate Latin American governments to mobilize their
latent resources and to utilize them to achieve more rapid and balanced
economic growth.
d) Terms: Repayments of loans would ordinarily be required in the
currency of the borrowing country in order to minimize the burden
on countries’ resources available to service external debt. Aid funds
should be available to meet local as well as external costs.
Rehabilitation of Chile
It is planned that of the total package of $600 million, $100 million
will be used to assist the government and the people of Chile in their
present task of rehabilitation. This task is the result of the recent series
of disastrous earthquakes which left great destruction over wide areas
of the most populous regions of Chile. Homeless people are counted in
hundreds of thousands. Total damage has been estimated to be almost
$500 million leaving a massive burden of reconstruction on the Chilean
people.
Congressional Action
We would obviously be in the strongest position in Bogotá if
Congress were to pass a $600 million authorization bill when it recon-
venes in August. The Latin Americans hope for and expect concrete

evidence of an intention on our part to create a new, special fund to be
used exclusively in Latin America; a statement that the funds already
authorized for the Development Loan Fund are adequate for the time
being would not be well received. I would hope that the leaders of both
parties would agree to the authorization procedure. No appropriation
would be sought until the next session of Congress in 1961 by which
time the results of Bogotá would be available and the Inter-American
Development Bank would be in business. In the event agreement
could not be obtained I would then recommend that their agreement
be sought to obtain a Joint Resolution phrased in the most definitive
way possible, again having in mind an adequate basis for the Bogotá
meeting. The Bureau of the Budget prefers that we not seek an authori-
zation, but limit ourselves to a joint resolution.
a) Short term action: In order to start some projects immediately in
Latin America and to meet other emerging needs in the present world
situation, it is important that the total Mutual Security Program appro-
priation request be obtained from the Congress, particularly the full
$700 million requested for the Development Loan Fund. (The House
has cut this $700 million request by $150 million.) How the final appro-
priation of the $700 million for the Development Loan Fund can best
be achieved is a matter of legislative tactics that can best be worked
out with the legislative leaders, including (a) action by the Senate,
either within the Appropriations Committee, on the floor of the Senate
or within the Conference Committee to assure a $700 million appropri-
ation, or (b) an increase by the President in his pending $700 million
request. Such a request could be made under the existing Develop-
ment Loan Fund authorization.
b) Presentation to the Congress: There are differing views regarding
the manner in which either an authorization or a joint resolution should
be presented to the Congress. The Vice President has informed us that
he feels strongly that there should be a special Presidential message on
this subject in order to indicate clear administration initiative. On the
other hand, the Secretary of the Treasury feels strongly that any pre-
sentation should be by the State Department and that there should be
no special messages on the subject from the President. From the point
of view of the State Department a special message from the President
would improve the United States position at the OAS Foreign Ministers
Meeting at Costa Rica when the subject of Soviet intervention in Cuba
comes up.2 However, the major interest of the State Department is
in securing the necessary legislation rather than in the method of its
presentation.
Douglas Dillon
Acting Secretary
2 Apparent reference to the Seventh Meeting of Consultation of Foreign Ministers
documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. VI, Cuba.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  109
ETA–45.
Memorandum of Conference With the President, by His
Staff Secretary (Goodpaster)1
Washington, August 1, 1960.
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretaries Herter, Dillon, Anderson, Dr. Ralph Reid, General Goodpaster
Mr. Herter said he first wished to put before the President a memo-
randum2 concerning the proposed Latin American program setting out
specific details more fully. The President read through the memoran-
dum. He then asked why the request was being made for $600 million.
He had thought that the work of the program might, in large measure,
be accomplished through use of the IADB, and that funds would go to
expand the capital of the IADB. Mr. Dillon said that the other American
countries would prefer not to have this program handled out of normal
bank capital if it were handled through the bank, but would keep the
money in a special fund. If the money is authorized, this is the kind of
specific arrangement that would be worked out through the discus-
sions soon to be initiated.
Mr. Reid said that from the standpoint of the Director of the Bureau
of the Budget,3 a simple resolution giving the sense and support of the
Congress would be preferable to an authorization. He is concerned
over the idea of the Administration submitting new proposals at a time
when the Congress has taken actions impairing the President’s FY-1961
budget surplus. Congress has already added about $1.6 billion to the
budget. Losses of revenues, together with other costs foreseen, amount
figure is no more than a guess, and will be very hard to justify before the
Congress, lacking any documentation. He added that the Development
Loan Fund has available substantial authorizations for which appro-
priations have not been sought. Mr. Dillon commented that he is not
proposing that the Administration ask for appropriations at this time,
but rather limit its request to an authorization.
Secretary Anderson said he would prefer not to have a spe-
cial Presidential message. He suggested that the State Department
try to have this provision tacked on to a pending bill. The President
suggested the possibility that he might send a letter to the State
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman Files, DDE Diaries. Secret. This memoran-
dum was prepared on August 10.
2 See Document ETA–44.
3 Maurice H. Stans.

Department instructing them to seek to do that. He commented that
the Vice President, however, has asked the President to send up a mes-
sage to the Congress on the reconvening of the Senate in order to take
effective initiative. Also, by a special message at that time he hopes to
do something to hold the Congress to hard essentials as against many
loose pending schemes that are being discussed. Mr. Anderson said he
thought it very important not to send up new requests to this Congress,
but to limit the message to repeating what the Administration has
already asked for. Referring to an earlier point, Mr. Herter said that
a check had been made to see whether there is pending legislation to
which the proposal might be attached, and that there is none.
Mr. Dillon said he would like to consult with the Congress about
the proposal, and suggested that the State Department proceed to check
with key members. The President indicated no objection. The President
then said he thought he would mention the Latin American program
in a specific way in his message,4 and leave the development of details
until after he had met with the bi-­partisan group.
[Here follows discussion of issues related to the Congo, Tri–Partite
Arrangements, Arms Sales to NATO Allies, and Nigeria.]
4 See the editorial note, Document ETA–47.
ETA–46.
Memorandum from the President of the Export-Import
Bank (Waugh) to the Secretary of the Treasury (Anderson)
and the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1
Washington, August 4, 1960.
SUBJECT
Prepared new Program for Latin America
The announcement made by President Eisenhower on July 11 for
an increased economic program [for] Latin America has been read with
interest by the Directors of the Export-Import Bank. The purpose of
this memorandum is to consider the manner in which Eximbank may
contribute to the success of the program.
Social Economic Development Program July–Sept 1960.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  111
Eximbank during the past twenty-six years has authorized in
excess of $4 billion of loans in Latin America and at the present time
has outstanding loans and commitments of approximately $2 billion.
It is assumed that there is no intention to displace Eximbank in its
historic activity in Latin America. It is further assumed that it would be
advantageous to the realization of the ultimate goals of the new pro-
gram that uncommitted funds now available to Eximbank be utilized
directly in the program in situations in which loans repayable in dollars
for United States equipment, materials and services may be justified
from an economic and banking point of view.
For the purposes of this memorandum we are assuming that an
appropriation for the new program would be made to the President
and thereafter allocations would be made in each case to the agency
best suited to carry out the particular purpose of the allocation.
It is the suggestion of the Directors of the Export-Import Bank
that in those instances in which foreign equipment and services are
required for a project in Latin America and a credit to acquire the
same can be appropriately authorized out of funds of Eximbank, any
monies to be loaned for local costs in connection with the same proj-
ect be allocated to and administrated by Eximbank. An example of
such type of project would be a highway or access road construction
where as much as 30 or 40 percent of the cost may be in foreign pur-
chases and where the United States is prepared to make a loan on a
soft basis to defray at least a portion of the local cost involved. On the
other hand, in the case of a project—­such as one for housing or for
educational purposes—­involving solely soft loan arrangements, the
funds would be allocated to an agency normally operating in such a
field.
The suggested procedure offers a number of benefits:
1. The lone experience and success of Eximbank in Latin America
and particularly its experience in road construction which appears to
be an important part of any program for the opening up and settling
of new areas. Eximbank has financed road construction in nearly every
country of Latin America. It has also financed flood control and irriga-
tion projects and other similar programs requiring substantial amounts
of equipment, materials and technical services from abroad.
2. Eximbank has broad powers under its legislative charter.2 Fur-
thermore, its record of operations has acquired for it the support of the
Congress and, particularly, the Banking and Currency Committees, to
the extent that it has been permitted to operate with a minimum of
restrictions relative to the establishment and implementation of credits.
These facts have enabled Eximbank on many occasions over the years
2 Apparent reference to the Export-Import Bank Act (Public Law 173), approved

to act promptly in situations involving issues important in our foreign
political and economic relations. On the other hand, agencies created
as a part of our foreign aid programs have become restricted to the
extent that in many instances they are not as free as is Eximbank to act
promptly and with a flexibility of methods.
Only this week it was necessary to look to Eximbank to obtain
promptly a credit which, according to the Department of State, was
highly important to meet a serious political situation in Guatemala.
Fortunately, Eximbank was able to find reasonable assurance of repay-
ment in dollars and can meet the situation insofar as the dollar portion
of the credit is concerned. It appears, however, that procedural prob-
lems and others resulting from legislative requirements for documen-
tation may delay the availability from other sources of credits required
in connection with the local expenditures for the projects proposed for
Guatemala.
Delays and the effort involved in compiling new studies and doc-
uments required by other agencies to support the establishment of
credits often result in irritations and ill will that are counterproduc-
tive in an assistance program. Such problems can be avoided in those
cases in which the entire transaction can be handled by Eximbank
because it can usually proceed on the basis of its years of experience
in Latin America and through the use of procedures which are well
established and generally understood. Funds allocated to Eximbank
to finance the local costs of projects in which it is involved would
make it possible for Eximbank, as an agency of the United States, to
operate in the manner contemplated for the IBRD with the establish-
ment of the proposed IDA.
3. It is self-­evident that it would be preferable—both from the
standpoint of the borrower and the lender—to have a specific project
handled by a single agency where feasible so to do. It is recognized that
this cannot be accomplished in every situation.
On the basis of the foregoing, it is suggested:
1. That funds appropriated for a program of soft loan assistance in
Latin America be allocated to a particular agency—­either national or
international—­after determination is made as to the specific purposes
for which the funds will be utilized.
2. That in instances in which credits for local currency expendi-
tures are required in connection with loans which may he made out of
uncommitted funds of Eximbank, funds be allocated to Eximbank to
enable it to make and administer also the soft loan component.3
Samuel C. Waugh
President
the Bureau of Economic Affairs was tasked with the preparation of a memorandum in
reply to Waugh’s memorandum by August 12, but no copy of the reply was found in
Department of State files.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  113
ETA–47.
Editorial Note
On August 8, 1960, President Eisenhower sent a Special Message
to the 2nd Session of the 86th Congress, which reconvened on that date,
commenting on the Administration’s legislative program, and indicat-
ing that he would present new matters to Congress for the purpose
of promoting free world stability. The first new program involved
“an authorization in the magnitude of $600 million to help our Latin
American neighbors accelerate their efforts to strengthen the social and
economic structure of their nations and improve the status of their indi-
vidual citizens. This program, which should include further assistance
for the rehabilitation of devastated Chile, will promote the dynamism
and effectiveness of all our efforts in this Hemisphere. I urgently request
enactment of this authorization prior to the Economic Conference of
the American Republics, which convenes at Bogotá on September 5, so
that discussions leading to the development of detailed plans may be
initiated there.” For the full text of the President’s message, see Public
ETA–48.
Instruction from the Secretary of State to All Diplomatic
Posts in Latin America1
Washington, September 2, 1960.
SUBJECT
Policy Information Statement (ARA-308)
Special Committee of the Council of the Organization of American States to Study
the Formulation of New Measures for Economic Cooperation (Committee of 21)
by Robert Ross of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs on August 11, 31; cleared with
Alexander M.  Rosenson, Deputy Director of the Office of Inter-American Regional
Economic Affairs; Simon N. Wilson, Officer in Charge of Inter-American Organizations
and Conferences; Juan N. Gorrell of the Bureau of Public Affairs; and Frank A. Mau
of the Executive Secretariat’s Reports and Operations Staff; and approved by Francis
M. Herren, Deputy Director of the Bureau of Public Affairs’ Policy Plans and Guidance
Staff. The instruction was also addressed to the consulate generals at Guayaquil,
Maracaibo, Porte Alegre, Puerto la Cruz, Recife, Salvador, and São Paulo.

NO FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DISTRIBUTION
The enclosed Policy Information Statement—­forwarded to the Post
for use us outlined in Foreign Service Circular No. 49, November 18,
19532—­is also being transmitted to USIA und other interested agencies
in Washington for their information and guidance. You are requested
to make it available to appropriate officers of USIS and other interested
U.S. agencies assigned to your Post.
Instructions regarding USIS treatment of this subject will be issued,
as required, by USIA Washington.
HERTER
SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF THE COUNCIL OF THE ORGANI-
ZATION OF AMERICAN STATES TO STUDY THE FORMULATION
OF NEW MEASURES FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION (COMMIT-
TEE OF 21)
SUMMARY
The Special Committee of the Council of the OAS to Study the
Formulation of New Measures for Economic Cooperation, popularly
known as the Committee of 21, will begin its third meeting in Bogotá,
Colombia, September 5, 1960. The Committee’s meetings are considered
to be of significant importance by American Republics Governments
and high-­level national representation is anticipated. The United States
delegation will be headed by Under Secretary of State Douglas Dillon.
General items to be discussed may be placed within the following
headings:
1. Financing of Economic Development.
2. Agriculture, Education, Productivity and Technology.
3. Fluctuations in the Prices of Basic Products.
Thus the Committee plans to address itself to primary matters
affecting the economic well-­being and the stability of the inter-­American
community. The President of the U.S.3 has said that the economic devel-
opment of Latin America is of vital importance to the strength and well-­
being of the Free World and that “we are determined to press forward
with the concrete measures necessary to make inter-American coopera-
tion in the economic field as fruitful as it has been in the political field.”
Our full and sincere participation in the work of the Committee, and the
sub-Committee of 9, demonstrate our determination. Further evidence
defined its substantive relationships with the United States information Agency and distrib-
uted this information to all Foreign Service posts. A copy of this circular is filed in the Records
Management and Research Division of the Bureau of Personnel’s Office of Management.
3 Dwight D. Eisenhower.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  115
of U.S. willingness to work with the other American Republics may be
seen in the recent Executive decision, and Legislative authorization, to
go ahead with the President’s new concept of cooperative assistance to
Latin American social development programs.4
I—BACKGROUND
The Committee of 21 had its genesis in an informal Washington
meeting of American Foreign Ministers in September, 1958, called in
response to a suggestion by Brazil’s President Kubitschek in a speech of
ber of subjects, including the problems of the Americas. He expressed his
belief that underdevelopment was Latin America’s outstanding prob-
lem. President Kubitschek recommended that the matter be discussed at
a high-­level continental meeting to seek positive solutions. Among the
subjects mentioned were: (1) intensification of pioneer investments in
economically underdeveloped areas of the hemisphere; (2) expansion of
technical assistance programs; (3) protection of prices of basic commodi-
ties from excessive and harmful fluctuations; and (4) increase of resources
of international financial agencies and the liberalization of their rules and
a view to allowing greater latitude of action.
The Brazilian President also pointed out that his correspondence
with President Eisenhower6 made it clear that the U.S. Chief Executive
shared Brazil’s “  .  .  .  deep concern over the problems of economic
development.”
Subsequently, the Brazilian Government transmitted to the U.S.
“informal contacts for initial understandings should be carried out in
Washington . . .with a view to preliminary study and analysis of the
problem of underdevelopment in Latin America . . .” “These under-
standings,” he stated, “might ultimately attain a more coordinated
form of expression if there were created a Committee of 21 [nations]
appropriation of $600 million for the establishment of a new social program in Latin
America, $100 million of which was to be set aside for the rehabilitation of Chile. For
portions of the text of the President’s message, see the Department of State Bulletin,
President’s request, and the bill was enacted into law on September 8. For text of the
Eisenhower and President Eisenhower’s response of June 5, see the Department of State
7 The text of the Brazilian Aide-Mémoire, which was transmitted to the American
Meeting of American Foreign Ministers, Briefing Book, Background Information.”

for the purpose of concerting the bases of agreement to be approved
in a final meeting.” The U.S. Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles,
extended an invitation to the American Foreign Ministers, many of
whom were already in New York for a session of the United Nations
General Assembly, to meet in Washington on September 23 and 24,
1958.8 The Secretary proposed informal meetings to discuss several
matters, among them the manner in which Brazil’s proposals, called
“Operation Pan America,” might be carried out. During the meetings
the Foreign Minister of Brazil9 recommended joint hemispheric action
on six principal points:
1. Study and adoption of measures favoring the use of private cap-
ital of the industrialized countries in developing nations.
2. Increase in the volume, and easing of the terms, of loans made
by international public credit agencies or the creation of inter-American
financial agencies organized with the same objectives in mind.10
3. Study and implementation of other measures to strengthen the
domestic economies principally to fight inflation and to encourage sav-
ings and local investment.
4. Study and implementation of measures to permit equitable reg-
ulation of the market in basic commodities.
5. Study of joint measures to be adopted to meet problems arising
from the formation of large European trade blocs such as the European
Common Market; studies and measures leading to the establishment of
regional markets in the Western Hemisphere.
6. Expansion of technical assistance programs.
Upon the conclusion of the Foreign Ministers’ meetings a commu-
niqué was issued which called for Intensification of action to promote
the greatest possible economic development of the continent.11 The
Ministers indicated gratification at President Eisenhower’s pledge of
full U.S cooperation in achieving concrete results in the common effort
to promote the economic development of the American Republics
because it [the U.S.] considers that peace, prosperity, and security are
truly indivisible. The Ministers recommended that during the period
before the Eleventh Inter-American Conference [now scheduled for
Department of State decimal file 363 as well as in the following Department of State lot
9 Franciso Negrão de Lima.
10 It may be noted that the announcement of the establishment of the Inter-American
Development Bank, with U.S support, had been made in mid-August. [Footnote in orig-
inal source text.]
11 For the text of the communiqué issued on September 24 at the conclusion of the

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  117
March 1961 in Quito] special attention be given to working out addi-
tional measures of economic cooperation taking as the point of depar-
ture the Brazilian proposals known as ‘Operation Pan America” and
such others as the American governments might wish to submit in
connection with the general subject. The Foreign Ministers were of
the opinion that the Council of the OAS should set up a special “com-
mission” of the Council on which 21 republics would be represented.
Recommendations of such a group could then be carried out either
through OAS organs or by the individual governments. The commu-
niqué also expressed the opinion that practical steps could be taken at
once: the establishment of an inter-American economic development
institution; intensification of efforts to establish regional markets in
Latin America.
On September 24, 1958, the Council of the OAS established the
Special Committee for the Formulation of New Measures for Economic
Cooperation (Committee of 21). Among the most important matters to
be studied were the following: a draft resolution calling for an inten-
sified program of technical training: a proposal for annual meetings
of economic experts; a suggestion that the principal coffee consuming
countries of the area urgently study the establishment of import quo-
tas; a proposal to study possibilities for the establishment of a system
of coffee buffer stocks, retention or export quotas and restrictions on
production, a proposal to study ways and means to increase inter-­
American and international trade; proposals dealing with basic prod-
ucts; and a proposal to study ways and means to assist in increasing
the flow of private investment capital to Latin America. The first ses-
sions of the Committee were held in Washington between November
als were submitted to the committee.12 A working group of 14 nations
(Argentina, Brazil, Cuba, Chile, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Haiti, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, U.S., Uruguay, and Venezuela) was
established to consider the various items in preparation for the Second
Session of the Committee of 21.13
12 Documentation on the meetings held in Washington between November 17 and
1959. Documentation on its deliberations is in Department of State lot files 363 and
811.0020 as well as in the following Department of State lot files: ARA Special Assistant’s
Files, Lot 63 D 415.

The Second Sessions of the Committee of 21 took place in Buenos
on thirty-­three (33) draft resolutions for approval by the Council of the
OAS. While the limitations of space preclude a discussion or even a
listing, of all of the resolutions approved by the Council on July 8, 1959,
mention of several items will demonstrate the subjects covered and the
range of problems under the purview of the Committee of 21:
The Inter-American Economic and Social Council (IAECOSOC) as
advisory agency of the OAS on specific economic problems:
Measures to increase the flow of private investments and public
capital; Analysis of commodity price-­support systems and export sub-
sidy policies; Evaluation, development, coordination of transportation in
Latin America; Studies of wool and mineral markets;
Studies on regional industries;
Latin American regional market:
Problems of excessive fluctuation in the markets for basic products;
Liberalization of international trade in basic products:
Coordination of technical cooperation and assistance activities;
Survey and evaluation of natural resources;
Development of the home-­building industry and financing of low-­
cost housing; University training of technicians;
Promotion of economic development through agrarian reform,
In February, 1960, the President of Brazil addressed to President
Eisenhower an Aide Memoire15 suggesting that the delays attendant
upon completion of the IAECOSOC’s country-­by-­country economic
surveys indicated the desirability of certain limited but immediate
steps. The measures set forth by President Kubitschek were as follows:
1. Strengthening of measures for financing Latin-American devel-
opment, preferably through the Inter-American Development Bank.
2. Technical and financial program for the development of agri-
culture and of the food industries in conformity with the individual
characteristics of each country.
3. Measures to ensure adequate prices and market conditions for
raw materials and primary commodities which are basic to the eco-
nomic and social stability of Latin American countries.
4. Financial and technical assistance to an intensive program for
the training of experts in economic development and for the campaign
against illiteracy.
14 Documentation on the Buenos Aires sessions of the Committee of 21 is in
Department of State decimal file 363 as well as in the following Department of State lot
15 The text of the Brazilian Aide Memoire, which President Kubitschek handed to

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  119
5. Financial and technical aid for the establishment of an inter-­
American organization for technological and productivity research in
support of the industrial development of Latin America.
President Kubitschek also called for a meeting of the Subcommittee
consider the Brazilian proposals and related matters.16 Following the
work of the 9, the Council of the OAS at an extraordinary meeting on
Period of Sessions for the Committee of 21 and Bogotá, Colombia, as
the site for the meetings.
The draft agenda, subject to approval by the Committee, is as
follows:
1. Opening of the sessions
2. Approval of the agenda
3. Consideration of the report of the Subcommittee of 917 (which
includes the five points in Kubistchek’s Aide Memoire of February,
1960).
4. Other matters
The secretariat has proposed that the Committee set up four work-
ing groups or the sessions:
Group I—Financing of Development
Group II—Agriculture
Group III—Basic Products
Group IV—Education, Productivity, and Technology
It is expected that President Eisenhower’s new concept for social
development, announced on July 11, 1960,18 will be a matter of earnest
consideration by the delegations at Bogotá. (Reference is made to White
House press release, at Newport, of July 11th.) The President, pointed
out that the Bogotá meetings would be considering one of the most
important components “of our hemispheric future—­the problem of
social reform and economic growth.” He indicated that the basic ideas
which will guide the United States’ participation at Bogotá are:
16 Documentation on the meetings of the Subcommittee of 9 in Washington is in
Department of State decimal file 371.04 as well as in the following Department of State
and ARA Files, Lot 62 D 230.
17 The text of the “Report of the Subcommittee of the Special Committee to Study
the Formulation of New Measures for Economic Cooperation” was approval by the
21-U.S. Delegation Position Papers.”

1. Widespread social progress and economic growth benefitting all
the people and achieved within a framework of free institutions are the
imperatives of our time.
2. Our nation’s history and traditions place us in accord with those
who seek to fulfill the promise of the future through methods consis-
tent with the dignity of free men. Our interests and sympathies are with
them.
3. A new affirmation of purpose is called for in our cooperation
with friendly developing countries in their efforts to progress.
In his announcement, President Eisenhower outlined three specific
needs which he believes must be mot through cooperative action: prac-
tical ways in which developing countries can make faster progress in
meeting their own needs and ways in which their friends can most effec-
tively cooperate with them (he mentioned better land utilization, low-­
cost housing, und minimums for decent living); improvement of the
opportunities for the bulk of the population to share in and contribute
to un expanding national product; and acceleration of the trend toward
greater respect for human rights and democratic government based on
free elections. The Congress of the United States has indicated its gen-
eral concurrence in the President’s concept. END UNCLASSIFIED
BEGIN CONFIDENTIAL
Brazil views President Eisenhower’s proposal as an emergency
program applying to social infrastructure, to be followed by a program
to deal with economic infrastructure. The Brazilians also are insisting
on the principle of programming through a joint commission, either the
Committee of 21 or some other multilateral committee, wherein funds
available under the new program would presumably be allocated to
the various countries by this group.
It is very probable that Brazil will lead representations at Bogotá
in favor of some variety of massive U.S. assistance to Latin American
economic development and in criticism of the level of existing and
announced U.S. assistance. The President’s new proposals are not likely
to satisfy Brazilian desires on the scope and volume of U.S. aid.
II—U.S. POLICY AND OBJECTIVES
The United States believes (a) that the current, continuing revo-
lution in Latin America requires energetic steps by each nation’s gov-
ernment, in the direction of meeting the peoples’ legitimate aspirations
and that failure to do so can only lead to repetitions of the kind of
destructive social upheaval seen in Castro’s Cuba; (b) economic devel-
opment programs which do not bring relatively quick, though perhaps
relatively small, amelioration of dire misery encountered in many
areas will not meet the above problem; (c) it is absolutely essential that

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  121
Latin American governments and nations make reasonable efforts to
help themselves in attacking these problems, and (d) the United States
stands ready to lend a hand in cooperation with individual national
efforts.
We believe that the approach taken by the Committee of 21 in its
work over the past two years has not been fruitful and does not prom-
ise real accomplishment for the future. The United States will seek, at
Bogotá, to achieve restoration to the regular organs of the OAS of the
responsibilities which the Committee has been undertaking, with a
view to making greater use of the IAECOSOC for the consideration
of economic problems, for the conduct of necessary economic stud-
ies, and for appropriate recommendations for solutions. At the same
time we will seek acceptance of the approach embodied in President
Eisenhower’s program.
The U.S. delegation will press for: (a) the establishment of what may
be called the Inter-American Fund (or Program) for Social Development,
(b) use of the Inter-American Development Bank as the primary mech-
anism for administration of the fund, (c) acceptance of the principle of
self-­help, and (d) a strengthened IAECOSOC for Colombo-­type discus-
sions on social and economic problems. The action by the meeting will
probably take the form of an agreement accepting the above points or
whatever part of them may prove acceptable. The text of a draft of such
an agreement was given Latin American representatives by Mr. Dillon
on September 26, und the text has also been forwarded to each U.S.
diplomatic mission in Latin America.19
III—SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (None)
IV—PUBLIC POSITION
Excerpts from the August 23, 1960 testimony before the House
Foreign Relations Committee by Under Secretary of State Douglas
Dillon (enclosed) may be used us our public position.20
EXCERPTS FROM STATEMENT BY UNDER SECRETARY OF
STATE DOUGLAS DILLON BEFORE HOUSE FOREIGN AFFAIRS
COMMITTEE—AUGUST 23, 1960
19 Under Secretary of State Dillon handed the draft text of the “Agreement for the
Establishment of an Inter-American Program for Social Development” to Latin American
representatives in Washington on August 26, 1960. Documentation concerning the for-
mulation and presentation of this document is in file 371.04.
20 Under Secretary of State Dillon testified before the House Foreign Affairs
Committee on August 23, 1960, in support of President Eisenhower’s request that the
Congress authorize the appropriation of $600 million for the establishment of a new
social program in Latin America.

PROGRAM FOR LATIN AMERICA
The United States and its neighbors in Latin America enjoy a special
relationship rooted in unique and enduring ties of history, geography
and trade. As neighbors we have worked in close political association
through the Organization of American States. We have jointly devel-
oped and strengthened our economic and financial relationships. We
now propose to join forces to deal with the pressing needs for social
progress with which so many of our neighbors are confronted.
Despite notable and substantial economic growth in much of Latin
America, despite rapid industrial development in many areas, despite
some increases in agricultural production, the great majority of the peo-
ples of these nations have achieved little improvement in their standard
of living.
Among the reasons for this situation, several have particular sig-
nificance. A very high rate of population growth has consumed a large
part of increasing production. The general living standard has been so
low that large percentage increases have involved only small gains in
absolute terms. Productivity has been greatly hampered by the lack of
education and training. Finally, outdated economic, legal and social
practices and institutions have frequently impeded growth.
Thus, we find masses of people still living in extreme poverty,
without adequate prospect of favorable change. At the same time there
is wide popular appreciation in Latin America that such conditions
need not exist and mounting demands that they be improved. Unless
hope for improvement can be given, the prospect is for increasing frus-
tration and unrest which can only lead to violence and destruction.
To provide an adequate response to these pressing needs is a task
which will take effort, money and time. It will require initiative, effort
and courage on the part of the Latin American governments to adopt
and adhere to policies and actions which will assure their peoples a rea-
sonable degree of social progress. We believe that the governments of
Latin America recognize this need and that they have the will and the
determination to take the necessary actions. This is a primary require-
ment for success.
While it is the Latin American countries themselves which of
necessity must find the ways to solve these problems, few if any of
them possess the means to do so alone. They need help—­help in devel-
oping effective programs and help in the form of outside financing.
To provide such help is the purpose of the new social develop-
ment program which we are proposing. We would contribute cap-
ital resources and technical assistance to support the efforts of those
Latin American countries which are prepared to initiate effective insti-
tutional improvements and self-­help measures in the field of social

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  123
development. We would hope to include in the new social develop-
ment program for Latin America the Federation of the West Indies,
which has achieved self-­government and which will soon become fully
independent—­probably next year.
In a short time we shall be meeting with representatives of the gov-
ernments of Latin America at Bogotá in a hemispheric economic con-
ference. The discussions at Bogotá will look toward the development
of plans for a positive and productive attack on the problems of social
development. As I have suggested, effective plans will require strong
actions by the Latin American governments, particularly in the field of
domestic reform. To encourage them to take such actions, and to make
plain that assistance to complement their actions can be anticipated, we
need a clear and unmistakable expression of Congressional readiness
to provide appropriations. It is for this reason that we are requesting an
authorization at this time.
Such an authorization would provide a framework within which
we and our friends from Latin America can develop new and more effec-
tive plans and programs for attacking the problems of social progress.
We envisage that the Conference should agree upon the basic objec-
tives of a program for social development which gives primary atten-
tion to needs in three broad areas: (1) Improvement of the conditions
of rural living and land use; (2) Improvement of housing and commu-
nity facilities; and (3) Improvement of educational systems and training
facilities. The program we envisage begins with the development of
specific policies, plans and programs by each of the governments con-
cerned. We foresee that the Latin American governments will obtain
substantial help and advice from the Inter-American Development
Bank, and the Inter-American Economic and Social Council in pre-
paring specific projects and programs to expedite social progress, in
examining the adequacy of existing tax systems, institutions, laws and
policies to promote such progress and in developing more effective
systems of mobilizing human and material resources to further these
objectives.
We foresee that the funds which the United States would provide
to assist in carrying out these plans and programs would be utilized for
the most part for loans repayable in local currencies and administered
through the Inter-American Development Bank. Nevertheless, we do
not preclude the use of other mechanisms or means including grants
where appropriate.
It is our idea that the total effort should be periodically reviewed
and discussed within the Inter-American Economic and Social Council
where the progress in each country could be assessed and plans for
further progress could be discussed.

In these ways we believe the American Republics can proceed
effectively basis of common effort to meet their most pressing needs.
ETA–49.
Editorial Note
Under Secretary of State C. Douglas Dillon, accompanied by
Robert Cutler, Executive Director of the Inter-American Development
Bank; Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State-­designate for Inter-
American Affairs; T. Graydon Upton, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury;
two congressional representative from the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee-Senator Bourke Hickenlooper and Senator Wayne Morse;
and various advisers drawn from the Departments of State, Treasury, and
Agriculture as well as from the International Cooperation Administration,
the Export-Import Bank of Washington, and the Development Loan
fund arrived in Bogotá, Colombia for the third meeting of the Special
Committee of the Council of the Organization of American States to study
the formulation of new measures for economic cooperation (Committee
clusion of the Committee’s deliberations on September 13.
At the third meeting of the Committee of 21, which was attended
by representatives of all the Americans except the Dominican Republic,
the United States presented for the Committee’s consideration a pro-
posed new program for prompting social progress in Latin America to
complement existing programs in the field of economic development.
Financing for the new program was to come from the appropriation
authorized by the United States Congress on August 31.
In a statement to the first plenary session of the committee on
September 6, Under Secretary Dillon, the chairman of the United States
delegation, presented a draft agreement for an inter-American social
development program and said that its purpose was to add to the pres-
ent expanding programs of basic economic and industrial development
a broad new dimension of social development to further social justice
in the Western Hemisphere. The program’s purpose, he stated, was to
bring fresh hope to the less privileged people who constituted such
a large proportion of the people of Latin America and to open before
them the path to a better life of material well-­being, equality, and dig-
nity. The Under Secretary declared that the United States Government
was prepared to devote over future years large additional resources to
carry forward such a program, which was dedicated to supporting the
self-­help efforts of Latin-American governments and peoples.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  125
The Latin American delegations welcomed the United States pro-
posal. Their acceptance of the program was formalized in the Act of
Bogotá, which was signed on September 13 by the representatives of
all countries present except Cuba, whose representative had asserted
on September 7 that the United States proposal was an instrument to
stifle the awakening hope of the Latin American people in favor of the
Cuban revolution, to isolate the Cuban people, to facilitate new aggres-
sion against members of the Latin American system, and to distract
attention from problems of independent and self-­sustained economic
development.
For the texts of Under Secretary of State Dillon’s statement of
September 6 and the Act of Bogotá adopted on September 13, see the
tively. Additional documentation on Under Secretary Dillon’s trip to
as well as as in the following Department of State lot files: OAS Files,
and ARA/IPA Files, Lot 66 D 230.
ETA–50.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the United States
Representative on the Inter-American Economic and
Social Council (Turkel)1
Bogotá, September 5, 1960.
PARTICIPANTS:
United States
Central American Republics
Under Secretary Dillon
Sr. Fernando Eleta, Minister of Finance of Panamá, and
spokesman for the Central American Republics
Mr. Mann
Sr. Jorge Bueno Arias, Minister of Economy of Honduras.
Ambassador Turkel
Sr. Juan [illegible in the original], Secretary of National
Economic Council of [illegible in the original]
Sr. Juan José [illegible in the original], Minister of Econ-
omy of Nicaragua
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations, Lot 64 D
199. Official Use Only. The conversation recorded here took place in Under Secretary
Dillon’s suite at the Chancery at 3:30 p.m. Dillon was in Bogotá to head the United States
Delegation to the meeting of the Committee of 21. Turkel was also a member of the
delegation.

Dr. Pedro Abelardo Belgado, Deputy Minister of Econ-
omy of El Salvador
Sr. Mario Dalpente, [illegible in the original] Representa-
tives to IA-ECOSOC
Sr. Julio Prado, Minister of Economy of Guatemala.
Dr. Alberto [illegible in the original], Chief, Office of Inte-
gration, Ministry of Commerce of Guatemala.
Sr. Jorge Borbón, Minister of Finance of Costa Rica
Sr. Alfonsa [illegible in the original], Executive Director
for Central America in the Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank
SUBJECT
Views of Central American Delegations on Social and Economic Development
Sr. Eleta began by stating that there was unanimous appreciation
of the new U.S. plan. They agreed that it should be channeled through
the Inter-American Development Bank. There is no need to have a new
organization; the IA-ECOSOC can be strengthened. Any help given by
the U.S. must be matched and surpassed by the countries themselves,
but this ability to perform depends upon their economic development.
The social help should not burden the Central American budgets;
hence, there should be no requirement of repayment or else the new
effort would simply be limiting the credit worthiness of the countries
for other purposes. A study of the basic commodities is a matter of
utmost importance to the Central American countries. Finally, he said
that the six Delegations were now studying ways of getting together to
augment the credit institutions in Central America for economic devel-
opment. They also want to talk to the President of the new inter-Amer-
ican Bank.2 He concluded by saying that he hoped Mr. Dillon would
receive them one more afternoon where they could talk on matters of
pure economic development.
Mr. Dillon stated that he appreciated their views; these were
similar to our own. We had found misunderstandings among other
Delegations as to the place of the new program in the over-­all devel-
opment of Latin America. We never intended, by suggesting the need
for this program, to suggest any lessoning of economic development.
We went to make even greater officers in the economic filed. Indeed, it
is not possible to draw a very sharp line between social and economic
development. It is our idea that the fund will be transferred to the new
bank, loaned to the countries which will repay in local currencies under
terms like those of the special fund of the new bank, and when these
local currencies are repaid, they can resolve. Moreover, if the operation
moves as we believe it will the U.S. would be willing to put in more
money.
2 Felipe Herrera.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  127
On the IA–ECOSOC, Mr. Dillon said our views are identical. As
to commodities, we believe in effort to prevent violent swings in price.
The producers should get together but should do so on a commodity-­
by-­commodity basis. In some cases the same commodity is produced
in other parts of the world and this means we must have a world agree-
ment. As to coffee, efforts must be made to strengthen the existing
arrangements, and to do it in the coffee study group. There should be
some way of working out statistical collaboration between the U.S. and
the coffee countries, and thus help the coffee countries police their own
agreement. We will have to talk to the Africans, but feel they are getting
closer all the time to full collaboration.
Sr. Eleta then proceeded to emphasize the limited credit potential
of the Central American countries. If they are going to give priority to
borrowings for hospitals, schools, and so on, they will put down on
their ability to borrow for productive economic purposes. Even though
they don’t like grants or endowments, Central America needs them.
Mr. Dillon replied that when he had presented the new plan to
Congress he told them the bulk would be distributed through the
Inter-American Bank on the basis described, but the U.S. would
reserve the right to utilize part of it for schools and other projects of
that nature. We would be prepared to look at these through our IGA
mechanism. There was no objection to this so long as it was limited
to non-­productive projects. Education is, indeed, basic. There are tre-
mendous accumulated needs in housing, but unless there are more
job opportunities people should not be encouraged, through better
housing to move to the cities. In the same way it is not a good idea
to build hospitals if there are no doctors to man them and equipment
to use. In this social development program we don’t intend to push
the people to move too rapidly and get out of phase with economic
development. The self-­help type of housing is best.
Here Mr. Mann interjected that the first priority in housing would
go toward fostering building and loan associations, and then mobilize
local resources.
Sr. Eleta spoke once more, repeating himself on basis commodities.
Sr. Buess of Honduras then said that all six republics recognized
that the main results would depend upon their own efforts. Some of
these republics have been trying to inaugurate their own economics.
It has required grant sacrifices and they have to be gaining momen-
tum on a Central American common market, thus laying the basis of
future development for greater production our greater consumption.
Eventually they hope to became one political unit.
Mr. Dillon said the U.S. strongly supports that concept and will help
Central America [illegible in the original]. Mr. Dillon will speak to Mr.
[illegible in the original] who arrives this afternoon, to see if we can’t get

help to launch the Central American Bank. Nevertheless, in every other
way the U.S. will sympathetically support the integration movement.
Sr. Eleta then said that the six Delegations expect to hold further
meetings and will ask for discussions with [illegible in the original] and
with Felipe Herrera.
Sr. Fuentes Mohr of Guatemala then said the six republics fully
agreed on the revolutionary new program prepared by the U.S. but
hope Mr. Dillon will do something concrete to help launch the integra-
tion movement in Central America and these republics will sacrifice
as much as their economies will permit. In planning, financing of the
Central American Bank the U.S. should think of Central America as
an economic unit. So far; the movement is proceeding with differing
degrees if intensity down there and the movement needs acceleration.
ETA–51.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the United States
Representative on the Inter-American Economic and
Social Council (Turkel)1
Bogotá, September 12, 1960.
PARTICIPANTS:
United States
El Salvador
Under Secretary Dillion
Mr. Mann
Ambassador Turkel
Sr. Dr. Pedro Abelardo Delgado, Deputy Minister of
Economy
Sr. Dr. Luis [illegible in the original] Representative of
Central Bank
Guatemala
Sr. Dr. Alberto Fuentes Mohr, Chief, Office of Integra-
tion, Ministry of Commerce
Honduras
Sr. Jorge Bueso Arias, Minister of Economy
Sr. Roberto [illegible in the original] President, Central
Bank of Honduras
Nicaragua
Sr. Juan Jose Lugo Morenco, Minister of Economy
SUBJECT:
Proposed Central American Development Bank
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations, Lot
64 D 199. Official Use Only. The conversation recorded here took place in the Hotel
Tequendama at 5:30 p.m.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  129
Sr. Bueso presented a memorandum2 on how the U.S. could help
in the integration of Central American economies by the establishment
of a Central American development bank. Such a bank could finance
roads of common importance, the linking up of electric power net-
works, industrial loans of a regional character, and loans to enterprises
requiring help because of readjustments of tariffs. It would be a mixed
bank of government and private capital, reinforced by external loans.
Each Central American country would put in $2 million; there would
external resources to Central American resources. There would be an
open door for Costa Rica and Panamá, but since this is an integration
movement these two republics would have to be members in the trade
area, as well as in the bank.
Mr. Dillon said that we are warm supporters of Central American
economic integration and recognize the need for a bank. The U.S.
believes that once it has started the situation will rapidly improve.
Heretofore, we have had no very definite project for such a bank, but
at the time of the Bank/Fund meeting in Washington at the end of
September3 we would be ready to work out a draft charter. The Inter-
American Bank might serve as a supervisory trustee for U.S. funds.
Certainly it would be a good thing to work closely with that Bank.
Mr. Dillon observed that President Herrera said he was very much
interested in this bank and would like to give technical help.
Mr. Dillon said that we can’t tell how much the U.S. is ready to do
until we sit down and discuss it. The figure of $80 million mentioned
in a table at the end of the memorandum is much more than we had
hereto discussed. The important thing, however, is to get started. As in
the case of DLF experience, we found that some national development
banks require successive loans after the initial loan. He also said that
where major projects are concerned the parties might consider assis-
tance from organizations other that the proposed bank.
Mr. Mann suggested that, in order to save time, it would be best for
the U.S. to do its preparatory work with someone (perhaps Mr. Rochac)
between now and the end of the Bank/Fund meeting and we could all
meet thereafter, say September 25. Sr. Mohr said that it is true that the
important thing is to get started, but in order to have the psychological
impact that the Central American common market is here to stay the new
2 Not found in Department of State files.
3 Reference is to the annual joint meetings of the Boards of Governors of the IMF,
President Eisenhower to the representatives at the meetings, and statements by Secretary
of the Treasury Anderson, Under Secretary of State Dillon, and Assistant Secretary of
the Treasury Upton concerning the problems of a developing world economy, see

bank would need a good push to assure that it would succeed. As of now,
the Central American trade amounts to only 4% and it won’t be signifi-
cant until it reaches 25%, and investment is needed to achieve that figure.
Mr. Dillon agreed that it doesn’t do much good to take away bar-
riers to trade unless you have investment for production. The Coal and
Steel Community in Europe needed a balancing fund but they found
out that the problems were not as great as they had feared.
Mr. Dillon asked if there was any reason why the Inter-American
Bank can’t loan some of its own funds to the Central American bank.
The answer was given that President Herrera was well-­disposed to the
Central American Bank and had offered a secretariat and a meeting
place in his bank.
Subsequent discussion brought out the information that while the
World Bank has been thinking of a private Central American bank, the
World Bank had aimed at $10 million worth of private Central American
capital, and there was general concurrence among the Central Americans
present that this was far too much to expect. Moreover, the World Bank
was thinking of another private bank operating in five countries.
The conclusion was reached that Mr. Mann would arrange for U.S.
technicians to talk to Mr. Rochac to discuss a charter and that a meet-
ing would be held at the close of the Bank/Fund meeting at the end of
September.4
4 Apparent reference to the meeting held on September 30; for the memorandum of
conversation at that meeting, see Document ETA–53.
ETA–52.
Letter from the Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary
of the Treasury (Anderson)1
Washington, September 16, 1960.
Dear Bob:
I am seriously concerned over the threatened decline in the flow
of U.S. private investment to less-­developed countries and am certain
that you fully share this concern since we just continue to rely heavily
Co-­drafted by Edwin M. Martin, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, and
Peyton A. Kerr, Director of the Office of International Financial and Development Affairs,
on September 9, and retyped in the Executive Secretariat on September 14.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  131
on American private enterprise in the task of financing economic devel-
opment in these countries.
I am advised, for example, that recent actions taken by the Cuban
government have drastically reduced the willingness of American
investors to subscribe to new security issues intended to finance an
expansion of activities by U.S. firms in Latin America. It appears inev-
itable that the rising concern over the safety of existing foreign invest-
ment, which has already reached a high level, will seriously restrict
new investment outside of Europe. Whereas our foreign policy objec-
tives require an increase in the volume of private foreign investment in
less-­developed countries, we appear to be threatened with a decline.
We therefore propose to give serious consideration to means of
reviving the interest and confidence of U.S. investors in the foreign field,
especially Latin America. Perhaps we should seek to make available
broader insurance coverage against expropriation and non-­convertibility.
The requirement of a bilateral Investment Guarantee Agreement as a pre-
requisite to guarantees administered by ICA should be re-­examined. All
other possibilities should be identified and explored.
In this context, it would be most helpful if the Treasury Department
could undertake a review of present tax legislation to determine the
advisability of changes which would reduce the losses taken by U.S.
firms when their overseas investments are seized by permitting recov-
ery out of U.S. taxes to an extent and under conditions decried to be
appropriate in view of the basic objective to which I have referred.
I should appreciate your reaction to these suggestions and any
other suggestions you may have on this important subject.
With best wishes,
Sincerely,
DOUGLAS DILLON
Acting Secretary

ETA–53.
Memorandum of Conversation, by Joseph Carwell of the
Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs1
Washington, September 30, 1960.
SUBJECT
Meeting on Central American Regional Bank
PARTICIPANTS:
Dr. Lugo Marenco, Minister of Economy (Nicaragua)
Lic. Jorge Bueso Arias, Minister of Economy (Honduras)
Lic. Roberto Ramirez, President, Central Bank of Honduras
Dr. Pedro A. Delgado, Acting Minister of Economy (El Salvador)
Dr. Alberto Fuentes Mohr, Special Representative, Minister of Economy (Guatemala)
Ing. Mario Dalponte, Economic Counselor, Embassy of El Salvador
Dr. Alfonso Rochac, Executive Director, BID
Ing. Alfredo Hernandez, BID
Lic. Manuel Benfeldt, Minister of Finance (Guatemala)
Department of State:
ARA-Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann; ARA-Mr. Milton Barall;
REA-Mr. Alex Rosenson; OAP-Mr. Joseph Carwell
Assistant Secretary Mann opened the meeting with the statement
that it is his hope that the United States Government will be able to
make available to the proposed Bank $10 million ($5 million from
the Development Loan Fund and $5 million from the International
Cooperation Administration), and that he understood that ICA might
be willing to grant $2 million (non-­interest bearing) cash in the present
fiscal year, as part of the “capitalization” of the Bank. A Presidential
determination for the additional $3 million for the following year
would be required. Mr. Mann underscored the fact he could not speak
for the DLF and ICA, even less for the Congress of the United States,
and that present plans must be considered to be tentative.
Mr. Mann pointed out that regarding the DLF portion of the
finances, there are strong policy grounds for not paying out money in
advance of actual need, and that Congress has been critical of DLF for
channelling too much money through development banks rather than
directly. ICA has more flexibility in this regard. Whether the additional
$3 million financing Aram ICA will be in the form of a loan or grant, is
uncertain. However, Mr. Mann stated, he will try to persuade ICA that
it be in the form of a grant.
Mr. Delgado raised the question as to whether it was possible for the
United States to increase its contribution to the Bank above $10 million.
on October 6.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  133
Both Mr. Barall and Mr. Rosenson replied that if the Bank places its
loans wisely and can justify the need for increased funds, there would
probably be no difficulty in finding additional funds.
Another question raised by Drs. Rochac and Delgado, in view of
the known IBRD interest in forming a regional bank to service small
industries, was whether it would be inappropriate for the Bank to
engage in this type of lending activity. Mr. Mann replied that this was
a matter for the Central American representatives to explore directly
with the IBRD.
In conclusion, Mr. Mann stated that he thought that during the
next two weeks, this group, as the representatives of the proposed
Bank, should (1) meet with State, DLF, and ICA to work out the terms
regarding loans and grants; (2) draw up a charter for the Bank, and
(3) prepare a press release acceptable to the United States Government
announcing the formation of the Bank.
ETA–54.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of
State (Dillon)1
Washington, October 17, 1960.
SUBJECT
Central American Bank for Economic Integration - Request for Contingency Fund
Financing
Discussion:
During the past several weeks discussions concerning the estab-
lishment of and United States financial assistance to a Central American
Bank for Economic Integration have been carried on by United States
Government officials and representatives of the Governments of
Guatemala, Honduras, Salvador and Nicaragua. This memorandum
requests the commitment of $2 million from the FY 1961 Contingency
Fund, as part of United States assistance of $10 million to the Central
American Bank for Economic Integration, as soon as the institution
American Integration: El Salvador, 1960.” Confidential. Drafted by Carwell on October

is established. This memorandum also requests your approval for
an additional $3 Billion ICA contribution to the Bank from FY 1962
funds and for a determination that it is in the national interest for
DLF, pursuant to Section 202(c) of the Mutual Security Act,2 to allocate
$5 million of its funds to the Bank. Each of the four member countries
of the Bank—El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala and Nicaragua—­will
make an initial contribution equivalent to $2 million to be paid in three
installments over 14 months. The bank will be set up as an interna-
tional legal entity with its own charter, in accordance with Article XIX
of the Treaty of Economic Association, of February 6, 1960, establishing
a common market in the region (Tab C).3 The purpose of this Bank is
to promote the integration and balanced economic development of the
member countries.
The action recommended is in pursuance to your discussion
with the Representatives of the Central American countries during
the Bogotá Conference, in September 1960,4 to the effect that, “we
are warm supporters of Central American integration and recognize
the need for a Bank.” You further suggested that “at the time of the
Bank/Fund meeting in Washington at the end of September . . . that we
can’t tell how much the United States is ready to do until we sit down
and discuss it. The figure of $30 million mentioned . . . is much more
than we had hereto discussed. The important thing, however, is to get
started.” I therefore arranged for United States Government technicians
at the close of the Bank/fund meeting to discuss the proposed bank.
Participants in meetings included the Ministers of Economy and other
high officials of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua.
After consulting with ICA and DLF, I stated at the September 29
meeting with Central American high officials that, our present thinking
is to make available funds up to $10 million to the bank as described
above. However, when the $10 million referred to above is exhausted,
United States agencies will be prepared to consider further assistance
as appropriate to augment the Bank’s resources, taking into account the
degree of progress achieved in the economic integration program and
May 14, 1960, required a Presidential determination to permit the DLF to allocate funds in
3 The attachment designated Tab C is not printed here. For text of the Treaty of
Economic Association (with Annexes), signed by El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala
Treaty Series (UNTS), vol. 383, p. 3. The Embassy in San Salvador transmitted an extensive
analysis of the treaty’s provisions to the Department of State in dispatch 337, February 19,
4 For the memorandum of conversation containing Under Secretary Dillon’s state-
ments, dated September 12, see Document ETA–51.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  135
the contribution which has been made by the regional Bank to such
program, and member Government support for the institution.
The representatives of the four Central American Governments
have formally applied to the ICA for the funds to be contributed to the
resources of the Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
In order to inform the participating Governments that $5 million
of the $10 million of assistance would be provided by DLF, we propose
an allocation of a credit, under the terms of section 202(e) of the Mutual
Security Act (Tab C),5 of $5 million to be extended upon the satisfac-
tory establishment of the Bank. A formal application for such a loan has
been filled with the DLF and several discussions have been held with
DLF officials, including a nesting with the Managing Director. The draft
charter (Tab E)6 of the Bank provides for paid-­in capital subscriptions,
in three installments over a 14 month period, of $2 million by each
member country. These contributions to the capital of the Bank would
be available for use on a multilateral basis within the region (with the
national currencies subscribed being convertible). It is deemed neces-
sary to allocate $5 million of DLF funds for the purpose of a loan to
the Bank at this time in order to further the establishment of the Bank
which requires contributions by the member countries as well as the
United States which contribution it is hoped will be authorized by the
member countries in the near future.
With respect to the $3 million from ICA, we believe that it would
be possible to meet this part of the $10 million in a timely manner from
FY 1962 ICA funds and thereby make minimum demands on the con-
tingency Fund in 1961. We are therefore preparing papers for a 1550
determination (Tab A).7
The draft charter establishing the Bank (Tab E) which was dis-
cussed in retail with United States Government techniques, is subject
to ratification by each of the national legislative bodies of the member
countries before it can become operative. It is contemplated that ratifi-
cation by the respective national legislatures be completed by January
5 Not printed here.
6 Not printed.
lished a procedure for making commitments to foreign governments on behalf of the
United States, subject to the availability of funds. It stipulated that no promises or com-
mitments involving future performance or expenditures of U.S. funds for foreign assis-
tance should be made or implied, except upon specific determination by the Executive
Branch covering the following four points: 1) the commitment was in accord with
approved policy, 2) the funds had been approved by Congress or there was an Executive
decision to request additional appropriations, 3) a judgment had been made indicating
that the funds would be used effectively, and 4) the probable time span during which the
assistance might have to be granted had been determined. (S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous)
Files, Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action)

1961. Under the terms of the Charter, one half of the paid-­in capital sub-
scribed by each member country (the equivalent of $1 million dollars)
shall be payable within sixty days from the date this Agreement enters
into force. This would indicate that the Bank would begin operations
no later than April 1961.
United States Government technicians also discussed the draft
press statement (Tab F)8 proposal to be issued when the determination
recommended herein is approved.
Attached is a historical discussion of the actions taken which led to
the formation of the Control American common market and the Central
American Bank for Economic Integration (Tab B).9
Recommendations:
2. That you set aside $2 million from the Contingency fund on a
grant basis, upon the establishment of the Bank.
Approved____________________11
Disapproved__________________
3. That in accordance with the provisions of Section  202(c) of
the Mutual Security Act and pursuant to the authority which has
been delegated to you by Executive Orders Nos. 1057512 and 1061013
and Department Delegation of Authority No. 85,14 you confirm that
you have determined that it is in the national interest for DLF to use
the funds proposed to be lent by it to the Central American Bank for
Economic Integration pursuant to multilateral plans being developed
for the financing of that institution.
Approved_______________15
Disapproved_____________
8 Not printed here. The referenced press release was issued as a joint statement by
the United States, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua on November 3; for
9 Not printed.
10 Not printed. The required 1550 determination regarding the U.S. commitment of
funds to the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI), was signed by
mutual security program; for text, see 19 Federal Register 7249.
Operations Administration and transferring many of its functions to the new International
Cooperation Administration; for text, see 20 Federal Register 3179.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  137
ETA–55.
Circular Airgram from the Secretary of State to All
Diplomatic Posts in Latin America1
SUBJECT
Inter-American Social Development Program
REFERENCE
SUMMARY
The U.S. Inter-American Program for Social Development, now
incorporated into the Act of Bogotá, constitutes a major evolutionary
step in U.S. policy toward Latin America. Country Teams are requested
to study means of exploiting it in the light of local conditions.
The instruction cited outlined in some detail the historical back-
ground to the recent meeting of the OAS Committee of Twenty-One at
Bogotá, and further explained the purposes and objectives of the new
U.S. Inter-American Social Development Program to be presented at
that meeting.
With Cuba casting a sole dissenting vote, the Committee adopted
the “Act of Bogotá” which incorporates major features of the U.S. pro-
posals with some additions by the Latin American countries. This doc-
ument represents a significant new long range approach by the U.S.
Government, in cooperation with the other American Republics, to
attack the roots of social unrest in the area. The Council of the OAS has
given its formal approval.
On the one hand, the new Act calls upon Latin American countries
to institute some badly needed new legal and institutional reforms for
the purpose of providing greater economic opportunities to the average
citizen and particularly to the lower income groups. On the other hand,
it states the intention of the U.S. Government to provide capital resources
and technical assistance “to support the efforts of the Latin American
countries that are prepared to initiate or expand effective institutional
improvements land to adopt measures to employ efficiently their own
resources with a view to achieving greater social progress and more bal-
anced economic growth.”
Under the first heading the Act of Bogotá calls for measures
in the following fields: (a) improvement of conditions in rural liv-
ing and land use; (b) improvement of housing and community

facilities; (c) improvement of educational systems and training facili-
ties; (d) improvement of public health; and (e) mobilization of domestic
resources. In subscribing to this Act, the Latin American Governments
recognized the principle of self-­help and pledged themselves to give
greater and more urgent attention to the basic social needs of their
own people.
Initial financing of the new program will come from the $500 million
authorization voted by the U.S. Congress just prior to the Bogotá meet-
ing. The Executive Branch intends to seek actual appropriation of funds
during the next session of the Congress in January. The recently created
Inter-American Development Bank will be the primary mechanism for
administering the funds.
Our representatives at Bogotá made it clear that the U.S.
Government contemplates continuing support for the new social
development program. If the funds are used effectively, and if Latin
American countries indicate that they are making a genuine self-­help
effort to improve social conditions, further assistance should be forth-
coming after the initial funds are committed. We also made clear that
we regard the new program as a supplement to, and not as a substitute
for, programs of assistance to basic economic and industrial develop-
ment. We indicated, in fact, that we would favor further increases in
basic development assistance from the U.S. to Latin America on suit-
able terms.
Similarly, the new program is not expected to interfere with,
or substitute for, normal technical assistance programs of the
International Cooperation Administration in Latin America.
The U.S. Government views the recently signed Act of Bogotá as
a major evolutionary step in U.S. policy toward Latin America, adding
to existing programs of economic development a broad new dimension
of aid for social development. In the words of Under Secretary Dillon,
the American Republics have ushered in a “new era” of inter-American
social and economic cooperation.
It is to our interest, therefore, to give widest publicity to U.S. par-
ticipation in this venture, through all possible channels, setting the U.S.
effort into the context of a cooperative drive by the inter-American
community to improve the social condition of the individual.
While the new social development program is considered a matter
of greatest urgency, some time will unavoidably elapse before Congress
appropriates funds to make it fully operational. During this initial
phase, and until definitive steps actually are taken, the public should
be kept adequately informed, but care should be taken not to overplay
the program.
Joint efforts of all members of the Country Team will be required
to present the facts to all audiences within your country. While basic

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  139
publicity responsibility naturally lies with USIA, other members of the
Country Team can assist through word-­of-­mouth or other approaches
to their particular contacts.
It may be well to point out that some provisions of the Act of Bogotá
do not lend themselves to official publicity through USIA. The self-­help
sections are an example. The efforts of other agencies can usefully be
directed toward the essential task of building a favorable climate of
local opinion toward the concepts of tax reform, land resettlement,
and similar self-­help measures which the Latin American nations have
approved at Bogotá.
The Embassy is requested to study these possibilities in the light
of local conditions, and plan special projects and/or approaches
through the Country Team. Reports of such activities will be appreci-
ated. Background materials, including texts and speeches, in addition
to those already transmitted through USIA, will be forwarded to the
Embassy and/or USIA as they become available. (State and ICA are
preparing Joint instructions to Embassy and USOM’s regarding prepa-
ration for $500 million Social Development Program in Latin America
under American Republics Cooperation Act.)
PUBLIC POSITION
The statement of President Eisenhower at Newport last July 11 in
announcing this new program, the testimony of Under Secretary Dillon
before the House Foreign Relations Committee August 23, and state-
ments by our official delegation both during and immediately follow-
ing the Bogotá Conference, constitute our public position.
Acting

Bolivia: U.S. Relations with Bolivia1
Republics: Central and South America, Documents 248–294.
BL–1.
National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, January 7, 1958.
THE OUTLOOK FOR BOLIVIA
THE PROBLEM
To estimate the outlook in Bolivia, with special reference to the
prospects for domestic stability.
SUMMARY
1. In the last five years Bolivia has undergone political revolution
and severe economic decline. U.S. economic assistance, totaling over
$70 million since 1953, has prevented a complete collapse of the econ-
omy and during the last year has made possible modest progress under
a program of economic stabilization. Bolivia has some potential for
development, particularly of petroleum resources, but it faces formi-
dable obstacles—­including relative inaccessibility of large areas of the
country, the illiteracy of most of its people, and the deterrence which
political instability poses to private investment. Consequently, continu-
ation of the presently favorable economic trend will require substantial
foreign assistance for a number of years.
2. The recent improvement in the economic situation has depended
in large part on the effective leadership of President Siles, the moderate
1 Source: Department of State, INR Files. Secret. According to a note on the cover
sheet, this estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, and the fol-
lowing intelligence organizations participated in its preparation: The Central Intelligence
Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, the Army, the Navy,
the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. The members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
concurred in the estimate on January 7, 1958, with the exception of the representative of
the Atomic Energy Commission and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
who abstained, “the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.”

Bolivia  141
leader of the dominant party in Bolivia. Although he enjoys widespread
approval, his authority rests heavily on organized labor—­a vociferous
minority which has been the standard bearer and principal beneficiary
of social and political change. Siles has demonstrated considerable skill
in consolidating his position by taking advantage of the struggle for con-
trol of the labor movement between rival leftist labor leaders Lechin and
Sanjines, with the latter providing influential support for Siles. However,
Sanjines’ checkered and opportunistic background, including past associ-
ations with Communism, gives cause for some concern as to the reliability
of his support. Further, some of Siles’ labor support will almost certainly
be lost as he proceeds to apply the austerity measures necessary to his pro-
gram. Nevertheless, we believe that with continued U.S. aid the chances
are somewhat better than even that the present moderate regime will, bar-
ring Siles’ death or resignation, survive until the expiration of his term in
1960. The chief threat to the regime is the possible loss of Siles’ leadership
since there is no indication of a strong moderate MNR successor.
3. Either a deterioration in the economic situation or too severe
austerity would probably unite the labor movement against Siles. If
labor unrest led to riots and violence on a large scale, the government
probably could not preserve order. In any case, the resulting political
turmoil would greatly improve the prospects for the assumption of
control by a leftist labor regime and would enhance the influence of the
small but militant Communist groups.
DISCUSSION
BACKGROUND
4. Bolivia has some potential for agricultural development and pos-
sesses sizeable petroleum resources which are beginning to be exploited.
However, development has been and will continue to be hampered
by great social and geographical obstacles. Hence Bolivia is today an
exceedingly poor country; its standard of living is the lowest in Latin
America, except for Haiti. Mining, principally of tin, is still the backbone
of Bolivia’s money economy and provides the bulk of foreign exchange.
Most of Bolivia’s three and one-­half million people are Indians. They are
largely illiterate and are engaged in subsistence agriculture.2
5. The dominant political force in Bolivia is the government party,
the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR), which came to power
in 1952 through a revolution. The new regime under the presidency of
Victor Paz Estenssoro stripped the old ruling group of power in favor of
labor and middle class groups. The principal tin mines were nationalized
and large landholdings expropriated. Civilian militias were organized
as a counterbalance to the army, the political role of which was sharply
2 Agriculture and cattle raising employ about 64 percent of the population but con-
tribute only slightly over 27 percent of GNP. [Footnote in the source text.]

diminished. The decisive victory of the MNR in the June 1956 elections
reflects the extent of its political control and the appeal of its program.
The leader of the moderate sector of the MNR and former Vice-President,
Hernan Siles Zuazo, was elected President. His principal task has been to
deal with the critical economic problems that beset the country.
ECONOMIC SITUATION
6. The ambitious reforms of the Paz regime, including large wage
and social benefits, resulted in substantial government deficits. At
the same time production declined both in mining and agriculture.
In addition, falling world prices for metals reduced foreign exchange
earnings. The result was a serious inflation, with the cost-­of-­living
December 1956; depreciation of the free market exchange rate for the
boliviano was almost as great. In the period 1953–1957 the U.S. pro-
vided over $70 million in economic assistance. Nevertheless, in late
1956 economic deterioration reached critical proportions.
7. With U.S. and International Monetary Fund backing, President
Siles introduced a comprehensive monetary stabilization program in
December 1956. The program aims to encourage private incentive and
investment and to balance the government’s foreign exchange and
national budgets. Backed by a $25 million stabilization fund,3 the govern-
ment undertook to reduce monetary circulation and to increase govern-
ment revenues by tax and banking reforms. Chief among these measures
was a one-­year wage freeze. Other steps included establishment of a sin-
gle exchange rate and a reduction of subsidies and foreign trade controls.
Direct efforts were intensified to increase production and to improve
basic facilities, such as transport and power. In addition, the Siles admin-
istration is trying to attract foreign capital and has begun repayments to
many foreign bondholders and commercial creditors.
8. In its first year, the stabilization program made some progress in
arresting economic decline. Agricultural output increased, black market
operations were eliminated, and the real income of farmers improved. At
the same time, food prices gradually declined. The cost-­of-­living index
first year of stabilization, the external value of the boliviano depreciated
was relatively stable during the last half of 1957.
3 This included a one-­year IMF standby agreement under which Bolivia could pur-
chase foreign currencies equivalent to U.S. $7.5 million, a U.S. Treasury exchange agree-
ment providing that Bolivia may request the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund to purchase
million). [Footnote in the source text.]

Bolivia  143
9. Much of this improvement reflected the relative success of measures
to balance national and foreign exchange budgets. U.S. aid was still needed
to cover a budget deficit estimated at $13 million in 1957. Nevertheless,
the government was able to limit borrowings from the Central Bank to
about one percent of the money supply in the first nine months of 1957 as
compared to 150 percent the same period of 1956. Bolivia’s balance of pay-
ments deficit in 1957 is expected to be less than half the level of 1956, and
will be covered almost entirely by U.S. aid. Continued deficits through
10. Despite this progress, serious problems affecting the stabili-
zation goals remain. In the mining industry, although incentives for
production were increased, these as yet have had little effect and the
problems of obsolete facilities, high costs, and surplus labor remain
acute. A serious reduction of export income from the mines accounted
for much of the pressure on the exchange rate in 1957, and a further
decline in this source of income is expected in 1958. The relatively small
manufacturing industry—­employing 55,000—is still in a distressed
condition. Throughout the economy high wage costs and the inability
of employers to dismiss excess workers is a continuing difficulty.
11. The rate of capital investment is not adequate to maintain
present per capita consumption levels at current rates of population
growth. A program to raise per capita consumption one percent a
year in 1958–1967 and to absorb the estimated increase in labor force
of 26,000 per annum would probably require an annual investment of
only $37 million. Bolivia’s ability to obtain foreign loans and invest-
ment will continue to be adversely affected as long as the problem of
settling claims of former owners of the nationalized mining properties
remains open. However, with the curbing of inflation there may be a
better use of available resources and U.S. aid will be channeled more
directly to development needs than in the past.
12. Economic Prospects. Agricultural development depends to a
great extent on substantial improvement in farming techniques, on the
solution of the difficult problem of relocating labor, and on the develop-
ment of adequate means of bulk delivery from farm to market. Efforts
to relocate a surplus labor force of 10,000 to 18,000—primarily from
mining—have only begun. The fertile lowlands of eastern Bolivia are
almost unexploited, but resettlement from the highlands is difficult for
physiological reasons. However, the long-­term potential for increased
agricultural production is good.
13. While metal production in the private mines has been expanding,
total metal production has been declining, chiefly as a result of difficulties in
4 According to present estimates, the U.S. will furnish 34 percent of Bolivia’s gov-
ernment budget and 20 percent of its foreign exchange budget in 1958. [Footnote in the
source text.]

the nationalized mines which account for about 70 percent of total output.5
Efficient operation of the nationalized mines is hampered by the high cost of
social benefits and of surplus labor, and it will be politically difficult to elim-
inate or reduce these problems. Accordingly, the best short-­term prospect
for increased metal production may be through additional investment in
the private mines. However, because of world oversupply, expansion of tin
production would not provide any substantial increase in revenues. Export
quotas, imposed by the International Tin Council, will limit Bolivia’s exports
cent from the average quarterly level of exports in 1956. Further, the threat
of increased U.S. tariffs on lead and zinc, combined with falling demand for
metals generally, will tend to retard foreign capital investment.
14. The government is placing great hope on the exploitation of
petroleum resources as an eventual means of increasing foreign exchange
earnings. Petroleum output has gradually risen to over 3 ­million barrels
of crude in 1956 and Bolivia is now a small net exporter. Refinery capac-
ity has increased to about 12,000 barrels per day. The government petro-
leum agency (YPFB), entirely responsible to date for this development,
lacks sufficient capital to increase production substantially. However, the
Bolivian government is encouraging foreign private investment under
the 1955 petroleum code,6 which is considered to be as favorable to pri-
vate capital as any in Latin America. Foreign oil companies, including
Gulf and Shell, are active in exploration YPFB, partly with Gulf financing,
is constructing a pipeline through Chile to the Pacific Coast which may
be in operation in late 1958. While these developments may contribute
greatly to the country’s eventual foreign exchange earnings, production
on a large scale cannot be expected for perhaps five years. YPFB has so far
cooperated fully with foreign private firms, but its future attitude may be
conditioned by prospects for maintaining a satisfactory level in its own
operations, which will in turn require additional financing.
POLITICAL TRENDS
The Regime and its Support
15. The austerity measures adopted by the government under the sta-
bilization program and the emphasis on a freer economy were opposed
by the leftist factions of the MNR and the labor movement, led by Juan
Lechin, Executive Secretary of the Bolivian Workers Federation (COB),
and by Vice-President Nuflo Chavez. Their challenge was accepted by
President Siles, whose reputation for selfless dedication to duty had won
for him and his program considerable popular support. The attempt to
5 See Annex for Table on Production and Export of Principal Metals. [Footnote is in
the source text.]
6 Under the terms of the code, Bolivia excludes foreign government enterprises.
Because of this provision, Brazil’s petroleum monopoly cannot participate in exploitation
of a large and promising area in Bolivia now covered by a joint concession under a 1938
agreement between the Bolivian and Brazilian governments. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Bolivia  145
call a general strike of the COB in mid-1957 failed because of this support
and a split in the COB leadership. The emergence of a pro-Siles faction,
headed by railroad federation leader Juan Sanjines, subsequently led to
the ouster of Lechin from the Senate presidency and to congressional
acceptance of the resignation of Vice-President Chavez.
16. Siles has consolidated his position in the party and in the govern-
ment. Lechin and Chavez have been ousted from the MNR national polit-
ical committee and replaced by labor leaders who support Siles. Paz, who
has been Ambassador to Great Britain since late 1956, has refused periodic
appeals primarily from the labor-­left for his return. In the 86 member leg-
islative branch, the President commands a large working majority. Labor
politicians responsive to Sanjines’ leadership, as well as moderate mem-
bers of the worker-­peasant bloc which formerly dominated Congress,
have aligned with pro-Siles moderates.7 In opposition are nine pro-Lechin
labor leaders, several pro-Paz politicians, and a few die-­hard leftist sup-
porters of former Vice-President Chavez.
17. Despite these gains, the effectiveness of the Siles regime is still
hampered by MNR factionalism. Although the potential of Lechin and
Chavez for challenging the regime has been reduced, many of their
adherents continue to hold party and government posts in the depart-
ments. In Congress, the pro-Lechin minority has lost its battle against
the extension of the emergency powers which permit Siles to continue
the wage freeze. However, this minority may obtain greater support
from other labor groups for wage increases on the basis of claims that
workers are bearing the brunt of austerity measures. Other party dif-
ferences revolve around labor-­left demands for increased participation
in the government, for strengthening worker and peasant paramilitary
forces, and for an acceleration of agrarian reform.
18. A threat to Siles’ position and to the effectiveness of his program is
his dependence on the support of Juan Sanjines, who represents a somewhat
unstable influence. Sanjines presently heads the majority pro-Siles labor
segment in the COB. Prior to joining the MNR in October 1954, Sanjines
was closely associated with both the pro-Communist Revolutionary Left
Party and with the orthodox Bolivian Communist Party. Substantial num-
bers of orthodox Communists, Trotskyites, and their sympathies belong to
the railroad federation he heads. Thus far Sanjines appears to be primarily
interested in enhancing his own position and does not seem to be exploit-
ing his now political prominence for Communist ends. We do not know
whether he has in fact split with the Communist movement.
19. Labor support for the regime derives from the COB—­comprising
about 250,000 members in mining, industrial, and white collar unions as
7 Federico Alvarez Plata, a trustworthy moderate, is President of the Senate and
therefore successor to the presidency. Juan Sanjines, Chamber of Deputies President, is
second in line for the presidency. Almost all of the congressional committees are con-
trolled by representatives who appear to support Siles.

well as rural workers—­which is split into pro-Lechin and pro-Sanjines
factions. The basis of the Lechin support is the 60,000-man Mineworkers
Federation and other groups hard hit by austerity measures. The federa-
tion, formerly the most powerful COB affiliate, is presently weakened by
disunity among the rank and file. The COB faction headed by Sanjines
is numerically stronger but contains elements of diverse orientation. For
example, the factory and petroleum workers and the urban transport
workers have generally responded to moderate MNR leadership, while
the construction and particularly the railroad workers have been infil-
trated by Communist and pro-­Communist elements.
20. Among rural and middle class elements Siles and his stabili-
zation program probably enjoy considerable support. However, these
elements of the population are by no means as tightly organized as is
labor, and are hence less effective on the rational scene. The peasants,
moreover, are isolated and tend to distrust national politics.
The Opposition Parties
21. The right wing parties are incapable of offering more than a
limited challenge to the MNR. The right-­of-­center Bolivian Socialist
Falange failed to consolidate its gains after the 1956 elections when it
polled 14 percent of the total vote and obtained five congressional seats.
Its position has been weakened by an open split between moderate and
extremist elements, despite their agreement on the objectives of limiting
state intervention in the economy, reducing labor’s political influence,
and re-­establishing the traditional role of the army. The extreme rightist
Republican Socialist Union Party—representing the old oligarchy of big
business, large landholders, and former top army officers—­is totally
discredited. Its leaders both at home and in exile have persevered in
their efforts to undermine the regime.
22. Communist Groups. The capabilities of the Communist parties,
though much greater than their numbers indicate, are in general limited.
cast) and have no representation in Congress. The orthodox Communist
Party (PCB) has a maximum membership of about 2,000; Trotskyite fac-
tions, most important of which is the Revolutionary Workers’ Party (POR),
have a strength of 1,000 to 1,500. While the PCB provides conditional
support for the regime, the Trotskyite POR maintains an uncompromis-
ing opposition. Despite probable support from the Czech Legation, the
Communist movement is handicapped by chronic factional differences
and financial difficulties. At the same time, however, the presence in gov-
ernment circles of such individuals as Juan Sanjines and Edwin Moller8
provides a potential channel for the extension of Communist influence.
8 Edwin Moller, long a Trotskyite, joined the MNR in 1954. Although he was recently
ousted from the party by Siles because of his oppositionist activities against stabilization,
he still retains his seat in the Chamber of Deputies. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Bolivia  147
Three other labor leaders recently appointed to the MNR national politi-
cal committee may still have ties with orthodox Communists.
Role of Military and Para Military Forces
23. The present estimated strength of the army is 6,500, mostly career
soldiers. Its usable equipment, largely of European origin, consists pri-
marily of light infantry weapons and miscellaneous light artillery. The air
operational and most of these are trainers. While top officers and prob-
ably the majority of the personnel in the army and air force generally
support the present MNR regime, political, personal, and service rival-
ries increased in early 1957. Substantial reductions in forces as part of the
economies under the stabilization program contributed to this develop-
ment. A recently decreed organization of the armed forces is probably
designed to bring them more firmly under the government’s control.
Siles’ recent request for U.S. military assistance was based not only on
internal security needs but also on dissatisfaction among the military
over the government’s inability to finance an increase in the strength and
an improvement in the equipment and training of the services.
24. In contrast to the army, the Carabineros—­a national police corps
of about 6,700 organized along military lines—have maintained their
strength, probably as a result of the government’s dependence on this
force for internal security. The training and morale of the Carabineros
are good by Bolivian standards, although their capabilities are limited
by poor armament and lack of mobility. In addition, there are: (a) an
MNR security force which is directly responsible to the party’s National
Political Committee and which has about 1,500 members, two-­thirds of
whom are located in La Paz, (b) a workers’ militia roughly estimated to
be 10,000 with primary loyalties to local labor unions, and (c) rural police
forces which display considerable autonomy. Except for the MNR secu-
rity force, these units are ill-­disciplined and poorly equipped. They have
been utilized by the government for demonstrations during national cel-
ebrations and periods of political tension. At the same time, however, the
government has controlled these forces by failure to provide full equip-
ment and to replace the reduction in numbers through normal attrition.
25. The bulk of the armed forces and Carabineros would probably
support the Siles regime in the event of a serious struggle between MNR
moderates and leftist elements. These forces could probably defend the
government against attack by the workers’ militia. However, the security
forces probably could not control a situation involving widespread labor
unrest and violence, and in any case substantial defection from either
the armed forces or the Carabineros would make the survival of the
government doubtful. A rightist attempt to overthrow the Siles regime
is unlikely; any such attempt would almost certainly be resisted by the
workers’ militia and by sufficient elements of the armed forces and the
Carabineros as virtually to insure the survival of the government.

TRENDS IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
26. Bolivia’s foreign policy has traditionally been conditioned by its
land-­locked position. Under the MNR, policies have been increasingly
concerned with the economic needs of the country. Bolivia maintains
generally friendly relations with other Latin American states. There is
occasional friction with Brazil and Argentina, in part because these coun-
tries wish to discourage foreign development of oil deposits in areas of
Bolivia near their borders.
27. The trend in recent years toward closer relations with the U.S.
has accelerated under Siles. The favorable policy toward the U.S. is pri-
marily a result of the regime’s desire for continuing economic support;
recognition of the need for this support has tended to inhibit even the
labor-­left from criticizing the U.S. In the UN and the OAS Bolivia contin-
ues to support the U.S. and the West on most important political issues.
However, like the rest of Latin America, it often takes positions indepen-
dent of the U.S. on economic and colonial questions. A major reduction in
U.S. aid would almost certainly damage U.S.-Bolivian relations.
28. Except for diplomatic, commercial and cultural ties with
Czechoslovakia, which maintains a legation in La Paz, Bolivia has little
contact with the Soviet Bloc. So far it has not shown interest in strength-
ening ties with the Bloc, despite a few overtures from that direction,
and has also indicated that it plans to curtail Czech Legation activi-
ties. Should the Bolivian government come to believe that the country’s
economic outlook was worsening and should it be unable to count on
effective U.S. assistance, strong pressure would be generated to expand
its relations with the Bloc countries.
THE OUTLOOK
29. Bolivia’s future stability is greatly dependent on the success of
the moderate MNR leadership in dealing with the country’s difficult
economic problems. The Siles regime will probably retain a margin of
support for the stabilization program at least for the next year, if it con-
tinues to obtain external assistance. Because of labor dissatisfaction, it is
almost certain to encounter serious difficulties in maintaining this mar-
gin. However, we believe that the chances are somewhat better than even
that Siles will remain in power until the expiration of his term in 1960,9
­barring his death or resignation. In either event, Senate president Federico
Alvarez Plata, an MNR moderate, probably would succeed as provided
by law, but would be unable to provide as effective leadership as Siles,
with consequent loss of strength by the moderate regime.
30. Siles’ ability to proceed with the stabilization program will
depend on his success in retaining influential labor support. Some of
this support will inevitably evaporate by the mere passage of time, and
9 Under the Constitution, Siles is not eligible for re-­election in 1960. [Footnote is in
the source text.]

Bolivia  149
Lechin will seek to accelerate the process by calling for wage increases
and other concessions. While Lechin will not hesitate to use any oppor-
tunities provided by labor discontent to move against Siles, his success
will depend on the cooperation of labor groups associated with the
rival leadership of Juan Sanjines.
31. We believe that Sanjines probably will continue to support the
moderate leadership as long as his position in the labor movement is
not threatened thereby. While agreement between him and Lechin does
not appear likely, those two leaders might take parallel action against
Siles and his program. The likelihood of such action would be increased
by a sharp deterioration in the economic situation or even by the gov-
ernment’s inability to placate labor demands. Widespread labor unrest
and violence threatening to exceed armed forces’ capabilities probably
would lead to a modification of the stabilization program, and possibly
to Siles’ resignation.
32. Sanjines appears to be motivated by an ambition to replace
Lechin as COB Executive Secretary. If Sanjines gained a clear-­cut ascen-
dancy in the labor movement, his continuing support for moderate
MNR leadership would be doubtful. Even in present circumstances,
his past association with Communist groups may result in further
Communist penetration of the party and government.
33. Given continued external assistance at approximately present
levels, the short-­term outlook is for slow improvement in the economic
position of this impoverished country. Some increase in agricultural
production is likely, and there may also be a reversal of the present
downward trend in metal production. Only a major increase in foreign
investment would lead to greater progress in economic development
before the end of Siles’ term in 1960. Bolivia’s capacity to provide the
stability necessary to attract foreign private investment will depend for
some years upon U.S. assistance.
34. Nationalist and Communist propaganda attacks against U.S. pri-
vate capital, especially in oil development, are likely to increase, but these
attacks by themselves are not likely to affect foreign investment or over-­
all U.S. interests. Over the longer run, development of oil resources may
lead to an improved economic condition. However, the modest economic
progress we have estimated for the next few years will not necessarily
assure the continuation of moderate MNR forces in control after 1960.
35. A serious deterioration in the economic situation would greatly
weaken moderate leadership in the MNR. The otherwise poor prospects
for the parties in opposition to the MNR, both rightist and Communist,
would be enhanced. The resulting political instability would proba-
bly bring a leftist MNR regime to power and involve some increase in
Communist influence. Such a regime would be weak and disorganized.10
10 A map showing the outline of Bolivia’s strategic mineral resources is not printed.

[ANNEX]
Table
Washington, undated.
Production and Exports of Principal Metals
A. Production (in thousands of fine metric tons)
National Mines
Private Mines
Total
Tin
Tungsten
Lead
Copper
Zinc
Antimony
Silver
Total
Gold2
B. EXPORTS (millions of U.S. dollars)
Tin
Tungsten
Lead
Copper
Zinc
Antimony
Silver
Other
Total
1 Production and export of individual metals in 1957 based on data for first seven
months.
2 In thousands of kilograms.
3 Total exports of all metals in 1957 based on data for first nine months.

Bolivia  151
BL–2.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, January 17, 1958.
SUBJECT
Presidential Escort Battalion—Bolivia
Background:
The revolution of 1952 in Bolivia caused far-­reaching economic and
social dislocations, including the creation of armed workers’ militias. At
the same time, the country’s regular army was demoralized and virtually
disbanded. Since 1954, the United States Government has been providing
economic assistance to Bolivia, initially in order to prevent a serious eco-
nomic and political upheaval there which might have led to the forma-
tion of a pro-communist or communist government, and subsequently to
try to help Bolivia to remedy the serious economic and social dislocations
which resulted from the revolution.2 The United States had also used its
influence in the attempt to strengthen the moderate elements in Bolivia
and to weaken correspondingly the left wing extremists. These efforts
showed their most significant results in late 1956, when the newly elected
Bolivian administration put into effect with U.S. counsel and support an
economic stabilization program.
Discussion:
At the end of the first year, the stabilization program has achieved
considerable success and the position of the moderate elements in
the Bolivian Government has been strengthened at the expense of the
extreme left wing. Nevertheless, the lack of effective security forces at
the Government’s disposal exposes it constantly to the latent threat
of the armed irregular militia, which is subject to influence and in
some cases control by extremist elements. Both President Siles and
his Minister of Defense3 have requested United States military assis-
tance to confront this basic weakness. Consequently, the accompanying
Memorandum to President Eisenhower4 recommends that the President
William T. Briggs of the Office of South American Affairs.
2 Documentation relating to the revolution of 1952 and to U.S. relations with the rev-
olutionary government is printed in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The American
Republics, Documents 134–173.
3 Julio Prado Montano.
4 Not printed.

make a determination under Section 401 (a) of the Mutual Security Act
of 1954,5 as amended, that it is important to the security of the United
States that up to $417,000 of Military Assistance funds, available under
Section 103 (a) of the Act, be used for furnishing equipment and training
for a Presidential Escort Battalion in Bolivia and the supply of equip-
ment sufficient to establish two Bolivian army training centers without
regard to the requirements of Title I of the Act. In a recent revision of the
Overseas Internal Security Paper on Bolivia, the OCB Working Group
on Latin America has approved this program one of its recommended
courses of action.6
The enclosed Memorandum to the President explains in greater
detail the basic situation and the type and extent of assistance
recommended.
Recommendation:
That you sign the memorandum for the President and the copy of
the memorandum from the President indicating that the Department
has recommended this program.7
6 Reference is to the Operations Coordinating Board paper, “Overseas Internal
Security Program Annexes to Latin American Operations Plan for: Bolivia, Brazil,
“Latin America 1958.”
W. Bonsal, to negotiate a military assistance agreement along the lines described here.
April 22. For text of the Agreement, see United States Treaties and Other International
Agreements (UST), vol. 9, p. 953.

Bolivia  153
BL–3.
Editorial Note
February 1, 1958.
Growing labor unrest and reverses for the Bolivian economy threat-
ened the Bolivian National Stabilization Program. Despite the wage
freeze, which had been decreed on January 9 by President Hernan Siles
Zuazo, labor groups demanded wage increases, and there was some
indication that the Government might relax the decree. A heavy drain
on exchange reserves, triggered by the Government’s announcement
on January 24 of the discovery of a revolutionary plot, and aggravated
by unfavorable developments on the international tin market, contin-
ued unabated. Documentation concerning these problems is contained
“Stabilization Program.”
BL–4.
Telegram from the Chargé in Bolivia (Coerr) to the
Secretary of State1
Today orally conveyed to President Siles substance reference tele-
gram, stressing its highly confidential nature, on basis carefully pre-
pared Spanish translation. I felt he took negative possibility increase
U.S. aid beyond original 1958 figure, as body blow. His only comment,
“What are we going to do now?”
I emphasized that 1958 program now gathering momentum and
mentioned Victor Rose3 expected arrival tomorrow, as factors which
should help substantially.
President gravely predicted, without specifying, considerable
political and labor problems coming up in next few days; as well as
While Bonsal was in Washington for consultation, Wymberley DeR. Coerr was Chargé.
3 Rose was an economic adviser with the International Cooperation Administration,
who was serving as Executive Director of the Bolivian National Stabilization Council.

widespread continuing heavy labor demands for increased compensa-
tion. Later, on parting, thanked me for message.
Coerr
BL–5.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the
Department of State1
664. At meeting yesterday with Bolivian President, Vice President2
and Ministers Foreign Affairs,3 Finance and Economy,4 Vice President
Nixon promised his support for DLF loans to help tide Bolivia over dif-
ficulties created by reduced tin exports and prices.5 He praised Bolivian
Government for its responsible policy of self-­help through the stabili-
zation program and stated that U.S. would continue its cooperation. He
offered no hope on Siles request stockpiling purchases of tin.
Rubottom and Waugh agreed investigate DLF loan prospects for
prompt action. Waugh stated would consult with U.S. director regard-
ing attitude by IBRD toward Bolivia.
Rubottom stressed importance of prompt settlement compensa-
tion problem to improve atmosphere in U.S. Congress and business cir-
cles and stimulate increased investment. Nixon emphasized beneficial
effect in Congress.
Barrau and Siles stated Bolivian Government preparing authorization
to Andrade initiate negotiations in U.S. with Patino which largest firm and
only one of three with U.S. shareholders.6 They stated Bolivian Government
prepared from time of expropriation to compensate on basis book value of
$21 million. Their good faith demonstrated by this and payment to com-
panies thus far by $15 millions. They accused companies of acting in bad
faith by insisting on different basis of valuation and in utilizing Bolivian
Government payments to finance anti-Bolivian propaganda in U.S.
2 Federico Alvarez Plata.
3 Manuel Barrau Pelaez.
4 Hugo Moreno Cordova.
5 Vice President Nixon was in Bolivia as part of a good-­will tour of eight South
6 Reference is to three major tin mining corporations, which were nationalized on
October 31, 1952: Patino Mines & Enterprises Consolidated, Inc. (a Delaware corpora-
tion), Compagnie Aramayo de Mines en Bolivie (a Swiss corporation), and Mauricio
Hochschild, Sociedad Anonima Minera e Industrial (a Chilean corporation).

Bolivia  155
Rubottom recognized existence problems and re-­emphasized impor-
tance settlement. Siles and Barrau reiterated intention have Andrade pro-
ceed without delay on basis definitive instructions.
Rubottom and Waugh request prompt consideration by DLF with
cooperation various agencies working on Bolivian stabilization pro-
gram of assist which can be made available promptly.7
Bonsal
7 A more detailed account of the meeting is contained in a memorandum of conversa-
BL–6.
Memorandum of Conversation of the Executive
Counselor of the Embassy in Bolivia (Breaux)1
La Paz, May 6, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Vice President Nixon
Mr. Rubottom
Mr. Waugh
Ambassador Bonsal
Clarence [illegible in the original], Economic Counselor
Ing. Eduardo Hinojosa, General Manager, YPFB
Ing. Enrique [illegible in the original], Production Manager, YFPB
Dr. Eduardo [illegible in the original], Exploration Manager, YFPB
Ing. Rafeal [illegible in the original], Refinery and Pipeline Manager, YFPB
Mr. Luis K. [illegible in the original], Public Relations, YFPB
By [illegible in the original] of a graph2 (translated to tabular form)
Investment
Production
(Million $)
(Thousands Barrels
per Day)
6.0 (Estimated)
7.8 (Estimated)
Bolivia, YPFB.” Confidential. Sent to the Department under cover of despatch 1012 from
La Paz, May 15, 1958. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 Not printed.

Mr. Hinojosa showed that YFPB’s production has declined in the
past few years because its investment expenditures have decreased for
lack of funds, and that if additional funds are not forthcoming Bolivia
may soon find itself again in the position of being a petroleum import-
ing country. He asked if a loan might not be obtained from United
States institutions.
The Vice President said he understood that YFPB was an efficient
organization and he recognized YFPB’s needs; however, the U.S. policy
was not to lend in fields, such as petroleum, where private capital was
willing and able to operate. Mr. Hinojosa explained that YFPB was dif-
ferent from oil monopolies in other countries in that it did not monop-
olize the industry but allowed private firms to operate also. However,
the Vice President said that if an exception could be made, YFPB would
indeed appear to deserve such exception, but that unfortunately this
was not possible.
In answer to the Vice President’s question whether YFPB had tried
to obtain capital from private sources, Mr. Hinojosa said that he had
tried several times but unsuccessfully.
The Vice President then directed Mr. Rubottom to see in what
ways the U.S. could further assist the general Bolivian budget so that
the [illegible in the original] could find itself better able to assign funds
to YPFB. He also directed Mr. Waugh to see if he could interest private
sources in the U.S. to help YFPB (a suggestion advanced by Mr. Waugh.)
BL–7.
Letter from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
La Paz, May 12, 1958.
Dear Dick:
The Vice President’s visit here was a great success from all points
of view, including the Bolivian. President Siles is very happy. He antic-
ipates substantial additional aid in the very near future through the
DLF mechanism. This would (a) relieve the pressure on the balance of
Confidential; Official-Informal. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Ambassador
Bonsal’s typed name.

Bolivia  157
payments resulting from declining revenues from the export of metals
and (b) permit useful development projects to be initiated soon.
I hope that it will be possible to realize the President’s expecta-
tions, particularly as we may be confronted with a serious dollar crisis
at any time in view of the very narrow margin on which we are operat-
ing. But what we know here of DLF’s terms of reference coupled with
the serious problem of preparing bankable projects under conditions
prevailing here leads me to confess that I don’t see clearly how we are
going to make good on what the President believes was promised him
by the Vice President, Mr. Waugh and yourself on May 6. I hope you
will keep me closely informed so that I can pass any developments on
to the President.
I assume from what was said at the time of your visit here that
there is no chance, in the immediate future at least, to use DLF credits
to YPFB or to COMIBOL as a means to pump dollars into the Central
Bank Reserves.
Would it be possible for DLF to advance funds for general devel-
opment purposes on the following basis: The dollars to be placed in the
Central Bank’s reserves and the resulting bolivianos to be placed in a
special account either in the name of USOM/Bolivia or of the Central
Bank to be disbursed as suitable projects are developed and approved?
In order to develop such projects, we would, in my judgment, need to
furnish special technical assistance to the Bolivian Government. (Our
Bolivian friends are thinking along these lines as you will note from the
account of the May 7 Stabilization Council meeting being forwarded in
this pouch.)2
I am convinced that an immediate and substantial boost to the
Central Bank’s reserves here would have economic and political con-
sequences of real importance and would do much to maintain the con-
fidence in Bolivia’s future which the Vice President’s visit did so much
to strengthen.
There would, of course, be a definite risk in the procedure indi-
cated above. As development projects were initiated, the Central Bank
reserves would be called upon for the dollar component thereof and, of
course, the level of reserves might be insufficient particularly if world
metal markets continue in their present state. However, if the Vice
President’s generally optimistic view of the prospects of the American
economy is realized, the risk would be minimized. And the risk could
be largely eliminated if there were deposited in the Central Bank at
this time only the equivalent in dollars of the estimated boliviano
2 No account of the May 7 Stabilization Council meeting was found in Department
of State files.

component of expenditures under the credits DLF might be disposed
to grant. Whether the resulting amount would be sufficient to meet the
present situation is not clear to me at this time.
Sincerely,
Philip W. Bonsal
P.S. I am sending you a first draft of the account of the May 7 Stabiliza-
tion Council meeting since I am advised that the regular pouch copies
may be delayed a few days. Please give this very limited distribution
and return to me.
PWB
BL–8.
Letter from the President of the Export-Import Bank
(Waugh) to the Vice President1
Washington, May 29, 1958.
Dear Mr. Vice President:
Re: Oil Problems in Bolivia
Complying with our agreement, I have this morning had an
extended talk with Mr. W.K. Whiteford, President of the Gulf Oil
Company of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, who stopped over in Washington
in accordance with my request.
First, I found Mr. Whiteford completely familiar with the prob-
lems, both technical and political, that are prevalent in Bolivia. I also
found that he had a most constructive attitude and approach.
The question presented to us in Bolivia was the possibility of a
loan to Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos of from $8 million
to $10  million for the purpose of furthering their exploration in the
restricted area which, according to Mr. Whiteford, is a deep well distil-
late field (12,000 to 14,000 feet).
The digging of these wells and assuming that they find the oil is
but the first stop in an over-­all problem of a magnitude approximately
ten times the figure that they have given to us.
In other words, the locating of this amount of oil is merely the first
step. The country cannot absorb the oil domestically and therefore an
Bolivia, YPFB.” Confidential.

Bolivia  159
export market is an absolute necessity. To transport the amount of oil
necessary to make an operation of this size successful would require
the building, at a tremendous expense, of an additional and larger pipe-
line to the seacoast.
The history of this situation is that Mr. Whiteford and Gulf Oil had
an open bid for a number of weeks to carry out this program and he
has the feeling that he had the complete support of President Siles and
also the General Manager of Y.P.F.B., Eduardo Hinojosa, who he says is
a Penn State graduate and a first class oil man.
Apparently, as is so often the case, the situation became embroiled
in domestic politics and the President of the country and the General
Manager of Y.P.F.B., were not able to carry through to a successful con-
clusion the steps necessary to be taken to consummate the arrangement.
Mr. Whiteford insists that the loan requested at this time of from
$8 million to $10 million would not aid, but would rather complicate
the long-­range problem for, as above stated, this would be but the first
step in a much larger program that would be necessary to complete the
transaction.
Mr. Whiteford makes the constructive suggestion that if the
President and the General Manager of Y.P.F.B. could control the situa-
tion it probably could still be worked out whereby Gulf or a consortium
of companies would go in on a 50–50 basis, not only to develop the field
but also to provide the larger financing needed, namely, the building
of an additional pipeline, and assuming the responsibility for the basic
development of the markets.
There would have to be an agreement reached to the effect that
any money paid by the oil companies as a bonus would have to be
earmarked so that it could be used for the further development of the
producing properties that are already discovered and under the oper-
ation of Y.P.F.B.
I have obtained Mr. Whiteford’s permission to discuss this prob-
lem with Ambassador Victor Andrade, with whom I have been in touch
since our return and from whom I have obtained the information with
reference to the outstanding oil concessions, etc. In view of what has
transpired, I think it would be unwise to even approach any other oil
company or oil executive until after we have explored the possibility
outlined above.
I will keep you and the State Department informed as to develop-
ments, but if you have any suggestions to offer in the meantime, please
pass them along.
Very sincerely,
Samuel C. Waugh
President

On Friday morning, the holiday, Ambassador Victor Andrade came
in and we had an extended conversation, first with reference to our
visit in his country, and second regarding my talk with W.K. Whiteford,
President of Gulf, which had taken place the day before.
The Ambassador related some of the problems with which the
present Government of Bolivia is confronted, speaking now from a
political standpoint. He hastened to add, however, that he was not a
technical man and was not certain as to whether or not he understood
the point of view put forth by President Whiteford of Gulf.
It occurred to me, and I immediately stated, that rather than
attempting outline the position of Mr. Whiteford, since neither the
Ambassador nor I were technicians in this field it would be far better to
get the two men together and therefore he, the Ambassador, could get
the story first-­hand.
There is one point in the conversation that impressed the
Ambassador very much, and that was that the amount of money neces-
sary to develop this oil field which is now under the exclusive control
of Y.P.F.B. would be ten or-­fifteen times the amount suggested as a pres-
ent loan, namely $10 million.
While we all know the difficulty that might be encountered from
a political standpoint if the Government of Bolivia made further com-
mitments in the semi-­proven territory now being worked by Y.P.F.B.,
nevertheless it seems to me that if the government officials could attract
from $100 million to $150 million in outside capital without completely
losing the identity of Y.P.F.B., it might be the possible lifesaver for this
little country.
In any event, this morning I reached President Whiteford in
New York, related my conversation with Ambassador Andrade to him,
gave him the Ambassador’s address and telephone number, and received
the promise that he would get in touch with the Ambassador at the ear-
liest possible date. I think this is as far as anyone in the Export-Import
Bank should go, particularly at this juncture.
A copy of this letter and postscript is being sent to the Department
of State in order that they may be fully informed.
I explained to Mr. Whiteford over the telephone that these docu-
ments carried a confidential classification and therefore could not be
distributed outside of government circles. He replied that he under-
stood, that he was certain that the transaction had been reported and
recorded as we agreed upon during our first talk.

Bolivia  161
BL–9.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the
Department of State1
Most urgent I have reply REFTEL. Am seeing President tomorrow
and am aware he will question me closely re urgent further balance of
payments assistance which he believes Nixon and Waugh assured him
would be forthcoming.3
Bonsal
Distribution.
believed, “Siles and his advisers correctly gained impression from Nixon and Waugh
that U.S. was disposed help in balance of payments problem here resulting from world
metals situation and that this help would be over and above contemplated FY 1958 and
Siles that his impression was correct, but instructed the Ambassador to, “make clear
also that Bolivia must to maximum extent possible do its share in meeting the problem;
such as but not limited to permitting reasonable exchange rate adjustments; improved
administration of tax collections, including collection of counterpart; effective limita-
tion on demand for wage increases not compensated for by increases in productivity;
improved management of independent government enterprises such as COMIBOL
Banco Minero, Caja; passage of legislation permitting release of excess workers.
President and his advisors should be clearly informed U.S. not in position to under-
write unlimited demand foreign exchange rate and other deficiencies in Bolivian sup-

BL–10.
Letter from the Director of the International Cooperation
Administration (Smith) to the Assistant to the President
(Adams)1
Washington, July 23, 1958.
Dear Governor Adams:
You gave me a letter dated July 22 from the President referring to a
letter which he had received about our program in Bolivia.3
The program in Bolivia has been a source of considerable concern
to us and I am enclosing herewith a copy of my memorandum of June
will note that we are asking the Ambassador and the Acting USOM
Director6 to come to Washington for a discussion next month.7
I am prepared to go into considerable more detail on this subject
but feel a historical review is not what the President is interested in at
this time. Consequently, I would like respectfully to suggest that I defer
a final answer until we have met with the Ambassador and the Acting
USOM Director and have a concrete plan of action which can be out-
lined to the President at that time, if he so wishes.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File.
Confidential.
2 Not printed.
3 The referenced letter was from Willis P. Duruz of the United States Operations
Mission in Bolivia and personal friend of the President, June 28, 1958. In the letter, Duruz
criticized the U.S. technical assistance program, and stated, inter alia, the following:
“Various evaluation committees and groups have been here in Bolivia. They have
been given the plush treatment, the bright spots glowingly visited, and the sore spots
circumnavigated. So few days have been spent in these investigations, and most of the
time at the U.S. Embassy or ICA headquarters, that it has become a standing joke among
people who really know the situation in the field. One committee member did report this
mission as having: ‘Too much, too soon’. He was ridiculed by the bureaucrats, but in my
opinion that is a concise explaination [sic] of the situation in this mission.” (Eisenhower
Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File)
President Eisenhower’s preliminary response to Duruz, July 2, 1958, stated that he
had sent Duruz’s letter to the Director of the ICA, “taking the precaution only to elimi-
nate the heading and the signature from your letter since your communication is unof-
ficial and personal.” (Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File)
4 The memorandum contained a brief history of the program in Bolivia and a recom-
mendation that Ambassador Bonsal and Ross Moors, Director of the USOM in Bolivia, be
asked to come to Washington for full discussions concerning the program with representa-
6 Warren W. Wiggens.
7 The discussions between Bonsal, Wiggens, and various inter-­agency representa-
“Grant Aid.”

Bolivia  163
I would like to express my appreciation of the President's interest
in our program and for his thoughtfulness in passing along construc-
tive comments on it.8
Sincerely yours,
J. H. Smith, Jr.
Enclosure
8 On July 25, President Eisenhower sent another letter to Duruz in which he stated,
inter alia, that he understood the ICA program in Bolivia “has been of concern to respon-
sible officials of the Administration, and that there is ground for your specific criticisms.
However, there is another side to the coin which, without going into details, is largely
political in character.” He also stated that he wanted Duruz to know that “another look
will be taken at the whole situation.” (Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files,
Confidential File)
BL–11.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the
Department of State1
119. JOINT EMBASSY-USOM
Andrade and IMF mission departed today. IMF mission has made
some progress in convincing GOB of necessity for exchange rate action.
According to IMF mission Siles however still hopes keep depreciation
to figure below that recommended by IMF (20 to 25 percent) and wished
handle rate change as part of package deal which would include end
wage freeze, freedom hiring and firing, possible new currency and spe-
cific wage adjustments and perhaps some price controls. Presentation
such package which would presumably include announcement addi-
tional outside aid (U.S. program plus IMF) would in President's think-
ing take place toward end September. This generally confirmed by
Andrade.
Andrade has been charged by President with attempting secure
loan of approximately $10 million secured by future oil royalties
and designed assist balance of payments and facilitate development

projects. Andrade will make high level attempt secure such loan but
appears unoptimistic.
Meanwhile dollar drain continues and it is matter of days until
dollar resources will be exhausted and presumably Central Bank will
have to suspend sales. In conversations with Andrade and Tamayo I
have made clear our support of IMF position.
I expect to see President shortly. Please advise to what extent I can
discuss magnitude of proposed FY 1959 program with him. Extent to
which I can give details and discuss perhaps on highly confidential
basis this program as well as possible tin barter deal and our realization
YPFB possibilities may have determining effect on President's attitude.
President is confronted with extremely serious domestic political,
social and economic problems. In order meet these firmly he needs con-
crete assurances of increased support from U.S. I would hope I could be
authorized soonest at least discuss with him program on which there
appeared general agreement last week in Washington.
Bonsal
BL–12.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of the
Embassy in Bolivia (Coerr)1
La Paz, September 18, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Hermán SILES Suazo, President of Bolivia
Walter GUEVARA Arze, Minister of Government and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs
Philip W. Bonsal
Wymberley DeR. Coerr
Date: September 18, 1958
After consulting with representatives of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF)2 and the Acting Director of USOM, Ambassador
Bonsal called on President Siles at his home at 10:30 a.m., September
2 Reference is to the resident IMF representative in La Paz, Herbert K. Zassenhaus,
who served in this capacity from August 1957 to June 1959. Documentation relating to

Bolivia  165
18, to inform him of the levels U.S. economic aid in FY 1959, pursuant
to ICATO 156.3 The President was accompanied by Walter Guevara
Arze, newly appointed Minister of Government and Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs, and the Ambassador by an Embassy officer. On the
previous day, at the suggestion of IMF representatives, the GOB had
decided to suspend dollar sales by the Central Bank preparatory to
reworking the Stabilization Program.
The Ambassador said he was authorized to state that $17 million
would be available for Special Assistance, plus a reserve of $6 million
as and if required in the opinion of the U.S. Government as a result
of “actual implementation” of the agreement to be reached between
the GOB and the IMF on terms the continuation of the Stabilization
Program. Although the conversation was in Spanish, Minister Guevara
repeated “actual implementation” in both language interpolating the
comment that this $6 million was “conditional”, and President Siles
declared that he understood the phrase clearly. The Ambassador added
that he believed Technical Assistance would continue at about the cur-
rent level above $3 million. Both the President and Guevara expressed
their pleasure at the inclusive total of $26 million.
The Ambassador said also that DLF would be prepared to con-
sider loan applications within available funds and on the basis of well
prepared projects. He noted that although the possibility of DLF loans
had been known to the GOB for several months, only two applications,
those of Carlos Peña4 and the Gasser Brothers,5 had been submitted so
far. In reply to Guevara’s question as to whether the DLF would con-
sider both state and private projects, the Ambassador said that during
his recent visit to Washington he had found interest in the possibility
of a project to improve La Paz’ El Alto Airport, which would be a state
undertaking. He again emphasized the advisability of speed and thor-
oughness in submitting loan applications.
Guevara said that at this point he would like to give the Ambassador
his frank opinion, admittedly formed only two days after his return to
La Paz, of the Stabilization Program. The Program, he declared, had
failed, because it had erroneously concentrated on stabilization instead
of production. Instead of conceiving of stabilization as the first step and
of production as the second, stabilization and production should have
been given parallel emphasis. The great effort and courage with which
3 Not found in Department of State files.
4 Reference is to the loan application by the owner of a food processing plant, Fabrica
de Conservas of Cochabamba, for purposes of expansion and modernization of facilities.
5 Reference is to the loan application of the owners of a sugar mill, Compania
Azucarera La Belgica of Santa Cruz, for purposes of modernization and improving effi-

President Siles had supported the program had been in vain because
of this basic error. Guevara recognized that the Stabilization Program’s
“failure” had also been caused by other factors, both internal and exter-
nal, such as inefficiency of Comibol and the drop in the world metals
market.
President Siles commented parenthetically that he had received a
mildly encouraging note from Foreign Minister Andrade in Washington
indicating that some favorable attention was being given to the possi-
bility of purchases of Bolivian tin through Philipp Brothers, Inc., under
an agricultural barter agreement with the provision that Bolivia would
receive not dollars but pound sterling. It was agreed generally that this
would be most beneficial if it could be achieved.
Guevara continued that he had some views to express regarding
Latin American and Bolivian attitudes toward the U.S. Citing the Nixon
incidents in Lima and Caracas, he thought they has been incited by
a few communist organizers but declared that they reflected a basic
resentment of U.S. policies, which, as in the Bolivian Stabilization
Program, has denied U.S. help in promoting economic production in
Latin America. He said he was deeply pleased that, in addition to estab-
lishing the DLF, the U.S. had “finally” changed its policy in this respect
by supporting the creation of an Inter-American development agency.
As for the local scene, Guevara declared that during the short period of
his return to Bolivia he had been amazed at the number of complaints
he had received against the U.S. Aid Program here. He reflected that it
was ironic that U.S. programs designed to help Bolivia should be reap-
ing more resentment than appreciation.
The Ambassador stated that it was probably as difficult, if not
more so to give aid as to receive it. He recalled that the IMF and
both governments had held considerable hopes for the Stabilization
Program as recently as last June 13, as a result of the decisions the
GOB had taken on that date, but the GOB’s apparent inability to carry
out those decisions had contributed heavily to the present dollar cri-
sis and had played into the hands of forces hostile to the present
Bolivian Government and to the Aid Program. He stated that during
the past few months all the dollar resources of Bolivia, including U.S.
and IMF contributions, had gone primarily to permit speculation
and capital export because of an unrealistic exchange rate. Bolivia’s
friends could not be expected to continue to support such a situation.
He added that it was not to Bolivia’s interest to maintain a rate so low
that dollar resources which should be used for such purposes as the
progress of YPFB and the Development Corporation were siphoned
off by private speculators and people with no confidence in the coun-
try’s future.

Bolivia  167
Admitting that some of the causes of the Stabilization Program’s
present plight had been internal, Guevara said that it was nevertheless
a fact that the program had failed and that the people would take the
suspension of dollar sales as evidence of this failure. He predicted a
reaction of profound concern. The Ambassador, pointing out that all
of Bolivia’s neighbors had suffered depreciation of their currencies in
the past year, and several to a greater degree than Bolivia, admitted to
the gravity of the present situation but said he thought it was more a
matter of losing a battle, and not the war, on the stabilization front. He
saw no reason why it would not be possible to look on the coming oper-
ation merely as a retreat to a more defensible position. This observation
met an enthusiastic response, with Guevara agreeing heartily and Siles
observing that the continuation of the struggle with hope is imperative.
At this point the President received a message that had originated
in London bringing news that the International Tin Council (ITC)
had just abandoned supporting the price of tin, while maintaining
export quotas, and that the London price already had dropped heav-
ily. Recovering from the gloom induced by this news, President Siles
observed that it could be announced as the basis of the GOB’s action of
suspending dollar sales by the Central Bank.
Guevara, anticipating that the break in the tin market, coming on
top of the suspension of dollar sales, would cause panic and possibly
worse if unaccompanied by some compensating cause for hope, asked
if the Ambassador would concur in a release by the Foreign Minister
of a statement summarizing for the public the information he had just
given the President on the new level of U.S. aid. (While this proposal
was under discussion, the President received a telephone call from the
Ministry of Finance saying that the Central Bank had in fact stopped
dollar sales at 11 o’clock.) The Ambassador agreed with the timeliness
and potential value of the proposed release and it was decided that he,
accompanied by the Acting Director of USOM, would call shortly after
midday at Guevara’s office in the Foreign Ministry to see the proposed
wording.6 (The ensuing communique, as reported in Embtel 155,7
appeared in the evening’s Ultima Hora and Saturday’s morning papers.)
Referring to the GOB–IMF discussions on reworking the
Stabilization Program, Siles commented that some 70 percent of the
nation’s workers had received an increase in compensation since sta-
bilization and he had hoped, by finding a formula whereby future
increase would be granted only to the remaining 30 percent, that
it would be possible to restrict the depreciation of the Boliviano.
6  The draft press release, also sent under cover of despatch 231, is not printed.

He felt strongly that the fall in the Boliviano should be limited as
much as possible, in order to limit the resultant social and economic
reactions.
The Ambassador said it would appear desirable to him that any
publicity issued by the GOB regarding the decision to suspend dollar
sales should avoid attributing of this decision in any way to the IMF
and should present the decision as one taken by the GOB entirely in its
own judgement. To this, Guevara responded heartily, saying that any
other course would expose the Government to the charge of being a
mere “puppet”.
Throughout the conversation both the President and Guevara
showed a consistent determination to attack Bolivia’s critical problems
with vigor and courage.
BL–13.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, October 21, 1958.
[Subject:] Status of Stabilization Program in Bolivia.
The Government of Bolivia and a mission from the IMF reached
agreement on a new stabilization program recently with the details
contained in a letter dated October 4, 1958 to the Managing Director
of the IMF.2 This letter was signed by the Finance Minister3 and the
President of the Central Bank.4 It sets forth the stabilization policies
and performance levels the government proposes to implement. It also
requests reinstatement of Bolivia’s drawing rights under its stand-­by
agreement with the Fund.5
Confidential. Drafted by Henry L. Pitts of the Office of West Coast Affairs. The source
text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 A copy of the reference letter, addressed to Per Jacobson of the IMF, is attached to
3 Eufronio Hinojosa.
4 Luis Penaloza.
5 With respect to the Bolivian request, despatch 281 read in part as follows: “It
is understood that, on the basis of this letter [of October 4], the IMF mission plans to
recommend that the Board of the Fund act favorably on the Government’s request.”

Bolivia  169
To date, the ICA has advanced $500,000 to the Bolivia Government
out of U.S. special assistance for fiscal 1959. The agreement repre-
sented by the October 4 letter would limit U.S. cash grants and draw-
ings from the IMF to $1 million by the end of October, $2 million by
the end of November and $3 million by the end of December, 1958,
except in “unusual circumstances” and after agreement with the fund.
Nevertheless, on October 16 the Foreign Minister made a request to
Ambassador Bonsal for $1.5 million additional to be advanced from fis-
cal 1959 cash grants, “due to an abnormally high demand for dollars.”
The dollar drain has continued heavy in spite of an increase in the
exchange rate to 11,600 on October 16. The Bolivian government has
allowed the exchange rate to depreciate but apparently not enough
thus far to meet the high level of demand of the moment. Ambassador
Bonsal and the Acting Director of the USOM in Bolivia are concerned
that the request of the Bolivian Government implies a desire to keep
the exchange rate from moving in accordance with market forces. The
Embassy-USOM and IMF representative also consider the current dol-
lar demand to be abnormal. In their opinion it reflects general belief in
Bolivia that there will be a further serious devaluation due to the dete-
rioration of the economic situation, and the belief that the Government
will not maintain its stated positions on such matters as credit policy,
restriction of budget deficit, and wage control.
The Department, with the concurrence of Treasury, plans to instruct
the Embassy to inform the Bolivian Government that the U.S. would
consider an additional drawing at this time if the IMF is satisfied with
Bolivian performance on the exchange rate and recommends the draw-
ing. We believe the ICA should be prepared to advance $500,000 now,
and as it is understood there have been several heavy non-­recurrent
exchange requirements during this month, consideration might be
given to an advance of another $500,000 before the end of the month, if
Bolivian performance is satisfactory.
There has been some speculation in Bolivia on the possibility of
instituting selective exchange controls but the Department is strongly
opposing this and has informed Embassy La Paz we do not believe
there is any effective alternative for Bolivia to maintenance of a free
exchange system. Furthermore, we propose to instruct the Embassy to
encourage the Bolivian government to take a firm stand now on wage
and other stabilization issues, since it appears that a “show down” on
issues of inflation is inevitable, and the present moment may be the
most propitious for a show down.

BL–14.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1
Washington, October 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Attempted Rightist Coup in Bolivia
Facts:
On October 21 the rightist Bolivia Socialist Falange Party (FSB)
attempted a revolt at La Paz. Armed units attacked public buildings
and the homes of some high government officials and leaders of the
National Revolutionary Movement (MNR), the Government party.
Some Carabinero (police) units apparently were involved in the abor-
tive coup and the chief of the Carabineros is under arrest. Three per-
sons were reported killed and several injured, but no American citizens
were hurt. President Siles decreed a nation-­wide state of siege, and the
Congress authorized its implementation. Since the revolt, MNR civil-
ian militias have been patrolling the streets of La Paz. The Minister
of Government subsequently announced that over 100 persons were
under arrest, and both students’ and teachers’ federations are threaten-
ing to strike if their members under arrest are not released. There are
reports that last minute efforts to postpone the revolt were successful in
all but one suburb of La Paz.
The Communists and Lechín, head of the mine workers, claim the
Government is responsible for the discontent which the reactionaries
tried to utilize. Lechín has organized “emergency committees” for the
“defense of the working classes.” La Paz and the rest of the country
appears to be quiet and censorship imposed on October 21 ended two
days later.
Background:
The FSB, the second strongest party in Bolivia, consists of extreme
right wing elements and finds some support among the middle class
and the military and police forces. It has been plotting to overthrow
the Government since the MNR’s assumption of power in 1952, and as
recently as last May it staged an unsuccessful uprising. Recently, the
FSB has become associated with a loose coalition of small opposition
Confidential. Co-­drafted by Ernest V. [illegible in the original], Director of the Office of
West Coast Affairs, and Henry L. Pitts. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

Bolivia  171
parties. Apparently the FSB considered the moment opportune for a
revolt, in view of difficult economic and political conditions facing
the Government. A new stabilization agreement between the Bolivian
Government and the IMF resulted in devaluation of the currency at the
beginning of this month. Prices have gone up, and the Government is
plagued by demands for wage increases. The dumping of tin by the
USSR and the U.S. quotas on lead and zinc have complicated Bolivia’s
already difficult foreign exchange picture.
Evaluation:
1. The full force and strength of the plot may not have been revealed
due to last minute efforts at postponement. It is, however, generally
thought that the FSB, unless it obtains substantial military or police
support, has no chance alone of effecting a successful coup.
2. While the attempted coup might normally have been expected
to strengthen the Government by promoting MNR unity, it does not in
this case appear to have done so, possibly due to the apparent weak-
ness of the attempt.
3. As a result, the leftist-MNR labor leader, Juan Lichín, as well
as other minor opposition groups, appear to be endeavoring to capi-
talize on the situation by sniping at the Government in one way and
another.
4. To the extent that the attempted coup gave credence to the
Government’s claim of persistent plotting and helped identify spots
of disloyalty, particularly among the Carabineros, the long-­run effects
may be helpful to it.
5. The effect on the Government’s effort to stabilize the economy
cannot yet be judged. Although the immediate result was the termi-
nation of a factory workers’ strike, accompanied by manifestations of
loyalty, evidence of general discontent may weaken the Government’s
resolve to impose stringent measures.

BL–15.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, November 3, 1958.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING
BOLIVIAN PROGRAM
I. General
A. Our primary objective in Bolivia remains the maintenance of
relative political stability in order to forestall a serious politico-­social
upheaval. This will be difficult to achieve unless the Bolivian economy
can be stabilized and economic progress can be made. To realize our
objective we are prepared to support any Bolivian government which
can satisfy two basic criteria:
1. Freedom from Communist influence;
2. Ability and disposition to carry out an effective stabilization
program.
In our economic policy toward Bolivia, the primary emphasis
must still be on stabilization. There should also be increased support
for development.
B. The sharp drop in Bolivian export earnings in the past two
years because of the declining world metals market and the need to
show economic progress in Bolivia in order to retain popular sup-
port for the stabilization program cause a need for United States aid
to Bolivia in FY 1959 above the $17 million already requested of the
Congress.
C. A longer-­run economic purpose remains the achievement of
economic viability and strength which will, in turn, permit the termi-
nation of emergency aid to Bolivia.
D. Bolivian performance in the stabilization program has been
less satisfactory this year than in 1957. The United States should take a
firmer stand on the points discussed in Part II below.
II. Performance in the Stabilization Program
A. If the stabilization program in Bolivia is to be successful, the
principle of flexibility of the exchange rate to follow market forces
was prepared by Samuel D. Eaton of the Office of International Finance and Development,
and cleared with the Treasury Department, ICA, and the IMF. It was transmitted to the

Bolivia  173
must be maintained and implemented. The U.S. should be firm in
supporting the IMF in insistence on exchange rate flexibility. We
should depend upon the IMF to take the lead in judging the spe-
cific rate of exchange which is appropriate and in counseling the
Bolivian Government on rate policies. We should inform the Bolivian
Government that utilization of the FY 1959 balance of payments spe-
cial assistance will be predicated upon enforcement by it, in accor-
dance with the stand-­by agreement with the IMF, of policies necessary
to keep open the free dollar market at a rate of exchange requisite to
achieve at least an overall balance between demand for and supply
of dollars.
B. Acceptable progress on the collection of counterpart should be
a condition of use of United States balance of payments assistance in
FY 1959.
C. We should attempt to obtain Bolivian agreement to legislation
permitting the dismissal of surplus labor. If legislation is found polit-
ically impractical, we should continue to explore with the Bolivian
Government other means of achieving displacement of surplus labor.
D. We should begin now to recruit a top-­grade fiscal expert for the
financial mission to Bolivia, to serve as an assistant to the head of the
mission (who is also Executive Director of the Stabilization Council)
and to replace him during periods of absence.
E. Although petroleum development offers the best long-­term
prospect for Bolivian economic progress, mining will continue to be
the country’s principal export producer for the immediate future and
must also continue to play a major role in the economy in the long run.
Reorganization, rationalization and re-­capitalization of this industry
are therefore urgently needed. As the government mining corporation,
COMIBOL, constitutes by far the major portion of the industry, and as
its present inefficient operations are a chief source of Bolivia’s deficits
we should strongly urge the Bolivian Government to implement the
recommendations already made in this regard, including negotiation
of a final settlement on compensation for the nationalized properties.
The possibility of a management contract for COMIBOL with private
mining interests might also be explored.
III. Additional Assistance for Bolivia
A. The full $17 million FY 1959 special assistance program contem-
plated in the Congressional presentation should be made available to
Bolivia. In view of the decline in Bolivia’s export earnings and the com-
mitment to help Bolivia meet its balance-­of-­payments problem made at

the time of the Vice President’s visit, an additional $6 million from ICA
special assistance funds should be provided in FY 1959 on a grant basis,
contingent on satisfactory Bolivian performance under the stabilization
program.
To assure the greatest flexibility in meeting balance-­of-­payments
emergences and to make special assistance immediately available, such
assistance should be furnished on a cash basis to the extent that PAs are
not readily usable.
B. The Bolivian Government should be informed that DLF will give
prompt attention to development project loan applications for Bolivia
which meet DLF criteria.
C. The Bolivian Government petroleum agency, YPFB, offers
the only immediate source of increased Bolivian export production.
Moreover, its well-­being and progress will help to protect the interests
and investments of private U. S. oil companies now in Bolivia. In view
of YPFB’s acute need of capital, the U. S. Government should attempt to
influence U. S. private oil companies to provide this financing on a basis
which would be acceptable to YPFB and to the Bolivian Government.
Pending further clarification of U. S. policy on the petroleum industry,
this Government should defer consideration of financing YPFB from
U.S. Government sources.
IV. Administrative Procedures for Extending Aid
Use of the cash grant technique should be continued to meet the
needs of the stabilization program. Use of counterpart for projects is
subordinate to the objectives of stabilization and continuance of the free
exchange system.
V. Other
The internal security program begun in 1957 should be continued
as rapidly as political circumstance in Bolivia permit.

Bolivia  175
BL–16.
Letter from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the
Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of
Inter-American Affairs (Siracusa)1
La Paz, January 6, 1959.
Dear Mr. Siracusa:
written on the assumption that Messrs. Dillon, Rubottom, Mann, and
others had taken a clear-­cut affirmative position on the YPFB loan mat-
ter, and that Secretary Anderson had decisively vetoed this position.
Since neither of these assumptions now appears wholly correct, I will
have to leave to you whatever use, if any, you make of my letter of
December 19. If the situation reverts to what I thought it was when I
wrote the letter, I should certainly want it shown to Messrs. Rubottom,
Mann, and Dillon.
There is a lot of dynamite in this whole situation, both as it relates
to U.S. relations with Bolivia and, consequently, with the hemisphere
as a whole, and also as it relates to the respective leadership positions
of the U.S. Government and of certain American oil interests in rela-
tions to our foreign policy. But I realize that my view of the situation
probably does not take into account all of the factors with which you in
Washington are confronted.
It is interesting to note Mr. Whiteford’s position to the effect that if
YPFB were able to increase its oil production, it would probably not be
able to market it abroad. On the other hand, Gulf, Chaco, Shell, Andes
and others are making extensive investments in Bolivia on the assump-
tions that if they find oil they will be able to market it abroad, since they
certainly will not find a market for it in Bolivia which already produces
more than its domestic requirements. If such a position were, in effect,
to develop, i.e., YPFB unable to sell while the foreign oil companies
were marketing their output, the position here of the foreign companies
Secret. The source text bears Ambassador Bonsal’s typed name.
3 The referenced letter, from La Paz, stated that the Ambassador found “most dis-
tressing” the information that the $3–4 million proposed loan to YPFB had been cancelled
because of a veto by Secretary of Treasury Anderson. Bonsal further stated, “Favorable
action on our part would have had an extremely favorable effect politically and eco-
nomically on the situation here. The prospects over the next few weeks are, as we have
reported, very dark indeed. We may well have adopted a position which will insure the
failure of our entire enterprise. It is certainly one which may postpone the day when the
Bolivian burden on the American taxpayer can be lightened.” (ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D
429, “Bonsal Letters”)

would deteriorate rapidly. This is just another phase of the same argu-
ment which we are making to secure needed capital for YPFB. I am
concerned and depressed at the statesmanship being shown by the oil
companies in this matter.
I am not familiar with the marketing problems for Bolivian oil. I
know that Williams Brothers4 has been helping YPFB to sell gasoline to
pay for the pipeline. I also understand that there might be a possibility
of some sort of triangular trade whereby Bolivian sales of petroleum
products to Chile would be paid for in terms of Argentine foodstuffs to
Bolivia. I am looking into this matter and also other aspects of the situ-
ation and will let you know whatever I can find out. In addition to the
outlet to the Pacific, there is, of course, a possibility of selling consid-
erable quantities of Bolivian oil to Argentina when the Yacuiba-Buenos
Aires pipeline is completed in 1960 or 1961. In any case, I do not con-
sider that the no markets bogy should be considered a valid argument
against a modest U.S. Government credit for YPFB.
As to the probable effect of a U.S. Government loan to YPFB on
Henry Holland’s current negotiations with YPFB,5 I do not know how
far the Department considers that there is a pertinent relationship. I
note that the Holland proposition is for exploratory work in the mixed
concession area, whereas the U.S. Government credit would presum-
ably be for equipment and supplies for use in YPFB’s proven areas,
notably Camiri. The effect of both these propositions would be to
increase YPFB’s total resources available for both exploration and cur-
rent production.
This whole situation is not going to stand still, and I hope that you
can get some favorable action. A favorable decision would, in my judg-
ment, swing the situation here very definitely in our direction. It would
also lay a basis for a gradual reduction in our grant aid to Bolivia, which
is to me, and I assume also to the Department, a major objective.
Many thanks for your New Year’s wishes which I heartily
reciprocate.6
Sincerely yours,
Philip W. Bonsal
4 Williams Brothers Sud Americana, Ltd., an oil company associated with John
Williams, which had just completed a pipeline from Sicasica, Bolivia, to Arica, Chile.
5 Reference is to the activities of former Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs, Henry F. Holland, who was then representing the investment firm of
Loeb-Rhoades, which were discussed in Bonsal’s letter of December 19, 1958.
6 Further documentation concerning the proposed loan is contained in ARA/WST

Bolivia  177
BL–17.
Memorandum from the Operations Coordinator
(O’Connor) to the American Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, January 28, 1959.
For your information or action, there is quoted below an excerpt from
my preliminary and informal note on the OCB meeting of January 28:
“BOLIVIAN OIL SITUATION
“The Weekly Activity Report, prepared by the OCB staff, stated
Ambassador Bonsai’s view on the importance of obtaining U.S. public
credit to permit YFPB (Bolivian government oil company) to enable it
to (1) maintain increased field production, (2) free funds for explora-
tion, and (3) give it greater freedom of action in negotiations with pri-
vate companies. The Ambassador underlined the important political
impact which the granting of such credit would have.
“Mr. Smith (ICA) said an International Monetary Fund team2
had made an economic study of Bolivia six months ago and had sug-
gested raising the price of gasoline and use of greater care in granting
credit, particularly in the light of the company’s unfavorable posi-
tion in accounts receivable.3 With some caution, Mr. Smith said the
U.S. gives advice and when the country doesn’t take it ‘we help them
anyway—­this must stop.’ Governor Herter said he did not have suf-
ficient knowledge of the factors which support the granting of U.S.
credit and would inquire. Under Secretary of Treasury Scribner noted
that Argentina, Mexico and Brazil will be considered for aid in the
petroleum sector of their economies and suggested the desirability of
not discriminating against them in our treatment of the Bolivian state-­
owned enterprise.”
Jeremiah J. O’Connor
2 Reference is to the IMF mission, headed by David Finch, which visited La Paz,
Lot 62 D 16, “Grant Aid.”
3 Another IMF team, consisting of John Clark, Edison Zayas, and G.A. Constanzo,
renewal of an IMF Stand-by Agreement, which provided a cash grant budgetary support
program for the Bolivian government, and was scheduled to expire on February 28, 1959.
Documentation concerning the visit is in ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 429, “Grant Aid.”

BL–18.
Editorial Note
March 2, 1959.
The Latin American edition of the March 2, 1959, issue of Time made
reference to a suggestion, which the magazine attributed to an office of
the United States Embassy in Bolivia, that the only solution for Bolivian
problems was to abolish Bolivia and allow her neighbors to divide the
country. Protests followed in the wake of publication. On March 3, a
public demonstration was held, in which President Siles and other
high government authorities paraded. The Bolivian Government gave
orders to the police to protect the U.S. Embassy from mob action, but
the demonstration became violent, resulting in damage to the Embassy
and other U.S. installations and property in La Paz. The Embassy was
evacuated and a number of Embassy families moved temporarily to
a suburban area. Bolivian police prevented further damage to U.S.
installations in La Paz, but United States Information Service offices
in Potosí and Cruro were stoned and those in Cochabamba completely
destroyed. Documentation concerning the disturbances is in file 724.00
and ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 429, “Bolivia, Time Demonstrations.”
BL–19.
Telegram from the Chargé in Bolivia (Coerr) to the
Department of State1
464-A. PASS USIA
EMBTEL 4622
In view mounting personal hostility toward Americans, demon-
strations against Embassy personnel and increasing pressure from
press, I handed the following note Foreign Minister 3:30 this afternoon:
QUOTE
I have the honor to refer to our conversation of February 27 and to
give Your Excellency the following assurances: immediately following our
conversation I instituted investigations concerning a statement attributed
to an officer of this Embassy by the current Latin American edition of
edition of Time, released by the Government of Bolivia to dealers on February 28, was seized
by MNR youth who were planning to burn it, and symbols of the United States, on March

Bolivia  179
TIME Magazine and I have found absolutely no evidence that such a
statement was made by an officer of this Embassy. I have every confi-
dence that no officer of this Embassy did, in fact, make such a statement
The reprehensible suggestion that Bolivia be abolished and divided
among its neighbors is obviously completely contrary to the demon-
strated attitude and policy of the USG as evidenced by its respect for
the independence and integrity of Bolivia and by its close and friendly
relations with Bolivia, including cooperative efforts in recent years to
assist Bolivia toward a solution of its basic economic problems. The
Government of the United States is, and will continue to be, interested
in a strong, independent and prosperous Bolivia.
Accept Excellency, et cetera
UNQUOTE
Will confirm and report.3
Coerr
Bolivia announced, “con placido”, with pleasure, receipt of the Embassy’s note, and repeated
its intention to ask the Department to take action against Time if the story was inaccurate.
Coerr advised, “For Time to reaffirm an Embassy source now could seriously aggravate
BL–20.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, March 13, 1959.
SUBJECT
Bolivia/IMF Standby Agreement
As you know, the former GOB/IMF standby agreement expired
on February 28. The recently negotiated new agreement has not been
recommended to the Fund Board because of failure of the GOB thus
far to live up to the terms offered in its Letter of Intent on the crucial
miners wage/commissary price issue.2 In the absence of an agreement
Siracusa.
2 After problems arose between the Bolivian Government and the IMF relating to
the provision of the Government’s Letter of Intent of October 4, 1958, Bolivia submitted a
static copy of the new Letter was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of

with the Fund, we have been withholding payments to the GOB. The
last payment was made on February 4.
It has long been our policy to stand behind the Fund on matters of
these kinds so as to avoid placing ourselves in the position of dictating
economic terms which have major domestic political implications in
foreign countries. We have supported the Fund on this issue because
we have felt it crucial to the success of the stabilization program this
year. Nevertheless, the situation has changed drastically because of
recent developments in Bolivia and as of today, the possibility that the
GOB would be able to obtain agreement with the miners on terms sat-
isfactory to the Fund appears remote indeed. The Government is not
only facing a miners’ strike but the possibility of a general strike in
sympathy with the miners. This whole situation is fraught with danger
and could very well jeopardize the lives of Americans in Bolivia.
It is my firm belief that the GOB has made a maximum reason-
able effort to obtain terms acceptable to the Fund and that we cannot
expect it to do more than this. I think, therefore, we should endeavour
to induce the Fund to agree to accept the last offer made by the GOB
(20% wage increase plus phasing out of commissary subsidies over
120 days), if this is attainable, or the best possible terms on which the
GOB can achieve a settlement with the miners. This should reduce the
tension in the country and allow us opportunity for a calm evaluation
of the effects of such a settlement on the stabilization effort and on the
future conduct of our program. Needless to say, it might also allow a
breathing space in which we could make personnel adjustments so as
to reduce U.S. exposure in the country. I believe, therefore, that it would
be highly advisable for you to counsel the Fund to take action along
these lines and not to throw in the sponge and withdraw their associa-
tion with the Bolivian Government.
The withdrawal of IMF participation in the over-­all Bolivian pro-
gram would have repercussions far beyond the boundaries of that coun-
try and might, especially if the United States decides that it must continue
the aid program, encourage other countries to take a harder line with the
IMF (and the United States) every time a financial crisis occurs, hoping to
by-­pass the IMF and deal with the United States directly.3
3 On March 13, the Bolivian Government promulgated a Supreme Resolution incor-
porating IMF terms, which called for unfreezing of mineral commissary prices. Renewal of
the Stand-by Agreement and U.S. cash grant aid was dependent upon the Government’s
ability to force the striking miners to accept the Supreme Resolution. By mid-May, the
Government was successful; it put the miners back to work and announced the renewal of

Bolivia  181
BL–21.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of West
Coast Affairs (Siracusa) to the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, March 27, 1959.
BL–22.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Bolivia1
320. For Coerr Only
EYES ONLY COERR
Nationalized mines must be placed on as sound an economic basis
as possible if there is to be any reasonable opportunity for restoration
economic stability in Bolivia. One of key issues to be resolved in this
connection is that of COMIBOL labor policy. Your recent reports sug-
gest that GOB may be resolved to carry through to a showdown on
commissary price issue at this time. GOB success on this issue could
have crucial effect on its willingness and ability to take on other
COMIBOL operational and management problems. On other hand,
failure of GOB to prevail on commissary price issue would seriously
jeopardize chances of its being able to continue a stabilization program
having reasonable chance to achieve even minimum objectives.
We believe therefore that entire effort of USG to assist Bolivia over
last few years may well hang in balance at this time. For these reasons we
strongly favor showdown now on commissary price issue on assump-
tion that GOB is willing stand firm on its agreement with IMF and
has a reasonable chance to win out. We mindful of course paramount
importance safety U.S. citizens but inclined believe that measures you
are taking to safehaven dependents and are planning for establishment
protected positions if needed for those Americans remaining may place
us in best position face showdown that we have had or may be likely
to have in future. Therefore consider it important that GOB continue to
Distribution. Drafted by Siracusa and signed by Murphy.

believe that in absence of renewal IMF standby, cannot count on U.S.
balance of payments and budget support.
Nevertheless, if issue comes to showdown which you consider GOB
unlikely to win and if you judge further pursuit of issue by GOB would
lead to conflict of such scope and character as to place Americans in unrea-
sonable jeopardy, you authorized, at moment you deem tactically best
indicated, to inform GOB that if it makes best possible settlement with
miners under the circumstances and even if this does not provide basis for
renewal IMF standby, USG will nevertheless be prepared to continue aid
on a temporary basis pending total reevaluation of situation with a view
to ascertaining whether any basis remains for continuation of a program
Bolivia embodying balance of payments and budget support. GOB should
understand of course that amount and form of aid for remainder this year
and certainly in future years must be related to our estimate of GOB’s will-
ingness and capability of pursuing sound economic practices.
Dept and ICA fully mindful of heavy burden of decision which
this instruction places on you. We believe however that issue is of suffi-
cient importance to adopt policy indicated above and that since timing
may be of crucial importance, there is no alternative but to place final
decision in your hands. We have full confidence in your being able to
exercise the judgment here required and will of course support you in
whatever you decide to do.
ICA concurs.
Herter
Acting
BL–23.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs’ Special Assistant (Leddy) to the Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, May 8, 1959.
SUBJECT
Level of Assistance to Bolivia for 1959
You have asked that the Bolivian aid program be reviewed to
determine whether assistance should be continued at the level of
$23  million originally programmed last September for FY 1959, or
whether it should be reduced to $18 million.
Subcommittee.” Confidential. Drafted [illegible in the original] by Leddy; concurred in
by ARA, W/NSC, ICA, and the Treasury Department.

Bolivia  183
ICA and USOM Bolivia have continued to believe that an aid level
for FY 1959 of $23 million is excessive in the light of Bolivian perfor-
mance and needs and that $18 million is adequate in the circumstances.
ARA and OFD believe that the additional $5 million which
Ambassador Bonsal, on authorization of the Department and ICA, told
the Bolivians would be available if we found it was needed and subject
to satisfactory performance by the Bolivians on stabilization, should be
provided as indicated. They believe the full $23 million is necessary (a) to
support the stabilization program to which we are committed, (b) because
of the desirability, both politically and economically, for as much develop-
ment activity as is practicable to go forward at this time, and (c) because
our failure to provide the full support Ambassador Bonsal announced
would be difficult for the Bolivian Government and people to under-
stand now, when the Government has just successfully carried through a
politically extremely risky operation to achieve an important stabilization
objective, i.e., the unfreezing of commissary prices, and also since we will
be continuing to condition releases of cash support on performance on the
stabilization commitments of the Bolivian Government to the IMF.
The relevant facts, from an examination of USOM and IMF doc-
uments as well as conversations with the USOM Director, Mr. Rey
Hill, the U.S. Executive Director on the IMF,2 the staff of the IMF and
Department personnel, appear to be as follows:
1. The United States aid program has two major economic objec-
tives in Bolivia of an immediate nature (there are other longer-­term
goals). These are (a) monetary stabilization, which the U.S. and the
IMF have in common, and (b) economic development, which is a U.S.-
supported objective to be achieved separately from but consistently
with monetary stabilization.
2. As in other countries, the U.S. relies heavily on the IMF for estab-
lishing the Bolivian monetary stabilization program and for influencing
the Bolivian government to adhere to that program. The 1959 target of
the IMF, agreed upon with the Bolivian government, is to avoid depreci-
ation of the present exchange rate of 12,000 bolivianos to the dollar while
maintaining a free exchange system. To achieve this the IMF has reached
agreement with the Bolivian government on the controls to be applied
to the sources which generate monetary pressure, chiefly the budget,
Central Bank credit, the use of aid counterpart, and wage and subsidy
policy. A key issue between the Fund and Bolivia—­the immediate reduc-
tion and early elimination of subsidized prices in the commissaries of the
mine workers—­has just been settled on a basis which the Fund considers
will, together with other commitments, justify a new standby agreement
and a further credit to Bolivia of $1.5 million.
3. The U.S. Director in the Fund and the Fund management, while
conceding that the Bolivian stabilization program might well fail,
2 Frank Southard, Jr.

consider that the prospects and performance in Bolivia are such that
the Fund should not refuse its continued backing at this juncture.
4. The Fund stabilization program for 1959, which will come
before the Board in the next week or so, is based upon an assumption
of U.S. aid in calendar 1959 at a level reflecting the $23 million for FY
1959 contingently indicated last September. The Fund projection, how-
ever, assumes certain developmental expenditures, to be financed from
counterpart, which are based on USOM’s and Bolivia's developmental
plans. It is this area of developmental expenditure which creates the difference
of view as to the need for the additional $5 million.
5. To understand the above, a few figures are necessary showing
the relationship between dollar aid, the generation of counterpart, and
the uses of counterpart:
Origin of Funds
Dollar Aid
($ Million)
Counterpart
(Billions of
bolivianos)
Use of
Counterpart
Counterpart of FY 1959
aid spent in CY 1958
25 )
Sterilization
Agreed1/
Counterpart from aid
prior to FY 1959
35 )
Total counterpart on
Counterpart from FY 1959
aid spent in CY 1959 to
date (April 1959)
18 )
Sterilization
proposed2/
Other counterpart as of
            )    25
end of April, 1959
7 )
Total counterpart on
Counterpart collections in
CY 1959 from aid prior
to 1958
21 )
Fiscal 1959 aid not yet
spent:
            ) 117
Budget
Cash
96 )
Commodities
Contingent (commodities
or cash)
Development
Counterpart collections in
1959 from 1958 aid funds
26 )
1/ Sterilization agreed upon by IMF, U.S. and Bolivian Government.
2/ Sterillization proposed by IMF to U.S. Government.
3/ IMF states that low ratio of counterpart figure to dollar figure arises from certain
subsidized procurements (e. g. wheat) and lags in collection.

Bolivia  185
6. On the basis of the above, the Fund staff asserts that if USOM
will sterilize existing counterpart on deposit at the level of 85 billion
bolivianos, which the Fund believes should be done to prevent infla-
tionary pressure, then USOM cannot finance 117 billion bolivianos for
development out of counterpart without an aid level of $23 million.
In other words, the Fund contends that if aid is reduced by $5 million,
then the equivalent counterpart would not be available for develop-
ment expenditures, and if such expenditures were financed through
other means, severe inflationary pressure would result and the stabili-
zation program would be impaired.
7. ICA is not certain that the above analysis of the Fund with respect
to the development sector is correct. Nevertheless it is prepared to agree
(a) that counterpart deposits at the existing level of $83 billion bolivi-
anos should be sterilized (except that the need for sterilization at that
level will be re-­examined periodically by USOM and IMF representa-
tives), and (b) that the additional $5 million should be drawn upon to the
extent determined to be necessary by USOM to provide counterpart for
agreed projects in the development sector, which may or may not reach
117 billion bolivianos. It also recognizes that some or all of the additional
$5 million may have to be provided in the form of a cash grant.
Recommendations:
U.S. fiscal year 1959 funds; and that the possible need for up to an addi-
tional $5 million in the form of cash grants or otherwise from FY ‘60
funds in the last half of calendar 1959 be recognized (a) as determined by
the USOM to be necessary to provide counterpart for agreed investment
projects and (b) contingent upon satisfactory performance by the Bolivian
Government on its commitments to the IMF regarding stabilization.
Disapprove ______________
2. That USOM sterilize counterpart deposits at not less than 85 billion
bolivianos.
Disapprove ______________
3. That Embassy/USOM La Paz be instructed to accelerate efforts
to reach agreement with the Bolivian Government on the development
projects for which counterpart expenditure will be required.
Disapprove ______________

BL–24.
Special National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, May 19, 1959.
CONTINGENT PROSPECTS IN BOLIVIA2
THE ESTIMATE
This estimate, prepared in response to a request from the
Department of State, is designed to answer the following specific
questions.
1. What are the prospects for Bolivia if U.S. aid is continued at
about the present level?
In this case, moderate MNR3 President Hernan Siles Zuazo will
probably be able to remain in office until elections in 1960. U.S. aid will
enable him to continue efforts to stabilize the Bolivian economy, though
at best progress will continue to be slow. Although by law Siles can-
not succeed himself, his successor will almost certainly be a member of
the MNR. Because of growing opposition within the party to the U.S.-
supported stabilization effort, the electoral period will almost certainly
be characterized by an increase in anti-U.S. oratory. However, the next
administration, while anxious to avoid antagonizing left-­wing labor
elements, will probably cooperate with the U.S. to the extent necessary
to assure a continuation of aid.
2. If Siles leaves office for reasons other than a withdrawal of U.S.
aid, what group, party, or faction in Bolivia would be most likely to
succeed to power?
If U.S. aid continues but Siles leaves the presidency before 1960,
his most likely immediate successor would be Federico Alvarez Plata,
President of the Senate, who is next in the constitutional line of suc-
cession. Alvarez Plata’s continuation in office would depend on back-
ing from ex-­president Victor Paz Estenssoro, long-­time party chief and
1 Source: Department of State, INR Files. Secret. According to a note on the cover
sheet, this SNIE was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, and the following
intelligence organizations participated in its preparation: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the
Air Force, and the Joint Staff. The members of the United States Intelligence Board con-
curred in the special estimate on May 19, 1959, with the exception of the Atomic Energy
Commission representative, the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations,
the Director of the National Security Agency, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, all of whom “abstained, the subject being out of their jurisdiction.”
which remains generally valid. [Footnote in the source text.] For the text of NIE 92-58, see
Document BL–1.
3 Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario (Nationalist Revolutionary Movement).
In 1952 the reformist MNR led a successful revolution against an incumbent military
junta. President Siles was constitutionally elected in 1956 for a four-­year term. [Footnote
in the source text.]

Bolivia  187
symbol of MNR unity, and on accommodation with Juan Lechin, leader
of the leftist wing of the party. Alvarez Plata would almost certainly
seek such an accommodation, but would not go so far to the left as to
jeopardize the continuation of U.S. aid. Failing such an accommodation
among the key leaders, a violent intra-MNR conflict would probably
ensue.
3. What is the leaning of the Carabineros and the armed forces?
The Carabineros (national police) and the armed forces are proba-
bly loyal to Siles. They, in conjunction with civilian militia units, would
probably support the MNR government in sufficient numbers to put
down any rightist or leftist attempt to seize power. However, if Siles
had left office and a violent intra-MNR conflict were to occur, the action
of the Carabineros and the armed forces would be uncertain. The bulk
would be likely to support the MNR moderates as they have in the past,
if there were a cohesive moderate group to support.
4. What would be the likely effect on the present moderate govern-
ment of a withdrawal of U.S. aid?
The withdrawal of U.S. aid probably would bring Siles’ leadership
of Bolivia to an abrupt end. He has become so strongly identified with
the policy of co-­operation with the U.S. that he would be completely
discredited and probably could not remain in office even if he tried to
do so. We believe it unlikely that he would try. There would be a strong
upsurge of anti-American sentiment and the MNR left wing would
become dominant in the party and in the successor government. These
circumstances would enable the small orthodox Communist and the
Trotskyite groups to increase their influence.
5. What would be the outlook for the successor government?
The tenure of the successor government would depend largely on
its ability to cope with Bolivia’s economic problems. If U.S. aid had
been denied, the success or government would desperately seek aid
from any available source, including the Soviet Bloc, as an immediate
action necessary to avert internal economic collapse and political chaos.
6. What would be the likely attitude of the successor government
toward the U.S. and the possibility of fruitful U.S. cooperation with it?
Denied U.S. support, a successor government would adopt an
extremely unfriendly attitude toward the U.S. and would seek to influ-
ence other Latin American countries to do the same. Internally, there
would be a violent anti-American campaign which would probably
involve acts of violence against U.S. property and persons.
7. What would be the effect of a withdrawal of U.S. aid to Bolivia
upon U.S. relations in the inter-American community?
In these circumstances, there would be a widespread sympathy for
Bolivia in Latin American opinion. It would be contended that Bolivia

had made a reasonable effort to comply with unrealistic U.S. condi-
tions for aid, and that the termination of U.S. aid in such circumstances
constituted an intolerable interference in Bolivia’s domestic affairs and
demonstrated the political folly of basing national policy on an assump-
tion of continuing U.S. cooperation. The consequent anti-American
reaction would adversely affect the ability of Latin American govern-
ments to cooperate with the U.S., especially in those countries where
the adoption of stabilization measures was a condition of U.S. aid. In
particular, the political position of Argentine President Frondizi, who is
taking determined steps toward economic recovery with a U.S.-­backed
stabilization program, would almost certainly be adversely affected.
In these circumstances, the Latin American countries would become
increasingly receptive to offers of aid from the Soviet Bloc, thus present-
ing the Soviet Union with an excellent situation to exploit.4
4 An annex containing background information is not printed.
BL–25.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Bolivian Affairs (Pitts)1
Washington, September 28, 1959.
SUBJECT
Recent Development in Bolivia, and U.S.-Bolivian Relations
PARTICIPANTS
Victor Andrade, Foreign Minister of Bolivia
ARA - Mr. Rubottom
Mario Montenegro, Chargé d’Affaires of Bolivia
WST - Mr. Silberatein
WST - Mr. Pitts
COPIES TO:
ARA - Mr. Rubottom (2)
ICA
E
Amembassy La Paz
L/E – Mr. Duvall
IRC – 8 copies
WST – Mr. Pitts 3 copies (2 cc’s)
H
The Foreign Minister stated that the MNR Party Convention in
December would probably nominate Victor Paz, Walter Guevara or

Bolivia  189
himself as the party’s candidate for next year’s presidential election. At
the moment it would appear Victor Paz was the front runner. Whoever
was nominated by the MNR party would undoubtedly follow the same
general policy of cooperation with the U.S. as the present Government,
Andrade stated, and Mr. Rubottom replied that he was glad to hear
Bolivia would continue this policy.
Concerning the present economic situation in Bolivia, the Foreign
Minister reported that last week he had a long satisfactory talk in
New York with the head of the Gulf Oil Company’s Latin American
section, and that Gulf had confidence regarding its Bolivian opera-
tions. The Bolivian Oil Company, according to Andrade, is expected to
become productive later this fall or winter in the Madrejones area, with
a possible eventual production there of 10,000 barrels a day. In the Santa
Cruz area, agricultural prospects were good, he said, with an improve-
ment in sugar production and cattle raising. He thought that the entire
economic picture was slowly improving. There had been impressive
gains in manufacturing, end some plants (he specifically mentioned
SAID and “a glass factory”) were even rehiring workers.
The past year had seen tough tough battles in the social sector,
according to the Foreign Minister. The GOB, he said, had resisted the
demands of the miners and teachers for higher wages. Andrade stated,
however, that something would probably have to be done for white
collar workers, such as government and clerical employees, who still
earn very low salaries.
Mr. Rubottom mentioned the continuing harassment of our aid
program in Bolivia, in which La Nación had participated. He said that
we understood La Nación had been somewhat better in this respect
recently. Andrade replied that he had a long talk with Ambassador
Strom2 concerning La Nación. He added that this newspaper must be
permitted independence on “little” issues in order for it to support the
government’s position on larger issues, else it would be discounted as
purely a “government mouthpiece”.
Personalities were also involved in the minor irritations between
citizens of our two countries, Andrade added. Some U.S. citizens just
don’t understand how things work in Bolivia. There was no doubt,
Andrade said, that there were different cultural roots and he said we
must all have patience. He confirmed that we were agreed on the fun-
damentals. He referred to the fact that some Bolivian officials consid-
ered certain U.S. officials arrogant, and he then mentioned an incident
when an American lady at La Paz who had been drinking told him at
a party that she was fed up with Bolivia and wanted to go home. Some
sented his credentials to the Bolivian Government on May 4, 1959.

Bolivians present thought that Andrade should have made a scandal,
but he simply passed over the insult. Andrade stressed the fact that
we could not ignore the human element. Concerning U.S. officials in
Bolivia, he said that they must be briefed before going there on the need
for understanding the Bolivian people.
Mr. Rubottom commented that we were quite aware of the human
factor, and that undoubtedly human failures creep in. He said that we
tried to brief officials going to Bolivia, and that patience was certainly
needed—­on both sides.
Concerning the McClellan Committee hearings,3 Mr. Rubottom
said that Under Secretary Dillon deserved considerable credit, as did
Senator McClellan, for the quiet way the Committee meetings were con-
ducted. There was a possibility the Committee would issue a report,4
and he hoped the Bolivian Government would be prepared to react
in a “mature” manner to anything which might appear in the report.
Andrade indicated that he intended to make a call on the Senator, and
Mr. Rubottom advised him to “let sleeping dogs lie.”
The efforts of the municipality of La Paz to collect a tax from Grace
& Co. on the disposal by Grace of commodities under the economic
assistance program was mentioned by Mr. Rubottom. The Foreign
Minister appeared to be quite familiar with this matter and confirmed
that if the tax was paid the GOB would simply have to deposit that
amount in the counterpart account. He concluded his remarks on this
subject by stating that he would send a cable to La Paz concerning the
matter. Mr. Silberstein mentioned that the Mutual Security legislation
was involved and that continuation of the commodity program might
be affected.
The refusal of Comibol to pay retentions to the Patiño Mines
Enterprises on tin barter sales was then brought to the Foreign
Minister’s attention by Mr. Rubottom. He said that we could see no dif-
ference between tin barter sales and ordinary sales, as far as retention
payments were concerned. Andrade said this was a troublesome mat-
ter, there was some reason to believe the GOB may have already paid
more than the value of the properties, and there was also the feeling in
Bolivia that Bolivia had maintained the price of tin on the world market
by its “sacrifices”. Mr. Silberstein pointed out the advantage to the GOB
of a final settlement of this problem, and the Foreign Minister replied
3 Reference is to the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate
Committee on Government Operation. Documentation relating to the subcommittee is in
APA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 429, “McClellan Committee.”
on Government Operations, “Administration of United States Foreign Aid Programs in
Printing Office, 1969).

Bolivia  191
with a smile that this would have to wait for the next administration.
Mr. Silberstein also remarked that as long as there was no settlement
Comibol would undoubtedly find it difficult to get help from abroad.
Andrade agreed that this was a serious problem.
BL–26.
Memorandum from the Assistant of State for Economic
Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, October 5, 1959.
SUBJECT
Assistance to YPFB
In my attached memorandum (Tab B),2 you were informed that
Treasury, ARA and this Bureau had concurred in a new approach to the
problem of providing financial assistance to the Bolivian Government’s
petroleum company, YPFB, which would authorize Embassy La Paz
to offer a grant of $5 million to the Government of Bolivia to be used
indirectly for YPFB and which would permit President Siles to make
some announcement in connection with this assistance. You were also
informed that ICA did not concur and favored a direct loan to YPFB.
Since that time, we have had further discussions and are now all
agreed on a new message to Embassy La Paz (Tab A) which is now
ready for transmission. You will note that the mechanism proposed
is that we would release up to $5 million in boliviano counterpart to
the Government of Bolivia for it to loan to YPFB and we would make
$5  ­million available in cash grants to the GOB to be available for
purchase at the Central Bank by YPFB to finance necessary imports.
These funds will only be made available after YPFB has purchased a
minimum of $4 million foreign exchange out of the current Bolivian
exchange budget, and will be released to coincide with YPFB requests
from time to time for conversion of local currency.
by Joseph A. Silberstein, Deputy Director, Office of West Coast Affairs.
2 The memorandum attached to the source text, matching the description given
here, was not designated as Tab B.

Recommendation:
That you authorize transmission of this message by signifying
your approval hereon.
APPROVED: ___________________3
DISAPPROVED: _______________
Concurrences: ARA
ARA:WST:JASilberstein:pge
[Attachment]
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Dillon)4
SUBJECT
Assistance to YPFB
Strom, if Embassy/USOM concurred, to inform President Siles we
are prepared to make available a $5 million cash grant which would
(Tab C)6 informed us that neither the Embassy nor USOM concurred,
inter alia, because the Government of Bolivia would find it politically
impossible to carry out the reforms we deemed necessary (increase
in internal gasoline prices to economic levels and settlement of debts
owed YPFB by Comibol and other Government entities) if the aid to
YPFB was to be indirect and secret.
In considering Embassy/USOM’s answer it occurred to us we
had three alternatives: a) to drop the matter, b) to override Embassy/
USOM and insist on the ICATO 81 proposal, or c) to seek some other
means of achieving the objectives sought. We do not believe we can
afford to drop the matter in view of the continuing urgency of YPFB’s
need for financing, and also having in mind the accelerating left-­wing
3 Dillon initialed approval.
4 Co-­drafted by Silberstein and Henry L. Pitts on September 3, and retyped on
September 14, 1959; concurred in by Assistant Secretary Rubottom.
5 Not attached to the source text, and not found in Department of State files.
6 Not attached to the source text: a copy is filed under [illegible in the original]

Bolivia  193
campaign in Bolivia “in defense of YPFB” which favors acceptance of
a Soviet loan and drastic modification of the liberal petroleum code
under which several U. S. oil companies are actively engaged in explo-
ration activities.
In recognition of Treasury’s opposition, on policy grounds, to
a direct open loan to YPFB, we have drafted an answer to Embassy/
USOM La Paz (Tab A)7 authorizing them to reiterate the ICATO 81 pro-
posal but also authorizing them to inform President Siles that when
announcing the over-­all FY 1960 aid program and his Government’s
plans for utilizing our aid, he could state that in view of the stabilization
support Bolivia is to receive from the United States his Government has
found it possible to channel some of Bolivia’s own resources to YPFB.
We have pointed out that in connection with such an announcement
he could explain the need for the necessary reforms. We believe that in
this way Embassy/USOM’s main objections to the ICATO 81 proposal
can be resolved.
Unfortunately, although Treasury has cleared our message ICA
has informed us (Tab D)8 that it cannot concur. ICA now holds that
it does not agree with the indirect grant approach and favors a direct
loan to YPFB. ICA further recommends that a survey team be sent
to Bolivia to study YPFB’s financial situation and future prospects
to provide the basis for determining the amount and conditions of a
loan. In view of Treasury’s strong objection to a direct loan we cannot
accept ICA’s proposal. Moreover a survey team would be inconsistent
with Treasury’s desire to play down the connection between our aid
and YPFB’s financing. We have no doubt YPFB badly needs at least
$5 million in financial assistance at this time. The details of what our
assistance would be used for and procedures for assuring ourselves
that our money goes for this purpose can be worked out through our
Embassy and USOM.
Recommendation
I recommend that you speak directly with Mr. Saccio9 to obtain his
concurrence with our proposed telegram. In the present context, our
7 Not attached to the source text.
8 Not attached to the source. The reference is to a memorandum from ICA to
Assistant Secretary Rubottom, dated September 9, 1959.
9 Leonard J. Saccio, Deputy Director, International Cooperation Administration.

modified proposal appears to be the only way open to us to provide
some assistance to YPFB.10
10 A memorandum of conversation between Bolivian Foreign Minister Andrade and
Assistant Secretary Rubottom, held in Washington, October 22, 1959, reads in part as
follows:
“Mr. Rubottom opened the conversation by stating that we were very pleased to be
able to assist YPFB in the manner outlined by our Embassy to President Siles several days
ago and to the Foreign Minister through the Bolivian Chargé here. He explained that this
additional assistance would become available after YPFB had received some $3 million
in foreign exchange out of this year’s GOB budget and gasoline prices had been raised
either to provide YPFB with additional local currency or the GOB with tax revenue. He
pointed out that our success in arranging this assistance to YPFB was the result of consid-
erable effort over a long period of time.
“The Foreign Minister expressed appreciation for this assistance and asked regard-
ing the condition that the domestic price of gasoline be raised. Mr. Rubottom said that the
gasoline price should be raised in order for our $5 million in aid to YPFB to be affective.
Andrade mentioned that he had voted in the Stabilization Council several months ago to
increase the price of gasoline, but that the vote had gone the other way. He added that it
might be difficult politically for the GOB to raise the price of gasoline at this time.”
BL–27.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bolivia to the Department
of State1
La Paz, January 25, 1960.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 3 pages not declassified.
BL–28.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the
Department of State1
In course discussion reference telegram I raised matter of funds in
new Foreign Ministry budget for Moscow Embassy, noted increased

Bolivia  195
Communist subversive potential which establishment Soviet Embassy
here would entail and said such exchange of Missions would certainly
raise questions United States Congress re our relations with Bolivia
whose outcome I could not predict.
Paz said he had not discussed matter with President Siles. He
noted possibility funds might never be used for this purpose saying
this common Bolivian budgetary practice. However, he said fact that
anti-Communists Siles, Guevara and Moreno3 have taken this action
indicative they under great pressure; greatest Communist public opin-
ion gains have come on issue aid to YPFB; happily, “we” have been able
calm down campaign against private oil companies and for acceptance
Soviet loan (He had talked personally to union leaders Cochabamba
refinery who pushing campaign that area, explaining his experi-
ence difficulties negotiating with Soviets); nevertheless, fact remains
“United States doors appear closed” on possibility loan to state oil
enterprise; meanwhile YPFB continues be regarded with pride by all
Bolivians who determined not let it fail and Soviets, whether seriously
or not, hold out possibility of assistance; YPFB has just received invi-
tation from Soviet Embassy, Buenos Aires, send six engineers to USSR
inspect newest Soviet drilling equipment; this is other side of coin
which United States must consider.
I said we had considered this aspect problem and are awaiting
formal GOB reply own proposal assist YPFB. Urged him use influence
obtain such reply promptly.
Comment: Embassy has already transmitted to Department GOB
reaction to our YPFB proposal on basis information received infor-
mally from GOB officials. I shall continue press for official reply4 but
in meantime I recommend that State again urge on Treasury necessity
of making adequate loan to YPFB in amount determined by study
already proposed. I believe adequate loan is crucial for our relations
with Bolivia over next five years and our ability protect investment
and opportunities of ten American oil companies in Bolivia with
which YPFB cooperating fully. Our failure assist YPFB gives Soviets
opportunity they can exploit at will. If United States attitude remains
unchanged, I believe Bolivia will ultimately accept a serious Soviet
aid offer. This will involve establishment Soviet diplomatic mission
in La Paz with all the opportunities for subversion that it will entail.
Acquisition Soviet machinery and equipment for use YPFB oil fields
will most likely bring swarm of Soviet “technicians” with most seri-
ous problems for United States.
3 Hugo Moreno Cordova, Minister of Finance and Statistics.

If we are really serious about resisting Soviet economic penetration
in this country, I believe we should make use of the obvious means
available to us, especially when we can at same time protect opportuni-
ties made available to American companies here.
Strom
BL–29.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the
Department of State1
La Paz, March 18, 1960.
No. 472
REF
SUBJECT
Formal Reply by Bolivian Government to United States Proposal of Assistance
to YPFB
The Embassy has just received the official reply of the GOB, through
the Ministry of Foreign Relations, to the United States Government’s
proposal to grant economic assistance this year to Yacimientos Petrolíferos
Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB), the state-­owned oil entity.
Aside from the Ministry’s covering note of transmittal, the reply
consists of memorandum drawn up by YPFB, which appears to be pre-
cisely the same as the memorandum received informally by USOM
from YPFB last November.2 To make the record complete and official,
however, the following documents are being transmitted herewith:
(1) copies of the original note of the Foreign Ministry along with the
response to the ICA proposal of October 23, 1959, to give Bolivia special economic
assistance in 1960, which involved the release of up to $5 million in boliviano coun-
terpart funds to the Bolivian Government for loaning to YPFB. In its memorandum,
the Bolivian Government stated that YPFB could not utilize $5 million to increase pro-
duction from proven oil reserves, because at that time it did not possess such known
or proven reserves, and that the principal need was financial support for further
exploration.

Bolivia  197
Spanish text of the YPFB memorandum;3 and (2) an informal transla-
tion of the memorandum into English.4 Enclosure No. 1 has been pho-
tostated to expedite transmittal.
The Embassy cannot account for the inordinate delay in receiving
the official reply of the GOB, having obtained unsatisfactory explana-
tions (documents having been lost, misplaced, etc.) from Foreign Office
officials. In view of the delay it had been thought that possibly the GOB
was redrafting the YPFB memorandum.
By now certain matters treated in the memorandum are outdated
and no longer pertinent (this would apply particularly to the condition
that YPFB purchase at least $3,000,000 from the Central Bank in 1959).
The long discussion this point, as well as the terms for repayment of the
proposed loan, is based both upon a misinterpretation of the conditions
set forth the U.S. offer and upon conditions assumed by YPFB but not
contained in the U.S. proposal.
Perhaps the principal point made in the whole memorandum is
that YPFB cannot utilize $5,000,000 to increase production from proven
oil reserves since at this time it does not have such known or proven
reserves. In other words, the entity’s main need is to engage in further
exploration with a view to discovering and developing other oil depos-
its. The Embassy, after having made many inquiries concerning this
matter, is inclined to agree with YPFB’s position on this issue.
For the time being the Embassy has no further comments to add
to those already set forth in the telegram under reference with respect to
this matter.
This despatch bears a Confidential classification solely because of
the reference made to the telegram of February 12.
For the Ambassador:
William F. Gray
Counselor of Embassy For Economic Affairs
ing note from the Bolivian Foreign Ministry, March 17, 1960; neither are printed.
4 Not printed.

BL–30.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Bolivian Affairs (Pitts)1
Washington, April 28, 1960.
SUBJECT
Possible Settlement between the Patiño Group and the GOB and COMIBOL’s
­Difficult Situation2
PARTICIPANTS
ARA - Mr. Rubottom
Victor ANDRADE, Ambassador of Bolivia
ARA/WST/B - Mr. Pitts
Ambassador Andrade referred to negotiations that had taken place
last month between representatives of the Patiño group and COMIBOL
at Montreal on the question of compensation to be paid for Patiño’s
expropriated mining properties. On that occasion the Bolivians had
indicated that they would recommend the GOB pay $4 million to Patiño
in addition to retentions already paid, and the Patiño representatives
received instructions from his government to inform the Patiño group
and the Department that $4 million was all the GOB was prepared to
offer, in addition to past retention payments, as a definite and final set-
tlement. He pointed out that making even this offer required a certain
amount of political courage as there was a strong feeling in Bolivia the
government owed nothing further to Patiño.
Mr. Rubottom said that he was encouraged to hear of the recent
negotiations and hoped for a settlement, which he thought would ben-
efit the GOB’s public relations abroad. He added that he did not know
what we could do to help bring about a settlement between the two
sides. Andrade said that feelings had mellowed over the years and that
he thought that it was quite possible to reach a settlement of the Patiño
problem, just as a settlement was eventually reached with the Standard
Oil Company of New Jersey following expropriation of that company’s
properties in 1937. Mr. Rubottom reiterated that in his opinion a settle-
ment was certainly desirable, and he hoped that some means would be
found to bring this about in the near future.
Mr. Rubottom then referred to information just obtained from
our Embassy at La Paz indicating a serious government financial cri-
sis caused by continued COMIBOL losses. He said that COMIBOL’s
Conversations.” Confidential. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
“Bolivia-Comibol.”

Bolivia  199
production had dropped considerably in the first quarter of 1960 and
a sizeable deficit was probable this year.3 He said we understood that
Mr. Clark4 of the IMF had talked to President Siles about this matter.5 It
appeared that action was needed in order to take those measures, such
as the dismissal of a large number of surplus miners and elimination
of commissary losses, which were required if a bad inflationary spi-
ral were to be avoided.6 Mr. Rubottom hoped that the necessary action
would be taken, although he realized it might not be possible to insti-
tute some measures until after the elections.
Mr. Rubottom also referred to the attack by a large number of
demonstrators on April 26 against the building housing the Servicios
in Cochabamba. He said that he understood that the police had even-
tually arrived and provided adequate protection, but he deplored the
irresponsible actions of the Confederation of Construction Workers.7
Andrade replied that he was not familiar with this incident, but would
inquire regarding the circumstances.
Following the discussion in Mr. Rubottom’s office the Ambassador
and Mr. Pitts continued the discussion along the following lines:
Should an agreement be reached with Patiño, Andrade said the GOB
would probably then approach the Department in an effort to obtain
assistance in financing such a settlement. The Ambassador pointed out
that the Bolivian government simply did not have the required funds
with which to pay Patiño and would, therefore, have to look to lending
institutions of the United States Government or to the IBRD and com-
mercial banks for help with this matter. Mr. Pitts replied that he could
not encourage Andrade regarding possible action by the USG. Andrade
commented that he had been assured that once a settlement of Bolivia’s
outstanding bonded indebtedness had been concluded, the GOB would
be able to obtain funds from the IBRD. Although an agreement was
reached and payments were being made to the bondholders, the GOB
had not obtained assistance from the IBRD as it was unable to finance
the studies required before presenting proposals to the IBRD. Andrade
added that COMIBOL was badly in need of funds with which to pur-
chase new equipment and improve its activities. He said that should
a settlement with Patiño not improve the GOB’s credit standing to the
of Bolivia must take drastic measures to cut Comibol losses or face a serious financial
crisis.
6 Telegram 619 stated that the situation required dismissal of large numbers of sur-
plus miners, closing marginal mines, elimination of commissary losses, and other drastic
measures, but stated that Siles was unlikely to take such action before elections.
7 The incident was reported to the Department in telegram 615, from La Paz, April

extent that it could obtain loans for COMIBOL, there would be a feeling
in his government that it was not worth while to conclude the agree-
ment. Mr. Pitts said it would not be possible to make any commitment
on this matter. He added that while a settlement with COMIBOL would
undoubtedly greatly improve the likelihood of COMIBOL’s obtaining
lion for payment of foreign debts, whereas the amount due in 1960
(including 1959 delinquencies) amounted to some $20 million. Even if
a settlement were reached with Patiño, therefore, the GOB might have
some difficulty in obtaining financing for COMIBOL.
Mr. Pitts again referred to COMIBOL’s current financial problems
and stated that the information just received indicated that drastic mea-
sure might be required in order to reduce COMIBOL’s operating deficit.
The Ambassador agreed that there might be strong political reasons
why desirable drastic measures could not be taken, “but still, if the doc-
tor recommended amputation of a leg in order to save the patient’s life,
the patient would have to make the hard decision”.
BL–31.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the
Department of State1
Despite Guevara’s opinion, Embassy considers seizure of power
by a military junta as immediate consequence of breakdown COMIBOL
negotiations only remote possibility. Present military leaders obviously
subject constant incitement to such action by right wing opposition.
Believe highly unlikely they will respond for following reasons:
(1) Believe top officers genuinely regard themselves as servants
legally constituted authority.
(2) Believe top officers doubt military strong enough to seize and
hold power.
(3) Believe top military leaders have learned political lesson from
1952, i.e., while they anxious restore order they will do so as agent of
ment by MNRA presidential candidate Walter Guevara Arze, reported earlier that day in
Embassy despatch 597, that if Comibol negotiations broke down, a rightist military junta

Bolivia  201
political authority; not assume political responsibility for the blood-
shed involved as would be case with military junta. Therefore although
right wing coup attempt good possibility prior to or immediately after
June 5 elections believe military will support GOB.
Rumors of possible installation of military junta by Siles rife last
ten days. Embassy place little credence these reports. Believe rumors
have two sources: (1) Effort of both left and right opposition drive
wedge between GOB and military and (2) uninformed speculation on
recent appointment military officers as prefects bringing total of mili-
tary prefects to seven out of nine (several these military men extreme
leftists who would not join any attempt establish rightist junta).
Should critical COMIBOL situation result in GOB bankruptcy,
Embassy believes anarchy and political chaos likely results with extreme
leftist holding political initiative. (For report on COMIBOL see EMBTEL
657). In Embassy’s opinion effort to establish military junta would only
became probability at onus stage. In view likelihood that military and
rightist leaders would be among first targets leftist night of long knives
consider fruitless speculate on which individuals might lead such effort.
Strom
BL–32.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the
Department of State1
La Paz, July 14, 1960.
No.20
REF
Embtel No:122
SUBJECT
Conversation with the President-Elect, Victor PAZ Estenssoro:
Comibol
Political Truce
Cochabamba Valley Civil War
Paz’s Visit to Argentina
The Ambassador, accompanied by Mr. Williams and Mr. Thompson,3
3 Herbert B. Thompson, Second Secretary of the Embassy in Bolivia.

of the conversation was devoted to the Cuban problem, and this portion
of the discussion was reported in the telegram under reference.
Comibal
The Ambassador inquired concerning the Comibol situation.
Dr. Paz said that the commission on Comibol was working “seriously”
and that immediately upon his assumption of office he would set into
motion measures which would in time, perhaps six to eight months,
improve Comibol’s financial situation. He realized that reforms would
not make their effect felt on Comibol for some time. Dr. Paz said he was
concerned by the possibility that Bolivia’s treasury would be empty by
the time he took office. He said he understood that the Government
of Bolivia had requested the “ICA” August cash grant of $450,000 this
month. The Ambassador said that it had been decided that the August
grant would not be made in July except with the approval of Dr. Paz.
Dr. Paz said that he believed he would be faced with a grave finan-
cial crisis soon after August 6 and hinted that he might have to look to
the United States for some special emergency assistance at that time.
The Ambassador said that while he did not have instructions to say
so, he was quite sure that the United States Government would con-
sider any proposals of the Government of Bolivia which were offered if
they were consistent with the political realities which the United States
Government must take into account in its relations with Bolivia. Thus,
for example, it would be politically undesirable for the United States
Government to be associated in a financial way with the dismissal of
supernumerary miners. On the other hand, there might be a possibility
of some assistance to the Government of Bolivia in a program of reset-
tlement of dismissed miners. The President-Elect acknowledged the
validity of the Ambassador’s comment. Dr. Paz said that he intended
to institute certain reforms including, probably, the raising of gasoline
prices, the establishment of a rationing system in the mine commissaries,
and the re-­allocation of miners to redress the present situation in which
65 percent of the miners in Comibol mines work above ground.
The Ambassador said, by way of illustrating one of the things
that was wrong with Comibol, that recently an American geologist
had talked to him, explaining that he had been hired by Comibol to
engage in exploration work. He had said that if the needed explora-
tion was to be accomplished expeditiously, it was desirable that the
initial work be done, not on the ground, but from the air. The Bolivian
Army’s Geography Institute possessed numerous maps and other data
which would be most valuable to the work of Comibol’s geologists,
but Comibol had not been able to obtain these data without paying for
them. Dr. Paz added, “And Comibol does not have the money.” The
Ambassador said that this situation seemed to him to be one which

Bolivia  203
could easily be straightened out; Dr. Paz said that he would seek to
intervene in the situation.
Prospects for Understanding Among Opposition Parties and the MNR
The Ambassador referred to proposals which had been made by
Fernando DIEZ DE MEDINA, until recently Ambassador to Rome and
the Vatican, that the opposition groups and the MNR mutually agree to
a sort of political truce in which they would eschew violence and carry
on their activities by purely legal and constitutional means. Dr.  Paz
[text not declassified] was willing, in his first message to the nation, to
express the new administration’s desire for domestic peace and recon-
ciliation. The opposition parties would then be at liberty to make sim-
ilar declarations.
Cochabamba Valley Civil War
The conversation turned to the continued fighting between Roja’s4
and Veizaga5 forces in the Cochabamba Valley. It was pointed out that
large number of campesinos who were engaged in this activity were
neglecting their farms and sooner or later would be confronted with
famine conditions. [text not declassified]
Dr. Paz’s visit to Argentina
The Ambassador wished Dr. Paz every success on his visit to
Buenos Aires, especially hoping that Dr. Paz would return with a sub-
stantial quantity of free dollars as a result of his negotiations regarding
the Bolivian-Argentine Bilateral Agreement. Dr. Paz said that he had
been preparing for this part of his trip to Argentina by consulting with
Mr. Clark of the International Monetary Fund, and he expected that he
would be able to convince the Argentine Government to release per-
haps as much as $3,000,000 in free dollars out of the Convenio account.
The Ambassador pointed it was also essential to terminate the Bilateral
Agreement and Dr. Paz replied this was one of his two prime objec-
tives in making his trip. (As long as the Agreement is in force, the dol-
lars YPFB sells to the Central Bank are blocked dollars. The bolivianos
which are put into circulation as a result of these sales are eventually
returned to the Bank for the purchase of free dollars which places a
strong inflationary pressure on the boliviano.)
For the Ambassador:
William L. S. Williams
Counselor of Embassy
4 Reference is to the forces of Jose Rojas Guevara, leftist leader.
5 Reference is to the forces of Miguel Veizaga, rightist leader.

BL–33.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the
Department of State1
La Paz, August 16, 1960.
No. 70
SUBJECT
COMIBOL: Dilemma for the United States
It is accepted that basic to any solution of Bolivia’s economic mal-
aise is increased production of minerals, principally tin, at lower cost of
production. Even should petroleum or natural gas be discovered in com-
mercial quantities, it is the consensus that this development, should it
eventuate, will have no perceptible effect on the general economy for five
or ten years. The Embassy has transmitted numerous reports concern-
ing the critical condition of Comibol, the State-­owned company which
manages and operates all the former mines and holdings of PATIÑO,
ARAMAYO and HOCHSCHILD, and which currently operates at a net
loss of $500,000 per month. The Department and other interested agen-
cies are informed of the reasons for its losses. In essence, the reasons are:
(1) serious de-capitalization; (2) worn out or obsolete machinery and
equipment; (3) depletion of existing ore deposits and a lowering of the
grade of ore; (4) the lack of an efficient exploration program; (5) an over-­
supply of workers (estimated at 6,000) who draw pay but produce noth-
ing and an excess of surface workers (65 percent of Comibol employees
work above ground); (6) shortage of operating supplies such as dyna-
mite, drill bits, picks, and shovels; (7) the high cost of operating mine
commissaries; (8) maladministration, both at the head office and at the
individual Comibol mines; (9) the cost to the Corporation of excessive
social benefits provided by the labor laws; and, finally, (10) the force of
Bolivian politics which has impeded or blocked those reforms which are
necessary if Comibol is to become a paying proposition.
I have already reported that Dr. Victor PAZ Estenssoro in his inau-
gural address on August 6 termed Comibol the major economic prob-
lem of Bolivia,2 a proposition which should be evident to anyone who
cares to know. I think it possible that my many talks with him helped
to make him alert to the problem. However that may be, there is no
doubt that the Government is fully aware of the Comibol problem and
prepared to make some decisions about it. If I did not credit the pos-
sibility that Dr. Paz intends seriously to address himself to Comibol
which was primarily a review of the achievement and difficulties of the previous admin-

Bolivia  205
and did not believe that he is the only one who can do anything about
it, if he has the will, this despatch would not be written. Two changes
have occurred in recent weeks: (1) there is widespread apprehension
concerning Comibol’s drain on the nation’s economy, and (2) there is
recognition in high quarters of the Government that something must be
done about it. There is an added element of great importance: President
Paz’ recent election gives him and his Government a greater freedom
of action than Dr. Siles had in the closing stages of his administration.
I believe that the rehabilitation of Comibol is the key to any early
economic improvement in Bolivia. I regard it as highly unlikely that
there will be, during the foreseeable future, any serious disposition
on the part of Government leaders to return Comibol mines and hold-
ings to private enterprise. Indeed, I suspect that the former owners
of Comibol mines themselves have no serious interest in returning to
Bolivia. No Bolivian with any political responsibility has even hinted
to me that Comibol should be liquidated and that its assets be offered
to private investors. President Paz told me that such a step would be
“political suicide”. The nationalization of the great mining companies
was and remains a major tenet of the Bolivian Revolution. Comibol is
the chief economic symbol of the Revolution.
Given that Comibol is the key to any improvement in the economy
of Bolivia, it would seem that the United States is confronted by a most
serious dilemma.
Although no specific position in this regard has been taken at the
highest levels of our Government, our policy has been not to consider
United States Government aid or to encourage American private assis-
tance to Comibol until the Government of Bolivia has reached a final
settlement with the former owners of Comibol’s holdings. A consider-
able percentage of the stock of Patiño Mines is held by American cit-
izens or by persons who are at least resident in the United States. I
understand that this is not so in the case of Aramayo and Hochschild.
The Government of Bolivia has been paying “retentions” to the former
mine owners and, according to the Embassy’s information, the sum of
retentions already paid has now reached over $17 million. Recent dis-
cussions were held between representatives of the Patiño group and
the Government of Bolivia in Montreal, with a view toward a final set-
tlement of the amount to be paid to the Patiño group in accordance
with the Government of Bolivia’s commitment to compensate the for-
mer mine owners. In essence, the Patiño group asked a sum double
that which the Government of Bolivia was prepared to give. To the
Embassy’s knowledge the discussions ended without agreement and
no further discussions have been held. The Government of Bolivia con-
siders that it has already paid to the former mine owners sums in the
form of retentions approaching the book value of the holdings which
were nationalized in 1953. (Mine owners dispute this claim on grounds

“book value” set was erroneous.) The former owners would appear to
have little motive, for purely financial reasons, to want to reach a final
settlement so long as they continue to receive with each shipment of tin
ore to the smelters in England a portion of the value of the smeltered
ore. It would seem likely that they would be content to continue indef-
initely receiving these retentions.
So long as the problem of Comibol remains unsolved, the United
States Government cannot expect that its economic and financial
assistance to Bolivia will have any really significant effect in terms of
improving the country’s economy. Indeed, in a sense, our cash grants
are little more than an indirect subvention which serves to make up for
Comibol’s losses.
It is understood that the Government of Bolivia will shortly
announce agreed measures for the reform of Comibol. While the
Embassy has no precise advance information concerning the nature
of the measures which the Government will propose to take, it seems
likely that they will include the dismissal of many Comibol supernu-
meraries, the closing of some unproductive mines, possibly a rationing
system in the mine commissaries to reduce commissary losses, and
some personnel changes. Such reforms, in themselves, however, will
have little more effect than to cut Comibol losses.
A major difficulty is that even if the Government is determined
to carry out these reforms it does not have the funds available to do
so. It is estimated, for example, that the dismissal of 4,500 employees
would cost around $2,500,000 in severance pay and other social welfare
benefits, and because of the probable need to resettle the workers. This
assumes that the Government would not have to pay any benefits in
the case of about 1,500 of these workers who, although on Comibol’s
payroll, have been drawing disability and regular retirement pensions
from the social security system.
Furthermore the reforms mentioned, while they should cut
Comibol losses considerably and perhaps even enable that entity
to show small profits, would not constitute a long-­term solution to
Comibol’s problems. In other words, Comibol would almost surely
be operating before very long at a deficit again unless other essen-
tial measures are also adopted. In short, Comibol will require new
capital to replace worn and outmoded equipment, to carry out inten-
sive exploration for new ore deposits, to install concentration plants
to process low-­grade ores, and for other improvements. Capital for
these investments is not available in Bolivia; it is unlikely that private
foreign capital would be forthcoming except on some basis whereby
foreign investors have a share in the management of Comibol or of
its individual mines, an arrangement which the Embassy believes the
Government of Bolivia is loath to accept, given the political symbol-
ism of Comibol, except possibly in the case of idle properties such as

Bolivia  207
the Matilde Mine. Hence the Government of Bolivia will be looking
abroad for public capital.
The Embassy anticipates that approaches will be made to the United
States Government for substantial assistance to rationalize Comibol’s
operations. It seems most probable that overtures will be made at the
same time, also, to Iron Curtain countries for assistance and that, there-
fore, the United States Government will be in a squeeze, threatened with
the prospect of important Czech or possibly Soviet Union economic (and
political) inroads into this country, if we do not come to Comibol’s assis-
tance. [text not declassified]
In summary, the problem which Comibol poses for the United States
is as follows: Our substantial program of economic and financial assis-
tance is designed to assist Bolivia in improving its economy, a condition,
precedent to political stability, the introduction of a reign of law and
order in the country, and the consolidation of a purely national revolution
which has promise of being a most valuable counterweight to the Castro
revolution in Cuba. Yet Comibol constitutes an enormous drain on the
resources of the country and, to a large extent, vitiates progress in other
sectors of the economy which is being made with our help. Comibol is the
key to the economic health of Bolivia, yet our share in economic develop-
ment here does not touch it. American public funds cannot accomplish all
that is desired until a program of reform and recapitalization of Comibol
is begun and carried through. The interests of a small number of investors
in the United States, the holders of Patiño stock, which dictate that United
States public funds not be made available to Comibol, appear, therefore,
to conflict with the broader interests of the mass of American taxpayers
whose money is not accomplishing, and not likely to accomplish, what is
desired here so long as Comibol remains such a heavy drain on the coun-
try’s economy. I believe that the United States Government’s interest lies
in assuring that the Bolivian Revolution remain a national one and that it
succeed along the general lines which it has now taken.
I am confident that within a short time the Embassy will be asked
what will be the nature and extent of United States cooperation with
the Government of Bolivia in reorganizing and recapitalizing Comibol.
I should, therefore, appreciate receiving promptly guidance from the
Department concerning the nature of my response to this question.3
Carl W. Strom
within the U.S. Government to extend loans to nationalized industries, and that the outlook
for U.S. credits and grants was negative until Comibol was completely reorganized and
made more efficient. The Department agreed, “solution COMIBOL problem an import-
ant step to ultimate disengagement of Bolivia from U.S. grant aid and budget support.
Desirable therefore that Paz administration without delay move ahead with meaningful
and effective measures for reducing COMIBOL operating losses in order demonstrate

BL–34.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Bolivia1
Department appreciates analysis and recommendations REFTEL
and, as interim reply, tends strongly favour German financing and man-
agement contract for COMIBOL over American. Department generally
interested in encouraging other capital exporting nations to aid under-
developed countries. Believes specifically that German governmental
sources might be less subject than American to limitations that could
affect the ability to supply capital to COMIBOL and that German man-
agement personnel attempting herculean task rationalize COMIBOL
would be less subject than American to obstructionist tactics by politi-
cal groups and Communist-­influenced miners.
Salzgitter is sales and distribution subsidiary of A. G. fur Berg
und Huetten Betriebe capitalized at 400,000,000 DM which is holding
company wholly owned by Federal German Government. Department
querying Embassy Bonn re Salzgitter intentions and capacity perform
satisfactorily.
Dillon
signed by Coerr.
President Paz who stated that he had received a concrete offer from the German firm,
Salzgitter, for the necessary retooling and expansion of Comibol, as well as credit for tech-
nical and managerial assistance. Paz stated, however, that the cost would be higher than
if the replacement machinery could be obtained from the U.S. and asked the Ambassador

Bolivia  209
BL–35.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Bolivia1
Embtel 2162
DEPT recognizes that GOB may in short time come under irresist-
ible pressure of leftist and Communist groups to open negotiations with
USSR on tin smelter, concentration plants, etc. and that Paz, despite ori-
entation to West, may feel compelled to proceed accordingly. (Soviets
are understood to have asked that offer be taken up through Bolivian
Embassy which they insist should be established Moscow.)3
To relieve pressure on Paz and buy time to implement our imme-
diate and long range plans for assistance to COMIBOL, you should
subject to your approval, recommend that Paz consider the following
course of action (1) under no circumstances should he permit the estab-
lishment of a Soviet diplomatic mission in La Paz since it would be
used primarily in an effort to subvert Bolivia and to replace Paz by
someone amenable to Soviet direction; (2) if irrestible pressure devel-
ops, Bolivia offer to send a mission to Moscow which would be strictly
commercial in nature to discuss the Soviet offer; and (3) this mission
determine what conditions are attached to the Soviet offer and whether
the Soviets are genuinely prepared to provide equipment and con-
vertible currency for loans required to meet attendant Bolivian local
currency requirements. Mission could well announce in advance that
it wants to determine whether Soviets offer aid without any strings
attached as frequently claimed. This play would prevent USSR from
exercising pressure within Bolivia and would buy time until U.S. posi-
tion firm. Bolivians would be able to evaluate full implications Soviet
offer and consider pitfalls establishment of Soviet Embassy and pres-
ence of Soviet technicians and political agent would pose for Bolivian
independence and duration Paz administration.
Dillon
Acting
Robert W. Weise, Jr., Officer in Charge of Bolivian Affairs, and signed by Milton Barall,
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs.
Government was in grave difficulties and that he was in need of an immediate loan of
3 Additional documentation concerning Bolivian-Soviet relations is in decimal files

BL–36.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the
Department of State1
I agreed President Paz analysis political situation (EMBDES 237,5
243). Unable measure what ultimate dimensions crisis will be but after
considering all evidence with great care I have concluded Paz govern-
ment will be in serious danger very soon, considering its near bank-
ruptcy. While foreign exchange reserves of Central Bank are as large
as they have been in more than year, they are by no means adequate
enable Paz weather crisis. Crisis comes at time when internal and exter-
nal leftist pressures are steadily increasing in part as direct result Soviet
and Czech offers assistance which have been most astutely timed. [text
not declassified].
We decided in July we should have full-­scale Bolivian policy
review November or December. This is most urgently required now.
I therefore request consultation orders.
I agreed some time ago speak graduation American School Oruro
November 12 and planned visit Cochabamba, Tarija afterwards.
Should appreciate Department’s decision immediately in case nec-
essary name substitute for Oruro and cancel Cochabamba and Tarija.
If Department agrees, wish leave La Paz November 12.6 If I am
ordered consultation hope ICA will give Hill orders also.
Strom
great pressure on the Paz Government, he was not yet prepared to recommend massive,
November 11, to speak at the Colegio Anglo-Americano Oruro, which would furnish an
excellent occasion to make a statement about how the U.S. intended to aid in the rehabil-
which the Ambassador told the President that he was very worried about the current
political situation, which Paz had been describing to Strom in conversations during the
October 27, 1960, concerning the imminence of a political and economic crisis in Bolivia
present, we believe critical situation requires your presence La Paz. Meanwhile we giving

Bolivia  211
BL–37.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Bolivian Affairs (Weise)1
Washington, November 9, 1960.
SUBJECT
The Critical Economic and Political Position of Bolivia
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Victor Andrade
Under Secretary Dillon
ARA - Mr. Barall MA
WST - Mr. Weise
Ambassador Andrade said that he wished to describe briefly the
critical and uncomfortable situation in which the Paz Government was
finding itself as the result of the new Soviet drive in Bolivia. During
the past month, following Khrushchev’s offer of a tin smelter and tin
concentration facilities to Bolivia, pressures from Communist and pro-­
Castro elements have been mounting to the point where these forces
are now threatening the political stability and very existence of the Paz
Government. Ambassador Andrade emphasized that the Bolivian rev-
olution is a national revolution and that, unlike the Castro revolution of
Cuba which has sold out to Khrushchev, the Government of the MNR
has resolutely defended itself against Communist domination.
The Soviet offer of a tin smelter, Andrade said, has revived certain
popular concepts regarding Bolivia’s dependence upon world market-
ing arrangements for the sale of tin, which although erroneous in some
respects, were nevertheless widely spread. Considering that Bolivia
is the largest producer of tin in this hemisphere and that the United
States is the largest consumer of tin in the world, many Bolivians do
not understand why their country must market its tin through Great
Britain and be dependent upon British smelters. Many Bolivians also
do not understand why the Texas City smelter was not built in or near
Bolivia where its operation would have been more economical and
advantageous to the Bolivian tin industry. Failure of the United States
to give a satisfactory answer to these and other questions relating to
the Bolivian tin problem has led many Bolivians to feel that the United
States is not interested in helping Bolivia free itself from outside inter-
national controls over the world tin market.
Bolivians also remember, Andrade claimed, that when the United
States ceased to buy tin for its stockpile, world prices dropped, which

resulted in substantial losses to the Bolivian mining industry. In regard
to the U.S. stockpile purchases of tungsten, Andrade said, Bolivians
recall that in 1953, following nationalization of the mines, the United
States Government refused to allow GSA contracts signed with the for-
mer private mine owners to be subrogated to the Bolivian Government.
Andrade said he recognized there may have been legal reasons which
prevented GSA from agreeing to subrogate these contracts. However, in
the minds of many Bolivians, the requirement that ore sales to the U.S.
stockpile be consummated through the former companies meant only
that the GOB had to pay to the private owners $10 out of every $54 per
unit of tungsten shipped, even though these companies no longer oper-
ated the mines. Andrade said that most people were not aware of the
legal or technical reasons for the U.S. position on these matters and
that consequently the Communists had exploited public ignorance by
accusing the United States of having failed to give Bolivia a fair return
on its sales of tungsten to the U.S. stockpile.
Ambassador Andrade then emphasized that COMIBOL is pres-
ently confronted with grave and serious problems which have been
aggravated by the mounting threats of Communist-­led strikes in the
mining sector. Andrade said he felt it necessary to “dramatize” the
Bolivian situation in order to impress upon Mr. Dillon Bolivia’s urgent
need for U.S. assistance. Andrade pleaded, “I do not wish Bolivia to
become a guinea pig of the cold war.” He hoped that his government
could avoid sending a mission to Moscow to discuss the Bolivian tin
offer in view of the many political risks involved.
Mr. Dillon expressed interest in the Ambassador’s presentation
and evaluation of the present Bolivian political crisis. He said that,
according to studies of the Bolivian tin industry made by Bolivian
and foreign technicians it appeared that a tin smelter was not needed.
What these studies did point out was that concentration facilities and a
rationalization of the Bolivian mining industry were urgently needed.
Mr. Dillon also indicated that the Department was studying the effect
a moratorium on retention payments to the former mine owners might
have, both from the economic and legal standpoint. He said it was our
understanding that the former mine owners had now received approx-
imately $20 million in compensation through retention payments on
ore shipped from nationalized mines. Ambassador Andrade said he felt
that the alternatives mentioned by Mr. Dillon would be of interest to the
Bolivian Government and would offer an appealing counter-­proposal
to the Soviet offer of a tin smelter. Mr. Dillon assured Ambassador
Andrade that the Department would continue to give careful attention
to the problems of Bolivia’s mining industry.

Bolivia  213
BL–38.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bolivia to the Department
of State1
La Paz, November 16, 1960.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 4 pages not declassified.
BL–39.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bolivia to the Department
of State1
La Paz, November 20, 1960.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 3 pages not declassified.
BL–40.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Bolivia1
170. For Strom from Mann
Department agrees every reasonable effort should be made to
support Paz regime and understands that downfall of government
may lead to extreme leftwing and possibly communist takeover.
(Embtel 247)
Drafted by Mann and signed by Barall.

For this reason in addition to special assistance program Dept has
endeavored to work out practicable program for putting Comibol oper-
ation on sound basis as prerequisite to economic and political viability
of any Bolivian Government. We estimate the cost of this program (apart
from $10 million for modern concentration plants and facilities) some-
where in neighborhood of $10 million. This is in addition to approxi-
mately $4 million which is needed for separation pay for 5000 excess
employees and which would be partially met from PL 480 program.
Inter-American Bank mission now in Bolivia and there is reason to
hope Bank will give favorable consideration to loan possibly in neigh-
borhood of $5 million and will be in position to negotiate late January
or early February. Department encouraging Bank give this first prior-
ity. Department has also urged German Government extend exporter
credit and conclude private management contract with Comibol.
In addition Department understands Williams Harvey considering
$2 million loan for purchase of machinery and equipment. Department
realizes it may be necessary to fill gap if one or more of these plans fall
through. We do not consider it prudent, however, given our own bal-
ance of payments situation and other problems, to address this aspect
of problem in advance of knowledge of outcome of these plans.
Second part of problem is need for concentration plants and atten-
dant facilities (Deptel 165). Dept. intended to help Paz by announce-
ment of willingness to make loan not to exceed $10 million for this
purpose under conditions set out in that telegram.
[text not declassified]
Please telegraph urgently your estimate whether program as outlined
above is inadequate and if so specifically what you consider Department
should do. Specifically Department wishes to know whether, re con-
centration plants, offer should be made to Paz. If $5 million needed for
immediate aid in lieu of $10 million offer for what purposes and projects
would $5 million be used? Also could situation be alleviated by immedi-
ate release frozen budget support and counterpart funds?
Your recommendations urgently requested.
Herter

Bolivia  215
BL–41.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Bolivia1
1. Department accepts Embassy conclusion that aside from offer
contribute long-­term solution COMIBOL, immediate short-­term assis-
tance to Paz, primarily in budget support field, appears necessary.
2. We propose that $5 million be made available immediately to
Central Bank consisting of balance of calendar year 1960 cash grant
ently planned for use periodic cash releases in calendar year 1961.
aid in form of loan. In view of (a) nature financial crisis and limited
prospects sufficient recovery in foreseeable future to permit repay-
ment and (b) in view expectation Bolivian Government that budget
support funds would be available on cash grant basis, we inclined
favor asking $5 million available to Central Bank as cash grant.
However, Embassy if it believes there are significant reasons for doing
so may offer make funds available part loan, part grant or all on loan
basis at its discretion. You may also require such prior approvals of
disbursements by Central Bank as you believe in U.S. interest. (In any
event such portion of funds as appears desirable may be advanced by
Central Bank on a loan rather than a grant basis. If this arrangement
followed repayment would be made to the Central Bank but not RPT
NOT to U.S. If there appeared to be advantages to U.S. such repay-
ments could be earmarked for use for purposes mutually agreed). In
summary Embassy may make $5 million available on such basis as it
determines most desirable and effective.
4. FYI and for use if question asked, $3,150,000 advance from cal-
endar year 1961 budget support would be made without prejudice to
amount finally provided for this purpose, although we assume that
subsequent cash grants for budget support in calendar year 1961 will
be smaller than it would otherwise be necessary to make.
drafted by Dennis A. Fitzgerald, Deputy Director for Operations, IGA, and Joseph S. Kyle
of the Office of the Deputy Coordinator for Mutual Security; cleared by Mann, and signed
by John O. Bell, Deputy Coordinator for Mutual Security.
2 Co-­drafted by Dennis A. Fitzgerald, Deputy Director for Operations, IGA, and
Joseph S. Kyle of the Office of the Deputy Coordinator for Mutual Security; cleared by
Mann, and signed by John O. Bell, Deputy Coordinator for Mutual Security.

5. No objection to provision $5 million on piecemeal basis as
indicated EMBTEL 257 and to obtaining such quid pro quos as early
increase in gasoline prices (EMBTEL 264) or some or all of actions enu-
merated EMBTEL 257.
Herter
BL–42.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the
Department of State1
La Paz, December 24, 1960.
325. Communique from Secretary General Presidency announces
1) government USSR has officially informed GOB its willingness receive
in Moscow commission technicians and economists to discuss A) tin
smelter offer B) credits up to $150 million for technical assistance equip-
ment and new installations Comibol and YPFB C) possibility long–term
acquisition Bolivian mine production 2) GOB has reaffirmed decision
ascend commission under Minister Mines discuss Soviet proposals
3) commission to travel Moscow latter half January.
Strom
patch time is recorded on the source text; it was received in the Department on December

Bolivia  217
BL–43.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Bolivian Affairs (Weise)1
Washington, December 29, 1960.
SUBJECT
Courtesy Call of Vice President of Bolivia Juan Lechin on Acting Secretary of State
Livingston T. Merchant
PARTICIPANTS
Juan Lechin, Vice President of the Republic of Bolivia
Victor Andrade, Bolivian Andrade Ambassador the United States
Mr. Livingston T. Merchant, Acting Secretary
ARA - Mr. Mann
WST - Robert W. Weise, Jr.
Lechin said that the purpose of his visit was to strengthen relations
between Bolivia and the United States. He said he wished to discuss
two problems with Mr. Merchant—­the first was related to the situation
of anarchy which prevailed among labor in the Bolivian mining indus-
try. The reason mineral production has not declined more in the past
year, he said, is due solely to the dedication of the individual miner and
his desire to maintain output. However, in order to increase produc-
tion, the miners need food, tools, machinery, and prompt payment of
wages, elements which are lacking under present conditions.
Lechin said that many of the difficulties confronting the Bolivian
mining industry were created by Patiño and the former mine owners
because of their failure to plan long range production and to make pro-
vision for an adequate supply of electric power. The principal cause for
the decline in minerals production is, however, the lack of capital.
Lechin then said that United States aid to COMIBOL (for mod-
ern concentration facilities) was a step in the right direction and that it
would help increase production, although it could not be expected that
production would reach the 1952 level in the immediate future. He esti-
mated that mineral production could be increased by about 30% within
a year after the reorganization of COMIBOL. The shortage of electric
power was still a factor which would continue to limit production.
The second problem raised by Lechin concerned the difficulties
with which the mine workers themselves were confronted. These
difficulties included 1) lack of pulperia (commissary supplies); 2) ter-
minal benefits for excess miners; and 3) the inability of COMIBOL to
meet payrolls when due. He claimed the workers have had to accept

a lower standard of living as the result of the economic stabilization
program imposed on Bolivia by the IMF. IMF policy, he said, is too strict
and does not allow sufficient flexibility. He then said that, as a labor
leader, he was concerned with the permanent condition of strikes in
the mines. These strikes occur not because the Bolivian Government is
a Communist government (which he denied), but rather because the
workers do not have sufficient tools, food and equipment with which
to perform their tasks. These negative condition, Lechin said, have cre-
ated an atmosphere favorable to enemies of the Bolivian Government.
He identified these elements which threaten the Government at present
as not the “reactionaries or conservatives” but rather the Communists.
He said Cuban intervention and the Soviet offer of a tin smelter have
contributed much to the deterioration of the situation in Bolivia. He
said the Communists were trying to gain control of the rank and file
of the labor movement and to displace the MNR which has had lead-
ership of labor for the past sixteen years. He also said the Communist
drive for control in Bolivia is directed towards interests and ends akin
to those of Bolivia. [text not declassified]
He then turned to the United States aid program. While a great
deal of money has been spent in Bolivia, he said, the results of this
assistance have not been as effective they might have been because not
enough emphasis has been placed on industrial and agricultural devel-
opment projects. The only exception, he noted, is in the Department of
Santa Cruz, where the United States aid program has made possible a
substantial increase in sugar and rice production in the past year. Santa
Cruz is the only province which has not suffered from the current eco-
nomic crisis. While he said he did not consider that the United States
was responsible for the current crisis in Bolivia, he nevertheless urged
that our aid program be modified in such a way as to eliminate some of
its draw backs. He said that our aid program should be directed toward
reestablishing a favorable atmosphere for economic development as
existed prior to 1957 when our aid became tied in with the IMF stabili-
zation program.
According to Lechin, the USSR offer of a tin smelter and economic
aid has spread a false belief that the Soviets could solve all the problems
of Bolivia. This concept is false, he added; help to the mining and petro-
leum sectors of the economy such as is proposed by the Soviets will not
benefit the people for sometime to come. Mr. Lechin then returned to
his original premise that the crisis in Bolivia is real and that there is an
immediate need for emergency aid to tide the economy over until the
middle of 1961 when the benefits of the reorganization of the mining
industry will begin to become effective. He emphasized that, in order to
restore confidence and re-­establish political and economic stability, the

Bolivia  219
Bolivian Government has an immediate need for loans to cover current
budgetary deficits.
Mr. Merchant thanked Mr. Lechin for his statement and said that
the Department would consider all elements of his presentation care-
fully. He said that the United States placed great importance upon the
continuance of good relations with Bolivia, which have always existed
between the two countries. He said that the United States is not unaware
of the problems of Bolivia and that we are keenly aware of the need
for economic development throughout Latin America. Mr. Merchant
also emphasized that economic development must be built upon sta-
bilization and expressed the hope that the triangular undertaking
recently announced by the United States government, Inter-American
Development Bank and the German Government will be a beginning in
the solution of Bolivia’s long-­range problems. Mr. Merchant referred to
the President’s Special Social Development Program for Latin America
for which the President has asked Congress for an appropriation
of $500,000,000. He said he hoped that when Congress convened in
January it would act upon this program and make the necessary funds
available.
Mr. Merchant observed that the United States is now in a period
between two administrations, which makes it difficult for us as well
as for our friends. He felt certain, however, that the new administra-
tion will not be less interested in Bolivia and he again assured Vice
President Lechin that his statement will be considered very carefully
by the Department of State, including other interested agencies of the
United States Government.

Chile: U.S. Relations with Chile
CH–1.
Despatch from the Chargé in Chile (Belton) to the
Department of State1
Santiago, March 21, 1958
No. 957.
SUBJECT
Embassy Views on Problems Resulting from an Increase in U.S. Copper Import Tax
The Embassy already has submitted press criticisms regarding the
proposed increase in the United States copper import tax, and a note from
the Minister of Foreign Affairs expressing concern about this proposal.
The Embassy naturally also is concerned about the proposal and foresees
any such import tax causing serious problems in United States-Chilean
relations. The following are some of the major problems envisaged.
With copper being Chile’s most important single export, and with
the production of about 90 percent of that copper being under the control
of two very large American companies, the issue of “copper” always is
a major factor in United States-Chilean relations. Because the industry is
so important to Chile and because it is almost completely foreign-­owned,
copper problems are extremely susceptible to local political exploitation.
Ambassador in Chile, Cecil B. Lyon, left his post on February 25, 1957; his successor, Walter
2 The referenced despatch from Santiago, enclosed a translation of the note from the
Chilean Foreign Office, dated February 25, 1958, expressing the Chilean Government’s
concern with respect to the bill, S. 2998, then before the U.S. Senate, which proposed a
3 This despatch from Santiago transmitted a summary of local press criticism during
4 This despatch from Santiago summarized continuing press criticism of the pro-

Chile  221
Added to these permanent factors is the complication that 1958 is a
Presidential election year in Chile. Moreover, 1958 is going to be a very
difficult year for Chile because of drastic drops in tax income and foreign
exchange receipts from the copper industry as a result of the low interna-
tional price of copper (see below for a discussion of this point).
Considering the current precarious status of the Chilean economy,
the application of any import tax by the United States on Chile’s lead-
ing export will have a deadly psychological effect locally. The impo-
sition and increasing of the import tax will be even more serious. The
Embassy believes that the United States import tax will become a local
political issue which will be exploited to extremes with little regard for
mining” copper actually was sold in the United States, and in 1957 only
14.7 percent). The average Chilean is not acquainted with the latest sta-
tistics of the copper trade, and if all he hears and sees is that the United
States is impeding the sale of Chilean copper in the United States, that
is what he will believe.
There can be no doubt that the important leftist political parties of
Chile will be glad to have such an issue handed to them, on a copper
platter so to speak, and also that these parties will utilize the issue as
widely and loudly as possible. The Presidential campaign thus far has
centered primarily or personalities, so that a new issue will be most
welcome by those left-­wing parties who can make use of it to whip up,
and capitalize on, anti-United States sentiment within the country.
The Embassy already has expressed its concern over the possibility
of an extreme-­left victory in September, particularly if economic condi-
tions worsen here. Therefore, the Embassy believes that the proposed
United States copper import tax of 4 cents cannot possibly help in the
achievement of United States objectives in Chile but could seriously
endanger them if the tax issue were to be instrumental in electing a far-­
left President.
The second serious problem envisaged by the Embassy is that if
the United States increases its protection against copper imports, it will
become much more difficult to maintain Chile’s cooperation in main-
taining embargoes against shipment of strategic materials to the Soviet
Bloc. If the United States, by raising import taxes, in effect indicates that
Chilean copper is unwelcome within its territory, Chilean cooperation
on the embargo policy undoubtedly will be subjected to great pressure
and might well be abandoned. Certainly United States moral suasion
for maintenance of the cooperation policy would have a hollow ring.
There has been a great deal of talk in recent years of “trade, not aid” in
United States foreign policy. In the eyes of Chileans, if we cannot grant
Chile more aid, the least we can do is let them trade. But, if Chile must
seek new markets for copper displaced from the United States mar-
ket, where can this copper go? It cannot go into the Western European

market. That market already is surfeited and suppliers, including Chile,
have cut back production. Where then, is there another market?
The siren song of sales to the Sino-Soviet sphere long has been
heard in Chile, despite the obvious lack of practical results from previ-
ous attempts to sell large quantities of copper. The Embassy already has
reported the increasing amount of local attention being devoted to pos-
frequent reference to free trade in all forms of copper. It may well be
that the Soviet Bloc really does not need Chilean copper, and would not
buy substantial amounts. But if a United States import tax of 4 cents is
placed on copper, the already growing pressure in favor of unlimited
sales to the Bloc could well become an irresistible avalanche. A more
serious possibility is that even if the Soviet Bloc does not urgently need
additional copper, it might well decide that 1958 is the key moment
for substantially increasing Chilean-Soviet trade relations. This would
present obvious political as well as economic problems for the United
States. The Bloc might seize this as a golden opportunity to acquire
political ties with Chile at a relatively cheap price through purchase of
copper even if above its own immediate needs.
The final point which the Embassy feels must be given weight
in considering possible repercussions from the increase of the copper
import tax to 4 cents is in reference to the two American copper com-
panies doing business here with a combined total investment in the
neighborhood of US$600 million. Because of this “Yanqui” foreign-­
capital nature of Chile’s copper mining industry, there is a great deal
of unfriendliness in Chile towards the companies. Only after labo-
rious efforts, in which this Embassy played a significant role, was a
new arrangement arrived at between the Chilean Government and the
American companies, in the form of the New Copper Law, No. 11,828
of May 5, 1955. This law established new tax rates for the companies
and did away with discriminatory exchange rates, previous treatment
accorded the companies having reached near-­confiscation levels. The
law also returned control of copper sales to the companies. In return
for this new deal from the Government, the American companies par-
ticularly Anaconda, began large new investment programs aimed at
increasing copper production.
The New Copper Law never has been accepted by large sectors
of the Chilean public and political body, on the time-­worn but still
very popular basis that it was a “sell out” of Chile’s natural resources
to foreign interests. The Law has come under increasing attack since

Chile  223
mid-1957, when copper prices continued their unchecked decline and
rumors began circulating about a possible reduction in production.
Now, with prices still lower and Government income from the tax lev-
ied on the companies’ profits down greatly, criticism of the New Law
is increasing.
The grim realities of Chile’s reduced income from copper sales
may be seen in recent statistics. In 1956, Chile received a total of
US$370,100,000 in hard currency exchange. Of this, the large copper
industry contributed US$196,420,000, or 53 percent of the total. Of
the total copper payments, US$128,610,000 was in the form of income
tax payments to the Government. In 1957, Chile received a total of
US$313,200,000 in hard currencies, with the copper industry providing
$143,044,000, or 46 percent of the total. Of the total copper payments,
only US$73,602,000 consisted of income tax to the Government. For
1958, the two American companies estimate that their total contribu-
tion in foreign exchange to the Chilean economy will be about US$109
million, of which only US$31,622,000 will be income tax paid to the
Government. The Embassy estimates that the $109 million will consti-
If the imposition of a 4 cent duty by the United States on copper
imports aggravates Chile’s loss of income (or if people here think it has,
which is the same in political effect), the Embassy believes that polit-
ical pressure will increase for a modification of the New Copper Law
in order to get more money for the Government. In fact, the Embassy
understands on a very confidential basis that such a proposal already
has been made in a paper prepared by the Department of Studies of the
Central Bank. Taking into consideration the catastrophic drop which has
occurred already in Chile’s hard currency receipts, action by the United
States which results in cutting, or is interpreted as cutting, Chile’s dollar
income still further is bound to give rise to widespread anti-American
feelings. This would come at a time when the feeling in Chile already
is that the United States is not as sympathetic as it should be towards
Chile’s current financial difficulties and is not helping Chile to the degree
which Chile would expect on the basis of the United States’ expression of
interest in the well-­being of the Chilean economy.
Modification of the New Copper Law could result in higher tax
rates on copper earnings, discriminatory exchange rates, or both, plus
the Government’s taking over control of sales of copper, as was the cast
from 1952 to mid-1955. After all the difficulties encountered in obtain-
ing the present Law and the very serious problems which existed for the
United States copper interests in Chile, any change in the Law would be
a serious setback to United States objectives in Chile.
The Embassy assumes that there is general agreement that the
long-­term strategic interests of the United States will be served best

if Chile is developed as a dependable source of large amounts of cop-
per. The American companies’ production dropped sharply in the years
of unfavorable tax and exchange treatment, and important expansion
programs were delayed. The effect of serious changes in the New
Copper Law could well be that the companies, particularly Anaconda,
might have to re-­examine their long-­range investment programs in
Chile, the result being a decrease in Chile’s actual and potential copper
production.
In conclusion, the Embassy wishes to add its strong belief that the
increase in the United States copper import tax will also raise serious
side problems in Chilean-United States relations. It could, for exam-
ple, seriously affect or preclude passage of certain pending projects,
such as the modification of the General Electrical Services Law to
permit the American and Foreign Power Company to obtain a higher
profit rate and enable it to carry out a large investment program, and
the Government bill to permit private and foreign capital to develop
Chilean petroleum resources.
The Embassy hopes that consideration can be given to means
other than a copper import tax to provide relief to American copper
producers, including possibly measures which have been suggested
in other quarters, such as an outright subsidy or increased stockpile
purchases. Such measures naturally would require the expenditure of
United States funds, but at least the expense would not include damag-
ing relations of the United States with a country in which we have high
political, economic, and strategic stakes.6
William Belton
Charge d’Affaires a.i.
Embassy should not undertake a detailed reply to the Foreign Minister’s note of
February 25 concerning the proposed copper import tax, but rather should state that the
observations made had been noted and that the Department would make every effort to
assure they were given full consideration as regards any tariff action. The Department
further stated that it generally agreed with the Embassy’s views regarding the problems
that would arise in the event S. 2998 were enacted.
The Department also commented on the bill, S. 3234, to repeal the current suspen-
sion of import duties on copper. Without congressional action, the suspension would ter-
The Department did not propose to press for continuance of the duty suspension after
June 30, since “there is reason to believe such action would be defeated and the strength
The bills were not enacted and the suspension was terminated as scheduled.

Chile  225
CH–2.
Press Release Prepared in the Office of the Secretary of
the Interior (Seaton)1
Washington, April 11, 1958.
SECRETARY SEATON URGES REPEAL OF SUSPENSION
ON COPPER-IMPORT TAXES
Secretary of the Interior Fred A. Seaton today recommended that
Congress repeal the suspension on copper-­import taxes which has been
in effect since 1947.
In recommending passage of S. 3234 which would revoke the sus-
pension of copper-­import taxes, Secretary Seaton said: “The import tax
was suspended at a time when copper was in short supply the world
over. Serious difficulties were being experienced in meeting defense
requirements arising from the Korean War. Both the Government and
domestic producers wished to remove any obstacles to increasing cop-
per supplies.”
“The circumstances on which the original suspension and its sub-
sequent extensions were based no longer exist. In the course of the past
year and one-­half the extreme shortage of copper has disappeared and
there is now an adequate supply,” the Secretary said in a letter to the
Senate Finance Committee.
Copper-­import taxes have been suspended since 1947 with the
exception of short periods in 1950 and 1951. The current suspension
remains in effect so long as the price of copper is 24 cents per pound or
above, or until June 30, 1958, unless sooner repealed by Congress. The
suspended import taxes on copper are now two cents per pound when
long as the price is at/or above 24 cents per pound.2
2 Ambassador Mariano Puga of Chile and Roy R. Rubottom, Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs, discussed Seaton’s statement on April 14, 1958. In his
memorandum of the conversation, Rubottom stated that he explained that the Department
was faced with two problems: “Our foreign relations problem, which involved our desire
to avoid any increase in tariffs on copper which would affect Chile adversely, and our
domestic problem, which involved the complaints of the industry and their efforts to
seek from the Congress protection which they considered necessary.” He further stated,
“The Department felt it would be hard to oppose stubbornly the industry’s pressure for
a tariff on copper but if there had to be an increase in copper tariffs, the least damaging
would be to permit the old rate to be reinstated upon the expiration of the suspension on
June 30.” The Ambassador remarked that, “he greatly feared that if this problem could
not be resolved promptly, there was a possibility that President Ibáñez might cancel his

CH–3.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversations President
Between Eisenhower and Secretary of State Dulles1
Washington, April 16, 1958.
TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT2
The Pres did see Ibanez cancelled his trip. He referred to what
Seaton said as being the reason. The Sec said he made a bad statement
from the standpoint of Latin American relations. He should not have
talked about it without clearance here. The Sec told what he said. The
Pres asked if they talked about it and the Sec said no. Our people have
but the Sec did not know what to say. The Pres does not know how S
can say anything until it is coordinated. The Pres will get Sherm on it.
TELEPHONE CALL FROM THE PRESIDENT3
The Pres said when he talked with the Sec he had no idea that
Seaton had made the statement on his own. The Pres called Sherm and
told him to call S and tell him by no means is he running foreign affairs
of the U.S. and if he is going to make statements he will coordinate
them. In case he calls the Sec the Pres wants him to know.
The Sec said we have the text of the Pres’ message to him.4 He
does not in the message allude to anything in particular. Chile is in
an excessive furor about it etc. They agreed there is not anything to
do - call off the dinners and think about a reply. The Pres said to tell
Buchanan to let their social secretary know.
pdb
Buchanan will so do.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
and cancelled his visit, citing domestic developments as the reason for cancellation.

Chile  227
CH–4.
Telegram from the Chargé in Chile (Belton) to the
Department of State1
692. Further analysis Ibanez decision cancel trip underscores con-
viction immediate cause was irritation resulting from his misunder-
standing U.S. position copper import tax and lack inclination or ability
take time (Frondizi here April 14 to 16) to understand it. Ibanez appar-
ently expected Puga obtain clarifying statement from Secretary State
or President expressing determination U.S. Government avoid copper
tax damaging to Chile. Ibanez also apparently assured that in U.S., as
in Chile, Interior is top-­ranking member Cabinet and principal spokes-
man government policies.
Also likely Ibanez foresaw difficulties if copper tax should go into
effect shortly after his return and seized on current furor re copper as
convenient basis avoid them.
Whatever his true motives (which are subject of much speculation
among few who understand that U.S. Government position was not
unfavorable to Chile and know these facts were available to Ibanez)
his action has gained support among even best friends of U.S. here,
who feel this dramatic gesture may bring to our attention the neglect
which Chileans feel the U.S. has shown for Latin America as compared
with rest of world. The left is particularly enthusiastic and responsible
rightist politicians are fearful it may be prelude to a sharp turn to left by
Ibanez which would aid Allende presidential campaign.
Ibanez momentarily riding unaccustomed wave popular support
as Chileans almost universally applaud his decisive action in upholding
national dignity in face allegedly unfriendly act by U.S. Only criticism
stems from transparently false reasons cited in message to Eisenhower.2
In considering this whole incident, particularly the illogical aspects
of it, we must bear in mind two important factors - Ibanez advisers and
his character.
[text not declassified]
Belton
Eisenhower’s response, which expressed regrets and further stated, “Your visit would
undoubtedly have strengthened even further the close ties that characterize relations
between Chile and the United States. I especially regret your not coming because our
Governments will be deprived of a signal opportunity to review problems of mutual inter-
est to us. Nevertheless, I can well understand and appreciate the matters of overriding
national importance which must perforce occupy the attention of the President of a great

CH–5.
Despatch from the Chargé in Chile (Belton) to the
Department of State1
Santiago, May 20, 1958.
No. 1142.
SUBJECT
U. S. Policy Toward Chile
Because Vice President Nixon’s South American trip2 did not
include Chile, the following synthesis of attitudes of friendly Chileans
toward U.S.–Latin American policy, combined with the Embassy’s
analysis and suggestions for possible modifications, may be helpful in
the current re-­examination of that policy. The Embassy believes Chilean
views are of particular interest because the Chilean free press, com-
bined with Chile’s traditionally democratic governmental processes
and outlook, provide a better basis for local understanding of the U.S.
than is available in almost any other country south of the border.
Much criticism of U.S. policy has recently developed here. It grad-
ually rose above what might be called the normal level as the Chilean
economic situation deteriorated due to low copper prices. It reached
flood stage with the Department of Interior press release of April 11 on
copper tariffs, and it overflowed on all sides as evidence of criticism in
other South American countries accumulated with the progress of the
Vice President’s trip.
In considering this problem, the Embassy believes it important
to bear in mind that a basically friendly feeling toward the U.S. exists
among the majority of Chileans. Much of the criticism, and certainly
the most constructive aspect of it, comes from people who recognize,
accept, and want a continuation of the U.S. as the predominant foreign
influence in this country. It is also highly important to remember that
Chileans are adept in seeing the mote in our eye and not the beam in
their own, and that the missing elements for which they criticize us are
often missing because of our conditioning their supply on Chilean per-
formance, which has been faulty. Nonetheless, if we want Chile to be a
on the source text indicated that this despatch was “Written with the advice, counsel and
assistance of:” Robert H. S. Eakens, Counselor for Economic Affairs, Donovan Q. Zook,
First Secretary-Counselor, and Robert J. Door, First Secretary; Oliver L. Sause, Jr., Deputy
Director, USOM, Nicholas A. Luongo, and Harold Robinson of the USOM; George Butler
and Hewson A. Ryan of the USIA mission; and Col. Leland R. Drake, Army Attaché.
2 Reference is to the Vice President’s good-­will tour of eight South American coun-

Chile  229
strong and friendly ally, we may have to accept certain Chilean failings
and find ways to pursue our policy in spite of them, rather than slow
down or halt our help while waiting for Chileans to change character.
U.S.-Latin American policy, while recognized as basically sound
and accepted as helpful by most Chileans, has nevertheless exhausted
its overt appeal here. We solved our major hemispheric political prob-
lems and supplemented that action with a welcome reciprocal trade
program during the Thirties and Forties, thus creating a reservoir of
good will which has carried us a long way and still has significant back-
ground values, but which is no longer exploitable. Our part in World
War II also helped to build our reputation.
With the political problems mostly out of the way, economic diffi-
culties have taken over the stage. In our efforts to help solve these by
loans, grants, technical assistance, and arguing the virtues of private
enterprise, we have had only limited success. What we have done has
been appreciated, but it has been badly overshadowed by the volume
of our assistance to the rest of the world, and by the fact that economic
problems larger than any we have helped solve keep appearing. The
net effect is one of relative neglect. At the same time, unfortunately,
our expressions of willingness to help and our largesse throughout the
world have created an atmosphere of paternalism which has caused
Chile to expect much more from us than we have delivered, and at the
same time to fail to recognize its corresponding obligations.
Specific complaints
Major Chilean complaints boil down to the following:
1) U.S. resistance against commodity arrangements to guarantee
reasonable copper prices, while keeping presumed Soviet bloc demand
uneffective, leaving Chile, so extremely dependent on foreign trade in
copper, to shoulder a cold war burden re this strategic commodity far
beyond its capacity.
2) U.S. tendency to revert to protectionism at the expense of its
friends in the face of what to Chile appear relatively minor domestic
economic problems, thus forgetting our position and obligations as the
leading world power.
3) Failure of the U.S.—­or of international financial agencies which
the U.S. could apparently influence heavily—­in spite of declared inten-
tions to the contrary, to provide development capital sufficient to enable
Chile to progress enough to keep up with growth rates elsewhere and
especially in the U.S, not to mention reducing the vast distance between
our standards of living.
4) Failure of the U.S. to distinguish within the hemisphere between
truly democratic friends such as Chile and dictatorships.

5) Apparent use by U.S. of expediency rather than policy in grant-
ing aid throughout the world, waiting until things are in a truly danger-
ous mess before coming to the rescue. Many Chileans feel that a serious
Communist menace close at hand is the best guarantee of U.S. support,
irrespective of the virtues of the recipient.
The Embassy would add the following additional factors which it
believes have an appreciable effect on attitudes here, even though they
have not recently been given special publicity:
6) The U.S., still the world’s most liberal and democratic country,
has let itself be forced into an appearance of economic and political
conservatism. Such a posture has no appeal to the average Latin, who is
excited by notions and dramatic examples of idealism. Our greatest tri-
umph here in recent years was our action against France and England
re Suez, but it has been overshadowed by too many smaller things with
opposite influence.3
7) Our policy toward cultural and non-­strategic trade contact
between Chileans and the Soviet bloc gives an impression of blind fear
which harms us and has had no productive results to our knowledge.
In most instances it is more rigid than our policy for U. S. -Soviet con-
tacts, and it does not jibe with our own standards of intellectual free-
dom and freedom of inquiry and of commerce. We have not lived down
the harm McCarthyism did us here and will not until we relax and let
the Chileans know we recognize they are as politically sophisticated as
we are. When we do, our approaches on problems of strategic trade and
other Communist contacts of similar significance will carry far more
weight.
8) Chileans are not convinced that the use of force to accomplish
our objectives has been completely discarded. They are convinced we
intervened in Guatemala, and they view with serious concern the recent
sending of paratroopers toward Venezuela. They worry that if they do
not get enough development assistance to raise their standard of living
appreciably, Communism will get a firm foothold and the U. S., against
its will and principles, will have to intervene by force, starting the era
Pax Romana a la U.S.A.
9) We have failed to convey to Chileans the fact that the battle
we are fighting against the USSR is their battle, and that the money
we spend in Europe and Asia is not spent because we like Greeks or
Iranians better than Chileans, but because those are the places the line
is most in danger of breaking. Chileans are essentially isolationist, so
American Republics: Central and South America, Chapter 7.

Chile  231
this argument can’t be won by talk alone, but only by giving them a
sense of participation.
10) Our recent interest in Africa is even harder to explain to
Chileans than are our European and Asian expenditures. They see
Africa as almost as remote from the Soviet orbit as South America, and
any developmental assistance we give there as directly harmful to their
own interests because it fosters the African capacity for economic com-
petition against Latin America.
11) We have made it appear that our economic assistance is avail-
able only if it is to be applied according to our own ideas of economics.
As a result we often seem to be making “free enterprise” or “people’s
capitalism” the “goal” rather than a possible and preferred “means”
toward our major purpose of promoting economic development. Many
of our aid and loan programs assist government and semi-­government
development programs. Since this is often in accordance with local eco-
nomic theory, we should exploit this de facto situation.
12) Chileans, as a people, undoubtedly know us, as a people, better
than we know them. Everything, including our world position, movies,
press wire services, USIA, make that inevitable. Yet they understand us
poorly. That being the case, how can we expect to understand them well.
They have none of our means to bring themselves to our attention. Our
ignorance of them is abysmal. Our lack of interest is almost as great.
They know this and it offends them.
Review is called for.
The problems above have not created bitterness in Chile toward
the U.S., but they have created an atmosphere in which Chileans are
clearly satisfied that the Nixon trip brought Latin American-U.S. prob-
lems dramatically to the forefront. No one here excuses the excesses
of Lima or Caracas, and all are quick to say it “couldn’t happen here.”
They are clearly pleased, though, that one way or another their prob-
lems finally reached the front pages of the U.S. press, and they are rea-
sonably sure this would not have happened in any other way.
What to do? If we want to alleviate these problems, if we want to
keep peace in “our own patio” and, most of all, if we want to create a
strong, friendly neighbor out of Chile, new verve must be added to our
policy. Quoting the title of El Mercurio’s May 16 lead editorial, “The
U.S. Has the Floor.” But Chileans want to hear some new ideas from
us, not more explanation of old ones. Nevertheless it would be tragic
if we panicked at this stage and started throwing money or anything
else around carelessly. Our attitude of requiring performance with our
assistance and of helping those who help themselves is fundamentally
sound. We need, however, to reassess not only the degree of help they
can, but will, give themselves, taking into consideration the social and

political facts of Chile as well as the economic ones. Likewise, we need
to reassess how we can get the best public relations mileage out of what
we do. Lack of understanding is the root of much of our trouble, but
new systems and techniques are needed, rather than more volume.
Some Suggestions
Following are some broad ideas for U.S. Government action which
may be helpful in considering the situation:
1) Take initiatives which will provide reasonable and fair solutions
for copper and other commodity problems. If the presently projected
subsidy plan for non-­ferrous metals is carried out, be certain it works in
such a way that it will be helpful and not harmful to the economic life
of Chile and other affected countries.
2) Provide a source of financing which will enable Chile to achieve
economic development as fast as the remainder of its social and eco-
nomic structure permits. Demonstrate faith in the economic future of
Chile by taking long term developmental risks. If we are willing to loan
money for balance of payments in order to keep Chile afloat, we should
be willing to loan money to enable her to steam ahead. By doing so, we
will contribute appreciably to the country’s capacity to pay back the rel-
atively non-­productive loans for the former purpose. Let’s dust off the
Chilean Agricultural and Development Plan and see if we can’t really
help them get it started.
3) Take advantage of the Chilean and other Latin American ambi-
tion to achieve a regional market. Let us come out four-­square in favor
of it—Chileans feel we are opposed to it for selfish reasons. Our sup-
port could make it a success. Besides contributing directly to the solu-
tion of a serious economic problem in this area, it could be a vehicle
through which we could gradually help in the achievement of many
other projects in the economic field.
4) Channel more of our economic development assistance into sec-
tors where it will have a broad social as well as economic impact. In
Chile almost all U.S. Government, international, and private financing
has gone into activities in remote areas or to private companies, also
frequently in remote areas, where the man in the street sees little direct
benefit to him. A few newspaper stories is all he knows about it and
he soon forgets that. This applies to the nitrate, copper, steel and coal
industries, and the Government-­owned electric plants. Loans in areas
where everybody could see the direct effects, such as those for the rail-
roads and the highways, have been held up by the World Bank.
5) As one means of fulfilling the above recommendation, undertake
a serious effort to help remedy the tragic housing situation. We loan
money for buildings to house machines, but we have been unwilling
to help house that other even more important productive factor—­men.

Chile  233
In Chile this is not a matter of providing comforts. It is the difference
between life and death for thousands of individuals. Out of Santiago’s
population of one and one-­half million people, more than 200,000 live
under tin cans. Another 500,000 are in what we would call slums in the
United States. There will be frost on the ground here most mornings
for the next four months. The other day we had two inches of rain in
eight hours. People living as millions of Chileans live can’t stand such
conditions and remain healthy and productive. We can’t build houses
for everyone in Latin America, but we can give appreciable assistance.
Technical assistance is being given but it alone is not enough. It must
be accompanied by economic assistance utilizing private initiative and
private means. To tap private capital and private savings might help
establish a system of savings and loan associations such as we have
in the United States, offering DLF money for initial capital in much
the same way as our Government did in the early days of the Federal
Savings and Loan System and as it now does through purchase of mort-
gages by the Federal National Mortgage Association; and we might
extend FHA insurance to include investments in Chilean mortgages by
United States private capital.
6) Increase our PL-4804 Title III program to the maximum to pro-
vide undernourished people the food we can’t sell. Create, support,
or expand school lunch programs and other effective distributional
means. Excellent progress has already been made with Title III in Chile
but we would like to see it continue and improve.
7) Demonstrate that we do recognize the difference between a
Dominican dictatorship and a Chilean democracy. We have already
proved that giving the cold shoulder to the dictators is not the ideal
way. Continue to treat them courteously and with sufficient cordiality
to guarantee their cooperation where this is essential. Reflect the differ-
ences we recognize and feel by doing extra things for the true democra-
cies. Wrap up some nice packages, some cultural, some financial, some
political, but all of a type providing mutual benefits. Present them to
the democracies, letting it be known we are doing so because they are
democratic.
8) We must work to get the full benefits of the impact of the helpful
things we do here, through better coordinated publicity and more expe-
ditious action. We have often announced sizable loans at times or in
ways which gave us practically no propaganda value. Others we have
not announced at all. Often we have, without remark, let the Chileans
give advance publicity about large sums they were seeking to borrow,
so when we loaned less we got criticism instead of congratulations.
4 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agriculture Trade Development and Assistance Act of

After advancing loans, we have red taped the procedures to the extent
that we have created disappointment and disillusionment on the part
of the recipients, e.g. the Smathers loan to the Council of Rectors here,
which was agreed upon a year ago and which is still awaiting legalities
in Washington which are alienating the Rectors of all of the universities
of the country.
9) We should give life to the Inter-American Defense Board or
some other hemispheric organization as a principal instrumentality for
our defense policy in Latin America. Through it we could give Chile,
and probably each of the Latin American countries, a sense of participa-
tion in the world struggle against Communism, which certainly Chile,
and probably most of the rest, do not have now. Through it we could
also bring home the difference in the types of military expenditures
which they make, encouraging them to reduce those which do not have
hemispheric defense value.
10) Improve coordination of U.S. government publicity. The U.S.
private press wire services are not subject to control, and neither are the
local headline writers who work on their stories. Our own government
public relations activities are, however. The extremely unfortunate
press release of the Department of Interior of April 11 on copper tariff
legislation cost us incalculable amounts of good will. We can blame no
one but ourselves for this flub.
11) Encourage the Pan American Union to step up its publicity
operations within the United States. Until our own people know some-
thing about Latin America, it is unreasonable for them to support pro-
grams designed to create good relations between us and Latin America,
especially if these programs may involve some personal sacrifice on
their part.
12) Start again the publication of a Government organ in Latin
America to set forth our viewpoints on our policies. We are now doing
very well in Chile having much material sponsored by us published
in the regular press. This is not a substitute, though, for an authen-
tic source where the definite word of the United States Government is
available. We have many understandable and reasonable explanations
for things we do. Because of our dependence on third parties to put
them forth, they are less well said and lack the ring of authenticity they
need.
The Embassy recognizes that the above problems and suggestions
are easier to state than they are to solve or put into effect. It recognizes,
also, that the major problem of getting the Chileans to do their share
remains. It believes, however, that a spirit of enterprise and an urge
for fundamental change and improvement exist here. These have been
hampered recently by economic problems arising from low copper
prices, but they will emerge again with full force if the U.S. is able to do

Chile  235
helpful things and do them in a way to provide hope and encourage-
ment to the vigorous elements within Chile.
William Belton
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim
CH–6.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, June 18, 1958.
SUBJECT
Strategic Control On Copper And U. S. Relations With Chile
Problem:
Chileans are unconvinced of the importance of security controls
on exports of copper to the Soviet bloc. Many believe they are senseless
and harmful to Chile’s economic position. This is grist for the commu-
nist mill and being exploited by the extreme-­left presidential candidate
who is coming up strong in the race to be decided by the September 4
elections.
Discussion:
The Communists have long claimed that U.S pressures on Chile to
restrict sales of Chilean copper to the bloc have been harmful to Chile.
They have implied that all of Chile’s economic problem would be solved
if the strategic controls were ignored and Chile embarked on a policy
of unrestricted trade in copper with the bloc. Although some Chileans
realize the spuriousness of this contention, it is widely accepted and is
at the root of much Chilean resentment of the United States. At a time
when copper prices are falling, when the reimposition of the U.S. excise
tax on copper imports is imminent, and when the press is full of reports
of strong pressures in the U.S. in favor of hiking up the excise, this feel-
ing becomes particularly strong and the leftist argument in Chile espe-
cially appealing.
Silberstein; initialed by Rubottom.

Senator Salvador Allende, presidential candidate of the extreme-­
left, is closely allied to the communists and follows much of their line.
He has indicated that, if elected, he would “reject the prohibition which
prevents us from placing our products in any country and accepting the
best condition of the market”. In a four candidate race, Allende is now
running strong second to the right-­wing candidate, Jorge Alessandri.
It is far from inconceivable that Allende might win the election. Our
Embassy reports that Allende’s compaign derives advantage from any
exacerbation of issues involving U.S. relations. He obviously bene-
fited from the violent anti-U.S. reaction in Chile to the Department of
Interior’s press release on the copper excise tax.2
From the viewpoint of U.S. interests, it would be better if any of
the candidates other than Allende won the Chilean elections. Were
Allende to win we could be faced with a pro-­Soviet, anti-U.S. admin-
istration in one of the important countries of the hemisphere. An
insight into Allende’s orientation is contained in his recent speech (Text
attached—Tab A).3 At the very least, we would have to deal with an
Administration opposed to much of what we stand for in the fields of
political and economic policy. The position of the $750 million worth of
U.S. investment in Chile would be endangered. Allende has indicated
he plans to introduce a bill to change the copper law in ways which
have the American companies greatly concerned. Moreover, if Allende
carried out his announced intention of dropping strategic controls on
trade with the Soviets, we would be faced with the necessity of a Battle
Act determination with all that would imply for our relations with the
entire hemisphere.
It is speculative, of course, whether anything the U.S. might do at
this time could in any way affect the outcome of the Chilean elections. I
believe, however, one action we could take, which would dramatically
deprive Allende of one of his strongest talking points and would wipe
out an issue that has long beclouded our relations with Chile, would
be an announcement by the U.S. that it no longer objected to trade in
copper in all forms with the bloc.
I understand that the downgrading of international strategic controls
on copper is already being urged by several countries in the COCOM
meetings now going on and that there is a good possibility that eventually
release, Allende announced that he would introduce a project to modify Chile’s new
copper law by, inter alia, re-­establishing a Government monopoly over copper sales. In
Allende spoke vigorously in support of Chile’s right to sell its products to any country in
the world depending upon where it could receive the best market terms, and criticized
3 Not printed.

Chile  237
we will have to acquiesce to such a downgrading. I also understand that
the large loophole in existing controls created by the downgrading of
copper wire of under 6 mm has already resulted in a substantial move-
ment of free-­world copper to the bloc in the form of wire and that it is
doubtful whether the downgrading of other copper would lead to a sig-
nificant charge in the supply availabilities of the bloc. I further under-
stand that the chances of our obtaining agreement within COCOM to
upgrading the controls on less than 6 mm copper are negligible.
It is pertinent to recall that for some time the communists in Chile
argued that Chile’s economy was suffering from U.S. objections to
Chilean trade in nitrates with Communist China and that there would
be a significant improvement in Chile’s balance-­of-­payments position
and in the position of the ailing nitrate industry if Chile could only take
advantage of the “tremendous” potential market that existed in com-
munist China for Chilean nitrates. In 1954, the Chilean Government
finally consulted with us on this point and was informed that we did
not object to Chilean sales of nitrates to Communist China. Since that
date, to our knowledge, not one pound of Chilean nitrates has been sold
to Communist China and an effective communist propaganda argu-
ment has been eliminated.
I understand that information available to the departmental officers
concerned with strategic controls indicates that continuation of existing
international controls on exports of copper to the bloc will not have a
significant impact on Soviet military capabilities so long as copper in the
form of wire is available to the Block. In these circumstances U.S. initia-
tive in agreeing at this time to the elimination of these controls would
remove an issue damaging to our relations with Chile and with other
copper-­producing and trading countries, could help to forestall the pos-
sibility that a pro-­Soviet administration might be elected in an important
country of the Western Hemisphere, and thereby could make a contri-
bution to U.S. security interests more substantial than maintenance of
controls which apparently no longer serve a significant purpose.
Recommendation:
Accordingly, I recommend that the Department:
1. After appropriate consultation with other agencies, agree to
remove copper from the embargo list in the forthcoming Consultative
Group negotiations.
2. Give prompt notification to Chile of the Consultative Group deci-
sion in order to obtain maximum advantage in U.S. Chilean relations.

CH–7.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the
Department of State1
commitment on sale strategic copper question reportedly based on arti-
cle appearing local press on July 13 from special correspondent at UN
pointing out Chile has no UN commitment on sale copper but Chile’s
only commitment due obligations under Battle Act.3 Foreign Minister
stated he would attempt forestall further discussion copper UN forum
pending COCOM decision.
He also advised new report from Chilean Ambassador Paris4
alleging various governments western Europe not interested removal
copper or only interested removal copper in manner favoring African
producers. He unable provide details any proposal favor African pro-
ducers but reiterated his feeling important U.S. take positive stand for
removal copper from strategic list in manner equitable all producers.
Howe
2 Alberto Sepulveda Contreras.
approved October 26, 1951, commonly called the Battle Act after Rep. Laurie C. Battle
of Alabama; for text, see 65 Stat. 644. The Battle Act required termination of U.S. aid to
any recipient country which shipped arms or atomic energy materials to the Soviet Bloc.
4 Juan B. Rossetti.
CH–8.
Editorial Note
On September 4, 1958, presidential elections were held in Chile. No
candidate received a majority of the popular vote. Jorge Alessandri, rep-
resenting the Conservative and Liberal Parties received 31 ­percent, and
Salvador Allende, candidate of the Popular Action Front, received 29
percent. According to provisions of the Chilean Constitution, the Chilean
Congress met in joint session on October 24 to elect a president from
among the two leading candidates. The official count gave Allesandri
oath of office on November 3, 1958. Documentation on the election is

Chile  239
CH–9.
Memorandum from Robert K. Phillips of the Office
of West Coast Affairs in the Bureau of Inter-American
Affairs to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, September 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Position of Chilean President-­elect on Major Issues
In public and private statements both before and after the
September 4 Chilean presidential election, the apparent President-­elect,
Senator Jorge Alessandri, has been generally forthright in stating his
position on most of the domestic and international issues facing Chile.
His views on some of the more important problems:
Presidential Role—Expects to be a strong leader, not under obliga-
tion to anyone.
International Affairs—
Relations with U.S. and Free World—Would continue basic Chilean
foreign policy as part of Free World. Friendly to U.S. but not subservi-
ent. Wants closer relations with neighboring countries and the rest of
Latin America.
Relations with Communist bloc—Not stated, but not likely to favor
closer relations with the bloc.
Defense—Would prefer to devote funds to economic development
but feels he must keep forces at reasonable parity with Argentina and
Peru.
Foreign Investment—Favors foreign investment as best means of
increasing productive capacity without requiring new sacrifices from
the Chilean people.
Foreign Aid—May seek some foreign loans in order to consolidate
short-­term debts, but hopes to rely primarily on better use of Chile’s
own resources. Does not expect a “Marshall Plan” for Latin America.
Foreign Trade—­import prohibitions should be eliminated, but cer-
tain (unspecified) import duties should be raised to protect national
interests. Doubts feasibility of Latin American common market. Favors
reciprocal trace arrangements.
through Ernest V. Siracusa, Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs.

Domestic Affairs—
Productivity—Chile’s basic problem is increasingly high cost of
production. Wages and social security benefits should be related to pro-
ductivity. Freer competition will encourage productivity. Agricultural
production should be stimulated.
Government Finance—Government should decrease expenditures,
take smaller share of business profits, and withdraw from fields more
suitable to private enterprise. Administrative reform is essential. Tax
revision and codification is urgent. When copper prices are high, part
of copper tax proceeds should be reserved for periods when prices are
low.
Credit Policy—Dislikes credit restriction as the main tool of infla-
tion control since it tends to curb production.
Exchange Rate—Favors realistic exchange rate, but has not commit-
ted himself to freeing rate.
Housing—Wants a national housing program with centralized
authority.
COMMENT: In summarizing Alessandri’s economic objectives,
Embassy Santiago suggests that some over-­enthusiastic U.S. press
reports of his election may lead people to believe that he will follow a
policy of austerity and will effect profound and favorable changes in
the foreign investment climate. The Embassy believes that Alessandri,
in view of his expressed resentment over credit controls, is more likely
to loosen rather than tighten monetary controls. The strength of the left-
ist vote in the presidential election would also indicate that Alessandri
may experience considerable difficulty in achieving many of his eco-
nomic objectives, including the encouragement of foreign investment.
While Alessandri’s job will not be an easy one, we are somewhat
more optimistic than the Embassy with regard to his chances of suc-
cess in the fields of monetary policy and foreign investment. The IMF
believes, and we concur, that the primary objective in attempting to
control Chile’s inflation is the reduction of governmental expenditures.
If Alessandri can make headway on this, there may be room for more
relaxation of credit to the private sector. The restoration of financial sta-
bility in Chile, if Alessandri can achieve it (and his record as Finance
Minister indicates that he is fully aware of the perils of inflation), would
do more than anything else to restore the economy and to improve the
climate for foreign private investment. How Alessandri will get along
with Congress remains to be seen.2
2 A handwritten marginal notation by Siracusa reads: “As far as stability is con-
cerned, assuming he can do what he wants, Alessandri seems almost too good to be true.
But I wonder if such a program can win political support and mass popularity.”

Chile  241
CH–10.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the
Department of State1
169. IMF cabled Central Bank October 22 to effect further draw-
ings under stand-­by arrangement contingent upon “adequate action”
to bring Chile into compliance with its undertakings.
Mackenna Central Bank advised Embassy that funds decision
placed Chile in serious foreign exchange situation. He has obtained
executive approval raise Central Bank’s selling rate immediately by
20 points to 828 (maximum possible without causing price increases,
especially of gasoline). Central Bank is so advising fund and calling
their attention compliance on agreed issue limit. Proposed depreciation
would narrow spread between bankers and brokers market to around
150 pesos, compared with spread of around 300 pesos in September.
Without scheduled fourth quarter drawings from IMF, private
banks, EXIM Bank and ICA totaling 13 million dollars, Central Bank
faces estimated exchange deficit of 11.1 million dollars at end of year.
Without further drawings bank estimates its foreign exchange reserves
(other than gold) will be exhausted by around November 8 due in part
Timing IMF cut-­off most unfortunate. Ibanez administration will
take no steps alter situation beyond what Central Bank proposing to
IMF. Embassy believes it neither fair nor wise to force new administra-
tion within its first days of office to meet critical exchange situation due
irresponsibilities old administration.
There is great optimism in Chile over Alessandri government.
Believe one of his first acts will be endeavor bring order Chilean
finances. Embassy urges Department encourage IMF take account
political implications suspension at this time and permit October draw-
ing in order give Alessandri opportunity work out new arrangements
with IMF mission early November.
Howe

CH–11.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of
State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, November 3, 1958.
SUBJECT
Chilean Financial Situation.
I suggest that you read the attached telegram from Ambassador
Howe in Santiago.2
The Department has consistently taken a firm line with regard to
Chilean compliance with the undertaking agreed to with the IMF and
the Export-Import Bank a few months ago. In fact, our line has been
tougher than that taken by the IMF itself, which, when confronted with
a decision in New Delhi regarding last month’s drawing, overruled the
recommendation of its staff and permitted the drawing. We had fully
supported the staff recommendation.
Now, however, it seems doubtful political or economic wisdom to
deny Chile the funds which it desperately needs just as the new admin-
istration is coming in, given the fact that a firmer line was not taken
against the Ibanez regime. It is our hope that President Alessandri
will have a much more business-­like administration than his prede-
cessor, and his new Minister of Finance, Roberto Vergara, strengthens
our hope. But the new administration should not be put in a financial
straight jacket in its first days and weeks in office. Even though the real
culprit would be the previous regime and its lack of fiscal discipline,
the tendency would be to place the blame on the IMF and the U.S. for
denying this drawing.
We hope to have a favorable decision from the IMF today, based
on: (1) Chile’s formal request for the drawing, and (2) Chile’s request
that the IMF send an official there immediately to review her situation.
I shall be in touch with you if we encounter difficulties.
2 No telegram was found attached to the source text, but the reference may be to
telegram 169 from Santiago, printed as Document CH–10.

Chile  243
CH–12.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Chile1
PRIORITY
FYI. Department appreciates serious implications if Alessandri
forced face crisis immediately on taking office. However, impression
here is crisis not so imminent as Mackenna alleges. IMF stand-­by and
related credits are not rpt not only recourse. In pinch modest amount
involved in Oct. drawings could be borrowed from commercial banks
or obtained as tax advances copper companies. Even before such mea-
sures might become necessary and certainly before heavy December
seasonal requirements must be faced, Dept. hopes Alessandri will reach
new understanding with IMF which would make Chile eligible utilize
all fourth quarter drawings. We understand IMF willing send mission
about Nov. 8–10 if requested. Also our impression IMF aware awkward
timing drawing cutoff and disposed be reasonable with Alessandri if he
indicates willingness move in right direction.
Mackenna’s observations on rate movement which suggest GOC
planning hold indefinitely to unrealistically appreciated rates and not
contemplating free rate responsive market forces arouse consider-
able concern. Rate depreciation reflecting inflation which has already
occurred believed inevitable. Sooner this occurs more obvious will be
that action made necessary by policies old administration.
Important discourage Mackenna idea U.S. can be used to pressure
IMF or that Eximbank will make releases independently of IMF. End
FYI.
Suggest tell Mackenna (1) Dept. understands from U.S. Executive
Director that IMF has not rpt not received request for October drawing
(2) in order avoid crisis Mackenna fears, strongly urge GOC request
IMF mission come soonest discuss circumstances under which drawing
eligibility could be restored (3) proposal move bank rate only 20 points
Drafted by Phillips on October 3, and signed by Ernest V. Siracusa, Director of the Office
of West Coast Affairs. This telegram was cleared in draft with Samuel D. Eaten, CFD/FR;
Alexander H. Rosenson, ARA/REA; Frank A. Southard, Jr., U.S. Representative to the IMF;
Charles Harley, Treasury Department, and Seymour Pollock of the Export-Import Bank.
2 See Document CH–10.

probably unsatisfactory to IMF, particularly in light earlier assurances
more rapid depreciation.3
sion of the day with Chilean Finance Minister Vergara, and Vergara’s opposition to the idea
that the IMF would continue to support the Ibáñez Government in spite of its violation
of commitments and then present the new Government with unfriendly demands. Howe
stated that the Embassy recognized possibilities for short-­term financing, but “feels it both
unfair and unwise force new government resort to makeshift interim measures first two
weeks in office,” and was “especially reluctant see new government start meeting financial
crises through demand advance copper tax payments.” He advised that the United States
should demonstrate its confidence in the new government, and renewed the Embassy’s
recommendation that the Department “urge IMF permit Chile make October drawings and
The Department responded to Howe in telegram 174 to Santiago, November 3,
stating that it appreciated and concurred in the Ambassador’s view of the importance
of demonstrating confidence in the new government, but could not and did not wish to
attempt to dictate IMF decisions. The Department advised Howe that it was “best you
limit observations to Vergara and McKenna to stressing importance Chile communicate
CH–13.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the
Department of State1
199. Discussed financial and other problems facing new govern-
ment at luncheon meeting today with [illegible in the original], Foreign
Relations, Defense, Banco Central [illegible in the original], and others.
They view financial problems as time bomb certain explode by March
next year unless they obtain substantial outside assistance to enable
them meet obligations in both foreign exchange and pesos until mea-
sures which they are determined take begin having effect.
Feeling situation urgent GOC was planning send mission Washington
next week to lay groundwork for negotiation necessary loan agreements.
We have succeeded in dissuading GOC from this premature action but
as alternative have agreed recommend that [illegible in the original]
mission come here from Washington study situation on the ground.
Vergara has promised have statistics and program available study such
group within a week. Have continually stressed importance having such
program designed cope with difficult situation faced through 1959 and
even more importantly to show Chile’s real determination do what she
can for herself. Vergara and others appreciate this and have repeatedly

Chile  245
indicated their determination develop and carry through realistic,
austere program.
GOC has reached agreement with IMF mission now in Chile under
which drawings will be permitted through end of year (Embassy tele-
gram 189). This includes: 1) adjusting banking exchange rate to realistic
basis, which Vergara said and 2) new agreement on credit restrictions
and government borrowing from Central Bank would be done promptly.
Agreement with IMF mission represents important first step and shows
willingness new administration come to grips with certain financial
problems. Believe this and any other help which IMF may be able extend
most useful. However, scope IMF mission too limited provide compre-
hensive analysis situation on which United States policy could be based.
Urge United States mission arrive here if possible on December
eight. Suggest it have both economic and political representation from
Department and that representatives also be included from Treasury,
EXIM Bank and possibly DLF. Believe such mission would be extremely
helpful because greater accessibility factual information and key
Chilean personnel in Santiago will provide opportunity assess finan-
cial crisis in relation to over-­all politico-­economic situation and fiscal
program new administration. Would also give chance working with
GOC officials while formulation their program in early stages. Realize
that such a mission would not be in position to make commitment, but
would hope that if facts developed by mission confirm urgent need,
Washington would be prepared to act promptly.
I feel prompt despatch to Chile of such a mission is absolute mini-
mum we can do to support and bolster confidence of new government
at this stage. I am having lunch with President Alessandri probably on
Monday next week and I feel it is important to our position in Chile to be
able to tell him at that time that a mission will arrive early in December.2
Howe
pleased that the Embassy had been successful in dissuading the Chilean Government
from sending a special mission to Washington, and instructed Howe to urge Alessandri
to lay through groundwork without publicity through diplomatic channels for early dis-
cussion of the issue. The telegram concluded as follows:
“Dept wishes emphasize there full realization here that new Administration faces seri-
ous problems. U.S. agencies pleased note GOC has reached agreement with IMF mission
and hopeful Chile will fulfill program interim targets. Embassy should continue encourage
GOC look to IMF for advice on payments and stabilization problems. U.S. disposed cooper-
ate with a sound, constructive program which holds out the premise of lasting achievement
and encouraged believe Alessandri Administration provides basis for such cooperation. At
same time Dept concerned that unrealistic expectations may be developing on part GOC
and Chilean public as to extent Chile “entitled” to and may expect obtain U.S. financial assis-
tance particularly for balance of payments problems. Believe you should emphasize to GOC
desirability avoiding continued reliance on balance of payments assistance (while Chile
maintaining highest levels imports in history, in large part for current consumption) in view

CH–14.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Chile1
Dept disturbed VIAL allegation GOC officials claim U.S. insists on
1100 before willing consider assistance3 and approves your energetic
clarification including statement importance we attach to GOC fulfill-
ment commitments to IMF.4 Believe you might make similar clarifica-
tion to officials who may have been source of VIAL’s Misinformation if
you consider advisable. It is precisely to avoid direct involvement heated
political situations such as that now current in Chile that U.S. consistently
refrains from advising other governments on specific internal economic
stabilization measures including exchange rates and instead urges them
consult and reach agreement with competent international agencies.
Would appreciate more details on agreement with Anaconda on
exchange rate windfall which sounds like disturbing proposal return
to discriminatory rate treatment for Gran Mineria which existed prior
new deal copper law.5
Herter
and signed by Siracusa.
Embassy was informed that Alessandri’s nationwide radio address on December 10
would emphasize the chaotic condition of government finances, the need to seek finan-
3 Reference is to the statement of Senator Carlos Vial Espantoso, Director of the
Central Bank and spearhead of the opposition on the exchange rate program, which was
also reported in telegram 225.
4 The International Monetary Fund had just completed its fourth mission to Chile
that year. The mission, which arrived on November 10 and worked through the week of
November 24, inquired into the reasons behind Chile’s non-­compliance with monetary
and exchange commitments made conditional to renewal of the Stand-­by Arrangement
of April 1958, which called for the establishment of a realistic banking exchange rate by
the end of 1958, and suggested measures which the new government might be willing
to take to restore Chile’s eligibility to draw against the Fund’s resources. Documentation
the message to Vial. It also reported on the agreement with Anaconda to forego savings
in production costs from peso devaluation, stating that the Finance Minister had assured
Anaconda officials that this would not mean a return to descriminatory exchange rate
treatment of large mining companies, but was expedient to enable the Government of
Chile to show the public that the copper companies were not reaping large windfall prof-
profits agreement is contained in a memorandum of conversation between company offi-
cials and State Department representatives, transmitted to the Department under cover

Chile  247
CH–15.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Santiago, January 20, 1959
SUBJECT
Economic Program of the Alessandri Administration and Problems Which It Faces
PARTICIPANTS
Señor Roberto Vergara, Minister of Finance, Economy and Mines
Señor Eduardo Figueroa, Chief Assistant to the Minister of Finance
Ambassador Walter Muller, the new Ambassador to the United States
Ambassador Howe, U.S. Embassy
Mr. William Krieg, U.S. Embassy
Mr. Raford Herbert, U.S. Embassy
Mr. Robert Eakens, U.S. Embassy
At a luncheon meeting today, various aspects of the Alessandri
Administration’s economic program and the problems it faces, both
with International Monetary Fund and from a domestic political stand-
point, were discussed at some length.
Vergara came to the luncheon straight from the Congress where
he had been in constant hearings for several days on the Government’s
recently submitted wage and economic and financial legislation. He
was frankly discouraged at being caught on the one hand between
the attitude of the Congress, which already had weakened the
Administration’s program with larger wage adjustments than had
been proposed, and on the other by the tighter attitude of the Fund, as
reported by Figueroa. Vergara nevertheless felt that in spite of the pres-
sures in Congress the program would go through without being weak-
ened too much, either as a result of restoration by the Senate or use
by the President of his veto. At the same time the attitude of Congress
made it clear that the program proposed by the Administration was the
most that could be hoped for.
Figueroa had gone to Buenos Aires on Friday, January 16, for a
discussion with representatives of the International Monetary Fund the
following day. Costanzo was tied up and was not available but Figueroa
has a 9½ hour discussion with Edgar Jones and Eugenio Bertens. [text
not declassified]
According to Figueroa, the discussion was very discouraging.
Figueroa felt the attitude of the Fund had changed greatly, and had
Distribution. No drafting information appeared on the source text. The memorandum
of conversation was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 732
from Santiago, January 23, 1959, not printed.

become much harder in what was being demanded of Chile than was
the case in the December discussions with Jones in Santiago. Figueroa
thought this reflected a greater lack of confidence in the Alessandri
Administration and a degree of self-­confidence brought on by the
Fund’s success in reaching agreement with Argentina.
Figueroa took a draft reply to the Fund’s letter of December 24
with him to Buenos Aires for the discussion. The December 24 letter of
the Fund indicated the conditions which Chile would need to meet in
the first quarter of this year to draw the quotas provided for under the
current Stand-By Arrangement which expires on April 1.
The one suggestion which Chile made with respect to the ceil-
Central Bank exchange sales to importers a total figure for the three
months be set of 25 million dollars to allow greater flexibility. Jones indi-
cated that he was in complete agreement with the draft reply except for
Chile’s position with respect to these exchange sales. Figueroa did not
explain why Jones considered a lump sum figure for the first quarter a
problem, or how firm Jones seemed to be on this point. Jones indicated
that the Fund would like to have the letter signed by someone other
than Maschke. Vergara said that legally Maschke was the only one who
could sign but he did not say that there was not some other way to
meet the Fund’s requirements on this point. Although not mentioned
in Figueroa’s memorandum, Jones indicated that the Banco Central
should be completely reorganized, apparently with the objective of
eliminating the Congressional members from the Board of Directors
and possibly others. Vergara said he was already working with Radical
Party leaders to see what could be done about changing the complex-
ion of the Bank. He thought there was a possibility that this might be
accomplished and he was going to continue to work on it although
there also was the possibility that he might be defeated. He also felt that
no change in the law would be possible until after Congress had acted
on the Administration’s economic proposals. Jones also considered that
a change in management was essential, this apparently being aimed at
Maschke, especially, but also at Mackenna.
As indicated in the Figueroa memorandum, Jones and Bertens
questioned various aspects of the Administration’s stabilization pro-
gram and also indicated certain requirements that Chile would have
to meet in reaching agreement with the Fund. They thought the wage
increase should be less and that the idea of general and automatic
adjustments should be eliminated as soon as conditions permit. They
made an especial point that any housing program should be financed
exclusively from private savings. They said that the adjustment made in
the establishment of a single exchange rate responsive to market forces

Chile  249
is a sine qua non of a new agreement with the Fund. They considered
that a cut of 10 percent should be made in the budgeted government
expenses, that priority attention should be given to making State enter-
prises completely self-­financing through economies of administration
and increases in tariffs, and that the government’s investment pro-
gram should be so limited as to provide only for completion of existing
projects, the initiation of new projects which would be financed with
foreign loans not being justified in the existing circumstances. They rec-
ommended a drastic revision downward in the amount of the arrastre
to be paid off. Upon completion of the current Stand-By Arrangement
on March 31, they did not consider any further credit expansion justi-
fied for the next year since prices already had reflected the currently
proposed readjustments in wages and any expansion would therefore
be inflationary. They recommended that the entire import deposit sys-
tem be abolished, all goods made freely importable, and several groups
of commodities established with tariffs varying according to essential-
ity and high enough to yield more revenue and to control imports.
Vergara, Figueroa, and Muller made it clear that they were in accord
with almost all of the foregoing measures which were advocated by the
Fund representatives. They felt, however, that Chile was being likened
too much with the case of Argentina, that the situation was quite dif-
ferent in Chile, and that therefore the means of achieving the desired
goals would also have to be different. An important difference is the
fact that Frondizi’s party has control of the Congress and the army is
accustomed over the years to be used in the control of Argentina. These
things make it easier for Frondizi to take strong action and back it up
with military force where required. Chile, on the other hand, is a demo-
cratic country split up into numerous political parties, with an army not
accustomed to participating in politics or control of the economy, and
with the present government having minority support in Congress.
One point that Figueroa stressed was based on two talks which he
has had with President Alessandri since his return from Buenos Aires.
This was the President’s feeling that he has to try to do something
about the unemployment situation and that he simply cannot take any
measures which would increase unemployment. Figueroa and Vergara
believe that the policies advocated by Jones and Bertens would have
this effect. Vergara emphasized this point at considerable length, point-
ing out that he could not see how technicians from the International
Monetary Fund could be so wrapped up in their figures and so cold-­
blooded as to advocate policies which would increase unemployment
and starvation.
While stressing his agreement with cost of the measures advo-
cated by the Fund officials, Vergara raised the question several times
as to what would be the attitude in Washington of the Eximbank and

the DLF if Chile would achieve two-­thirds or even possibly 75 percent
of the program which the Fund representatives outlined. He though it
would be possible to go most of the way but left no doubt in his feel-
ing that Chile could not meet all the requirements. Later on, Figueroa
indicated that he thought it would be possible to negotiate out the
differences with the Fund on all points except two. These relate to
housing and to credit. While he and Vergara did not consider the
announcement of a flat 10 percent cut in government expenditures
practicable, they were sure this objective could be achieved or per-
haps even more. Figueroa expressed the view that the desirable way
to put part of the people back to work was in a housing program. The
Fund representatives apparently left the definite impression that this
was one thing to which they could not agree. With respect to credit,
Figueroa was not very explicit, except that he felt that holding credit at
a fixed level from April 1 onward simply was impossible. According
to Figueroa, this was a big change in the position which Jones had
taken in his talks with them in December. At that time he agreed that
increases in the money supply were justified as physical production
expanded and as prices rose for reasons other than the government’s
fiscal and monetary policy. In Buenos Aires, however, they took a
very rigid attitude that there should be no further increases in credit
after April 1, for the reasons indicated above, and it was obvious that
Figueroa felt hurt that the Fund representatives should thus raise the
ante in view of his sincere efforts to meet their requirements.
Vergara expressed particular interest in knowing what the Embassy
group thought of their program. The Ambassador indicated that tak-
ing account of the political realities in Chile he considered the program
sound and that he thought people in Washington were generally sym-
pathetic with respect to helping Chile. He went into considerable detail
in emphasizing the importance which the U.S. Government attaches
to Chile first coming to an agreement with the Fund on its economic
program. This is not because the U.S. wants to hide behind the skirts
of an international agency but rather because the Fund is in a better
position to deal objectively with this kind of problem. In addition,
numerous countries are seeking help from the United States and these
requests can be handled on a more effective basis and better programs
developed by the countries collaborating with the Fund. Vergara and
Figueroa indicated their recognition of the soundness of this position
and the reasoning behind it. While he could not say just how much help
would be extended or in what form, the Ambassador said he felt con-
fident help would be available once Chile had reached agreement with
the International Monetary Fund. Vergara was particularly interested
in knowing what the attitude would be of U.S. lending agencies if Chile
succeeded in getting a “light-­green” signal from the Fund but not a full
“green light” endorsement. In reply the Ambassador said that in view

Chile  251
of the importance U.S. agencies attach to a country reaching a prior
agreement with the Fund, he could not say what their attitude would
be unless there was a full agreement.
As to the Administration’s program generally, Eakens indicated
it would be helpful if that part concerned with credit were reduced
to concrete terms. Mentioning that all measures thus far taken by the
Administration for increasing the availability of local credit had been
sound and non-­inflationary, he said the President had indicated his
disagreement with the credit controls which had been in effect during
the last two and a half years and that this had given rise to concern
in Washington that the Administration’s actions in this field were
going to be inflationary. He said the same concern was felt over the
Administration’s housing program. Vergara said that they were taking
measures to place the Chilean economy on a dollar basis and to encour-
age the use of dollars to finance imports and exports and relieve the
pressure on existing local credit. While the results had not been as great
as he expected, he said this was beginning in a small way to have the
desired effects.
CH–16.
Letter from President Alessandri to President
Eisenhower.1
Santiago, January 30, 1959.
[4 pages not declassified]
The Government has already embarked on a program to reorga-
nize the public administration and state agencies, for the purpose of
reducing national expenditures to limits consistent with the country’s
economic capacity. To the [illegible in the original] and studies will be
completed during 1959 that will permit the introduction of sweeping
changes in the systems of social security, customs tariffs, and taxation.
The first steps have already been taken to rationalize foreign trade,
by adopting a policy governing rates of exchange that will effectively
encourage export activities and reduce the demand for imported prod-
ucts to safe limits. With this purpose in mind, the areas of exchange
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.” Information on the source
text indicates this is an official translation of the original. Walter Muller Hess presented
his credentials to President Eisenhower on February 13, 1959.

have been unified in a single rate of exchange, the value of which will
be effectively determined by supply and demand on the market.
As a consequence of the mistaken exchange policy adopted in the
past, under which the value of the dollar was arbitrarily kept low in rela-
tion to the level of domestic prices, the national economy was deprived
of the flow of foreign capital and, what is more serious, the flight of
Chilean capital was encouraged as it sought more stable investments
abroad. Naturally this was reflected in a stagnation of capital invest-
ment in productive activities. Furthermore, the long process of infla-
tion which has affected the national economy has largely destroyed the
working capital of various enterprises.
In those circumstances production and trade have sought to use
domestic credit, this being their only possible source of financing, and
this has brought about heavy and constant pressure on the Central
Bank to increase the rediscount rate of the commercial banks. This erro-
neous credit policy has resulted in currency issues that have helped to
aggrevate the inflationary process.
The exchange measures already adopted will help to solve those
problems and, furthermore, will make it possible for the National econ-
omy to develop its activities through the use of foreign credit, thus leav-
ing margins of domestic credit available for these activities which by
their nature cannot reach out to sources of foreign credit. Along with
this, the demand for bank credit will be heavily reduced and it will then
be possible to keep the issuance of currency under strict control.
The development of this financial policy requires a climate of pub-
lic confidence and social tranquility. The Government will achieve its
purposes only to the extent that it create new sources of employment
that will permit the incorporation into productive activity of a large
number of workers who at present do not have even the most elemen-
tary resources for their subsistence. To attain this objective without
creating inflationary pressures, it is imperative to be able to count, for
one time only, upon substantial financial assistance from abroad, which
will supplement the country’s own resources and which is needed to
strengthen the country’s economic activities.
Attachment2
2 1 page not declassified.

Chile  253
CH–17.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) and the Assistant
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, February 13, 1959.
SUBJECT
Anticipated Chilean Request for Financial Assistance.2
Problem:
The Alessandri Government, inaugurated in November 1958,
claims that the restoration of economic and financial stability based
on the private enterprise is its prime objective. However, the economic
program it has devised does not give promise of achieving this end.
Moreover, the Administration has dragged its feet on working out a sat-
isfactory stabilization arrangement with the IMF, and the Government
has announced that about $100 million of foreign loans will be required
for budgetary and balance of payments support. Mr. Figueroa, Special
Assistant to the Minister of Finance arrives in Washington February 16
to open discussions on external assistance.
Recommendation:
While it is in our interests politically to support the Alessandri
Government, and while its application of a sound economic program
will entail certain political risks, we believe that financial support in the
absence of an effective stabilization program will serve neither Chilean
nor U.S. interests in the long run. Further, it is our tentative view that
Chile could go through 1959 without new balance of payments loans
from U.S. official sources if a serious effort is made to adhere to an ade-
quate stabilization program. The budgetary deficit is an internal prob-
lem not appropriate for external financing. This and other stabilization
problems should be worked out in operation with the IMF.
Therefore, it is recommended that the U.S. Government take the ini-
tial position that the Chilean Government should first reach agreement
by Siracusa, Albert Post of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs, and
Samuel D. Eaton, Financial Adviser, International Finance Division, Bureau of Economic
Affairs.
2 A covering note from Rubottom to Dillon attached to the source text reads:
“The attached memorandum on Chile’s interest in obtaining financial assistance
has been prepared for your background information.”
“No action on your part is believed necessary at this time.”

with the IMF on a stabilization program. We should further indicate
our belief that if an adequate stabilization progress is implemented, it
should be unnecessary for Chile to add to its heavy foreign debt bur-
den.3 We should add that we are confident that if there is an adequate
stabilization program, development credits for Chile will be forthcom-
ing from appropriate financial institutions. To demonstrate our support
for the Alessandri Government, we should be prepared to indicate to
the Chileans at an appropriate point in the discussions that the Export–
Import Bank would be willing to open credit lines4 to cover acceptable
economic development projects on the condition that Chile reach prior
agreement with the IMF on the renewal of the standby expiring next
month and show satisfactory performance under its terms. In this con-
nection, we should also be prepared to point out the possibility of DLF
loans.
Discussion:
The Alessandri Administration came into office in November 1958
after a campaign in which it advocated a program aimed at correcting the
financial disorder—­chronic inflation and balance of payments disequi-
librium—­of the Ibánez Government. Under the latter, the cost of living
increased by about 70 per cent despite the use of almost $120 million of
balance of payments loans from the IMF, Eximbank, ICA, and private
U.S. banks. During part of this period, the Chilean financial problem was
aggravated by declining copper prices as the average price fell from 40
causes of the inflation were the chronic fiscal deficits and the extraor-
dinary expansion of credit. The resultant internal monetary expansion
fostered a heavy demand for imports, which despite the sharp decline in
export income, rose to historic highs in 1956 and 1957.
During the election campaign, Alessandri attacked the large fiscal
deficits, the use of credit for speculation, and reliance on balance of
payments loans. He came out for a businessman’s Government which
would restore the financial health of the country. After taking office,
he showed some vacillation in pursuing a coherent economic program
and soon appeared to have lost the initiative required to put forth a
full stabilization effort. For example, one of the major complaints of the
IMF with the Ibánez Government had been that the latter had main-
tained the peso at an excessively appreciated rate of exchange thereby
3 The following handwritten notation by Assistant Secretary Mann appears on the
source text: “It may be necessary to spread out installments on foreign debt which are
bunched up at this time.”

Chile  255
draining foreign exchange reserves. The new Minister of Finance ini-
tially took a strong position for a sizeable devaluation of the peso but he
agreed to accept only about half of the depreciation he had requested
when the opposition took advantage of the Government’s indecisive-
ness. Since then, the Government has unified the dual exchange market
in accordance with IMF recommendations but it is now too early to
assess the impact of this measure on the reserve position since there is
no assurance that the rate of exchange will be permitted to move with
the market.
In a series of radio speeches and in its submission to Congress,
the Alessandri Government indicated that it expected to request bud-
getary and balance of payments loans from abroad and showed little
liking for fiscal and credit restraint. The budget now before Congress
envisages a global deficit of about 210 billion pesos ($210 million) of
which 60 billion pesos is requested to cover unpaid bills from the previ-
ous Administration, 75 billion for public works including housing, and
70 billion for wage increases. The Government expects to finance 100
billion pesos of this total by increased tax revenues and has indicated
that it wishes to obtain the remainder through foreign loans. President
Alessandri has written a letter to President Eisenhower requesting
him to use his influence with U.S. institutions in regard to prospec-
tive Chilean loan applications. On February 16, Special Assistant to the
Minister of Finance, Figueroa, is expected in Washington to hold dis-
cussions with the IMF and with the U. S. Government agencies on these
loan possibilities.
The IMF discussions will be necessary since Chile is not now eli-
gible to draw the $6 million for the first quarter of 1959 remaining in
the standby arrangements largely because no agreement was reached
on a satisfactory rate of foreign exchange sales by the Central Bank. It
is now hoped that a revised one-­year extension of the standby agree-
ment expiring in March, can be worked out between Chile and the IMF
which would require Chile to maintain budgetary, monetary, and for-
eign exchange policies aimed at achieving financial stability.
During 1958 the Ibánez Administration used about $40 million
of balance of payments loans from abroad. For 1959 it is anticipated
that the average price of copper will be about 30 cents compared
with 25 cents for 1958, which would give Chile an increase of about
$30 million in dollar earnings. In addition, there remains the $6 mil-
lion undrawn under the standby for the first quarter of 1959. Then fur-
ther resources of $12.5 million may be available from the IMF and the
private U.S. banks, if the Chileans reach agreement with the IMF on
renewal of the standby. Therefore, Chile will have available in 1959 in
additional foreign finances about the equivalent of the balance of pay-
ments loans made to the previous Government in 1958. Foreign debt

amortizations, however, will probably require unusually heavy pay-
ments this year, perhaps about $20 million more than last year. About
$25 million of the total payments due are owed to private U.S. banks.
The Chilean Government has indicated that it may be able to secure pri-
vate U.S. bank loans to cover the latter amount especially since the U.S.
copper companies have expressed a willingness to assist in obtaining
such loans by granting any windfall profits from the recent devaluation
of the peso for the service of these loans. In summary, it appears that the
Chilean Government will have adequate resources to meet its balance
of payments requirements during 1959 and that with a serious effort
at stabilization imports can be reduced from their present high levels
so that there may actually be no need to borrow from the private U.S.
banks on balance of payments grounds. The budgetary deficit is a prob-
lem for Chile to resolve in cooperation with the IMF and it certainly
cannot be financed by U.S. funds.
Therefore, we take the initial position that no additional balance
of payments loans should be made to Chile from U.S. official sources
during 1959. It is clearly recognized that the new Administration
requires same evidence of support from this Government especially
since Alessandri has based his political future on close economic coop-
eration with the United States. Alessandri is a political independent
who commands no real party allegiance and has shaky and heteroge-
neous congressional support. He was elected over a strong, leftist com-
munist supported candidate by a very narrow margin, and there is real
reason to believe that in the event of his failure, a drastic swing to the
far left in Chile might occur.
To meet the political and economic requirements of this situation,
we propose that the Chileans be informed at an appropriate point in the
negotiations that the Eximbank would be willing to open credit lines
to cover acceptable economic development projects on condition that
Chile reach prior agreement with the IMF on a renewal of the standby
and show satisfactory performance under its terms. We believe that a
credit of between $30 and $50 million would be appropriate, but no
indication of the amount should be given to the Chileans until after the
agreement with the IMF is signed. The announcement of credits would
not need to wait until negotiations for the individual projects are con-
cluded. In addition, the possibility of loans from the DLF can be pointed
out to the Chileans. There should be no great difficulty in working out
excellent development projects as the Eximbank has on file applications
for over $40 million, including a paper mill and electric power works.
The IBRD has been considering for some time large-­scale highway and
railroad projects on which action has been deferred because of infla-
tion. The DLF has on file applications totaling $l8 million and a recent
report by the USOM in Santiago indicates the existence of other projects
suitable for DLF consideration to the extent of $108 million.

Chile  257
CH–18.
Letter from President Eisenhower to President
Alessandri1
Washington, February 28, 1959.
Dear Mr. President:
Ambassador Muller has handed me your letter of January
­thirtieth,2 which I have read with great interest and sympathy.
I appreciate the seriousness and extent of the economic and fiscal
problems confronting you. It is gratifying to note that in facing up to
these problems you attach great importance to a free enterprise system
and monetary stability in your plans for Chile’s future. Surely these
concepts must be the basis of any economic program which holds
promise of realizing the better life, in freedom, that we earnestly desire
for our peoples. In particular, I am convinced that in Chile, as in many
other developing countries, a successful attack on the causes of infla-
tion is essential to steady economic growth.
It is not surprising that the Communists are seeking to create diffi-
culties for your program. Since these men abhor freedom, they will surely
endeavor to thwart the efforts of the Chilean people to achieve that full
spiritual and material life which can only be realized in a free society.
You are to be congratulated, Mr. President, on the effective steps
you have taken to inform the people of Chile of the high purposes of
your program. I am confident the Chilean people, whose fine qualities
and dedication to democracy are so rightly admired, will support your
enlightened and courageous efforts in their behalf.
I am sure that you are fully aware of the economic assistance
extended to Chile by the United States in the past. I am taking steps to
see that the economic problems you outline in your letter are brought
to the attention of the appropriate officials of this government who will
be glad to discuss sympathetically with your officials mutual problems
of economic and financial interest.
I deeply appreciate the confidence you have demonstrated in
providing me with the full and candid exposition of Chile’s problems
which your letter contains. Please be assured, Mr. President, that I will
follow closely your efforts to bring stability and prosperity to Chile, for
these objectives are important to the people of the United States.
With expression of my high esteem,
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.”
2 See Document CH–16.

CH–19.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of West
Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Siracusa)
to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, March 6, 1959.
SUBJECT
Chilean Request for Financial Assistance
Although Sr. Eduardo Figueroa’s discussions with the IMF and with
the Eximbank-Treasury-State team2 are still continuing, we thought you
might like to have an interim report. The IMF and U.S. representatives
engaged in these discussions seem to be generally in agreement that
Figueroa has presented Chile’s case in a frank and persuasive manner.
He will probably be able to go back with a reasonably attractive package.
We understand that the IMF and Figueroa, with the approval of
Finance Minster Vergara, have reached agreement in principle on all points
involved in a proposed new stand-­by agreement. The agreement has
been drafted by the IMF in the form of a letter to IMF Managing Director
Jacobsson to be signed by Vergara and Central Bank Chairman Maschke,
and the draft letter will be handed to Figueroa today for forwarding to
Santiago. Assuming that the agreement is signed (Maschke may find it
hard to swallow), it should be possible to develop a stand-­by package
million would come from the still unutilized first-quarter 1959 drawings
(DLF, Eximbank/ICA and private banks), $20 million from Treasury, IMF
and private bank credits available but not scheduled for drawing under
the stand-­by expiring this month, $2.5 million as the remaining balance of
Chile’s IMF quota (the only new money), and $25.3 as a roll-­over of previ-
ous private bank stand-­by credits already utilized and due to be repaid in
1959 (if Figueroa can negotiate this with the banks concerned). Under the
proposed stand-by with the IMF, Chile would not make regular monthly
drawings as in the past but would draw only as needed by the Central
Bank to prevent excessive fluctuations in the exchange rate.
The IMF has informed Figueroa that it sees no objection to the
proposed negotiation of a $50 million loan from the New York banks.
The IMF has also informed Figueroa that it would have no objection
to Chile’s acceptance of additional foreign financial assistance for
Phillips.
2 The team consisted of Ralph Korp of the Treasury Department; Silberstein,
Phillips, Post, and Eaton representing the Department of State; and Pollack, Williams,
and R. Henry Rowntree from the Export-Import Bank. Memoranda of their conversations

Chile  259
economic development purposes provided this can be utilized in a non-­
inflationary manner. This is where the U.S. agencies come in.
The U. S. team has had four three-­hour meetings with Figueroa, and at
least one more meeting will take place. Besides the $50 million loan Chile
will seek from the New York banks (in addition to the $25.3 ­million roll-­
over for the new stand-­by fund), Chile wants $50 ­million from us to cover
the balance of an anticipated unfinanced budget deficit of $100 million.
We believe that the Chileans have not been entirely realistic in assessing
their financial prospects, particularly in respect of their balance of pay-
ments position and the inflationary impact the budget deficit would have
even if it is financed by borrowing from abroad. We believe, however,
that our analysis of the financial situation has been useful to the Chileans
and may help to persuade them that a somewhat smaller amount of aid
in 1959 will meet their immediate needs and ease the transition to 1960,
when they propose to balance their budget without foreign aid.
Nevertheless, both IMF and U.S. representatives recognize the
desirability of helping President Alessandri to cope with his delicate
internal political situation. We realize that the extension of the aid they
are seeking involves the calculated risk that it may not cure the infla-
tionary problem, but this appears to be less than the risk involved in
doing nothing for Alessandri.
The U.S. team is awaiting additional data promised by Figueroa
which should enable us to determine just how much assistance we
might feasibly give and for which purposes. Between the regular and
supplementary budgets, we might be able to pick up about $25–26 mil-
lion representing proposed imports of capital goods which could be
eligible for Eximbank financing. It seems likely that Mr. Waugh’s high
opinion of Figueroa will be translated into practical terms.
Summary of Possible Package3
(in $ millions)
1. Stand-­by assistance
2. Private bank loan
3. Eximbank project loans, about
Grand total, about
When the Fund agreed to a renewal of its stand-­by arrangement with Chile on March 25,
measures adopted in order to terminate inflation in Chile. This program was also sup-
million from U.S. commercial banks granted in May 1959. In addition, the U.S. Treasury
increased the amount in its exchange agreement with Chile from $10 million to $15 mil-
lion. The Export-Import Bank also stated that it was preparing to complete studies involv-
ing prospective credits of about $25 million to private companies in Chile. International
Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 1959
(Washington :1959), p. 21.

CH–20.
Letter from the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs
(Phillips) to the Ambassador in Chile (Howe)1
Washington, April 8, 1959.
Dear Mr. Ambassador:
I enclose two self-­explanatory memoranda2 concerning a recent
proposal by the Office of Civilian and Defense Mobilization to sell some
128,000 tons of copper held in the Defense Production Act3 inventory.
I need hardly tell you that we were somewhat alarmed when we
first heard of this proposal, particularly since we had gotten the idea
that OCDM intended to move quickly and might do so without ade-
quate consultation with other agencies of the U.S. Government, let
alone the foreign governments which might be affected by this action.
As a result of the meetings described in these memoranda, however, we
believe that the situation is under control and that OCDM will not take
any precipitous action.
Nevertheless, there is every reason to-­believe that the Administration
will move eventually to get rid of this copper. You may be sure that we
will do our best to see that the Chileans are consulted and that the dis-
posal plan will not operate to their disadvantage. In fact, if we do have
a big copper strike in the U.S., the DPA copper could probably be sold,
after settlement of the strike, without seriously disrupting the market. It
is conceivable that such sales might actually benefit Chile if they helped
to prevent another price runaway such as occurred in 1955–56 and which
the copper producers would like to avoid if at all possible.
I am sending you these memoranda at this time merely to alert
you to what is going on here. As you will note the whole matter is
highly confidential and must not be discussed with anyone outside
the Embassy, nor should any allusion to this letter be made in official
communications. As and when OCDM comes up with a decision to sell
and the sales procedures to be followed, we will expect to consult the
Embassy formally as to the possible economic and political impact of
the OCDM proposal on our relations with Chile.
It would be nice, of course, if a copper disposal program, when it
comes, could somehow be related to a new suspension of the copper
The source text is a carbon copy bearing Phillips’ typed name.
recorded conversations between representatives of the Department of State and OCDM
officials. They are not printed.

Chile  261
excise tax. Actually, in terms of assuring an adequate supply of copper,
this would make a good deal of economic sense, and it undoubtedly
would be highly agreeable to the Chileans. Unfortunately, industry
opinion in the U.S. (including the brass industry) has not sufficiently
jelled in favor of again removing the excise tax, and there is no common
sentiment among the various interested U.S. agencies. Also, the inter-
ests and responsibilities of the agencies which might wish to see the
excise tax removed do not necessarily coincide with those of OCDM,
which is concerned primarily with the disposal of surplus stocks per se.
We will be in touch with you as soon as anything new develops
on this subject. In the meantime, the Embassy might wish to give some
thought to the ways in which we might seek to avoid any injury to
Chile or any undue strain on our good relations in the event the OCDM
proposal materializes.
I enclose some press items on the copper situation4 which you
might find of interest.
Sincerely,
Robert M. Phillips
4 Not printed.
CH–21.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, April 22, 1959.
SUBJECT
Disposal of D.P.A. Inventories of Copper
Recommended Position
It is recommended that in the Cabinet discussion on this subject
you take the following position, which is consistent with positions
already taken at the working level:
1. The Department fully appreciates the desire of the OCDM to
dispose of the copper held in D.P.A. inventories, and will be glad to
Concurred in by Silberstein; routed through the Executive Secretariat.

cooperate in the development of a sound disposal plan for this purpose
at an appropriate time.
2. The present time, however, does not seem to be an appropriate
one, and the Department is definitely opposed to undertaking any sales
of D.P.A. copper at present.
3. Since rumors have had an unsettling effect on markets, there
is need for a public statement to the effect that the Government is not
considering the sale of any copper at this time.
4. When the time does come to dispose of the D.P.A. inventories,
the plan of disposal should be carefully designed to avoid unnecessary
disturbance of the markets, and in particular it should specify a reason-
able cutoff price below which sales world not be made.
5. As the time for disposal draws near, but before final decisions
are made, it will be necessary for the State Department to hold mean-
ingful consultations (at least a week to ten days in advance) with cer-
tain governments having a substantial interest in the matter.
Background
About 136,000 long tons of copper are held in D.P.A. inventories
(not to be confused with the strategic stockpile, where the holdings of
about 1.0 million tons are close to the maximum stockpile objective).
Governor Hoegh2 and his Deputy, Mr. Price,3 have been under pres-
sure to dispose of excess Government holdings of various materials,
and in the past few weeks they have been pressing hard for disposal of
the D.P.A. copper.
Their aim has been to sell 10,000 tons in the course of the coming
two months and the balance of 126,000 tons later in the year. Rumors
have recently been circulating in the major copper markets to the effect
that the OCDM is about to liquidate the entire D.P.A. inventories of
copper. The price of copper, which had been strong for several months,
has dropped rather sharply in the past two weeks, some quotations
by 6–8 percent. The OCDM has made certain public statements which
have not been definite enough to reassure the markets.
Some of the domestic copper fabricators and brass manufacturers
are in favor of Government disposal of the D.P.A. holdings, but the major
producing companies, led by Anaconda, are opposed. The Interior
Department is also opposed to the action. A strong group of Senators
from the mining states, led by Senators Murray4 and Mansfield,5 have
2 Lee A. Hoegh, Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
3 J. Roy Price.
4 James E. Murray (D-Mont.)
5 Mike Mansfield (D-Mont.)

Chile  263
pushed through a resolution saying that the release of any part of any
Governmental inventories of copper at this time would cause “incal-
culable damage” to the security and well-­being of the country. The
OCDM, and particularly Mr. Price, have been under sharp criticism in
the trade press and in the Senate. The Senators have asked for public
assurances that the D.P.A. copper would not be sold.
The Labor Department probably has reason to oppose the action at
this time, because the copper mining companies are in the early stages
of wage negotiations which may lead to extensive strikes. A disposal of
Government holdings of copper at any time prior to the final settlement
of the wage negotiations and the conclusion of a new wage agreement
would probably be regarded by labor as a strike-­breaking measure. On
the other hand if there should be strikes and if the OCDM should wait
until after a new wage agreement had been concluded it might well
be possible to dispose of the D.P.A. inventories of copper at favorable
prices and without incurring serious objections.
Copper is the mainstay of the Chilean economy, accounting nor-
mally for 60 to 70 percent of the country’s hard currency earnings.
Any move on the part of the United States Government which had the
effect of pushing copper prices down seriously would be considered an
unfriendly action by the Chilean Government and people. Chilean sen-
sitivity in this regard was dramatically demonstrated last year when
President Ibanez cancelled his impending state visit to the United States
immediately after it was announced that our Administration favored
action by the Congress to advance the date for lifting the suspension of
the copper excise tax.
Copper is of importance also, in lesser degrees, to Peru, Mexico,
and Canada. These countries, especially Peru, have protested our impo-
sition of import quotas on lead and zinc, and they would undoubtedly
protest disposals of copper at this time.
CH–22.
Editorial Note
On May 20, 1959, representatives of the United States and Chile
signed in Washington an agreement providing for the Development
Loan Fund to lend $300,000 to Chile to finance design engineering for
a new international jet airport at Pudahuel. Documentation concerning
the loan is in ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 31, “DLF.” For additional infor-

CH–23.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Chile (Howe)1
Santiago, August 18, 1959.
SUBJECT
Chilean President’s Views on (1) Meeting of American Foreign Ministers, (2) U.S.
credits to Chile, (3) IMF-Latin American relations.
PARTICIPANTS
President Jorge Alessandri of Chile
Minister of Finance Roberto Vergara
Secretary Herter
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
Ambassador Howe
At the invitation of the President, Secretary Herter called on him at
The President opened the conversation in French, expressing his
satisfaction at the way the Meeting of Foreign Ministers had come out
and his great pleasure that it had been possible for Secretary Herter
to attend the conference. He continued that he was pleased that the
meeting had been held in Santiago as he felt it had given the Foreign
Ministers of the other American Republics an opportunity to see at first
hand that Chile has both a democratic and responsible government.
Secretary Herter replied that he, too, was very pleased with the results
of the meeting and that he wished to compliment the President on the
way in which Chile, as the host country, had managed all matters relat-
ing to the conference in a way which greatly redounded to its credit
and made an important contribution to the success of the Meeting.
The Secretary especially wished to comment on the statesmanlike and
efficient manner in which the Foreign Minister, don German Vergara,
had conducted the plenary sessions of the meeting and on the contri-
bution which he had made towards resolving a number of the more
difficult situations. The President, in thanking the Secretary, said that,
in truth, there had been the possibility of difficult situations created by
the Cubans both in the meeting and by the non-­authorized arrival of
the two planeloads of visitors. He said that he had just received reports
on the arrival of the second Cuban plane with Raul Castro and that
he and most of those who accompanied him would be admitted to
the country although two of his companions, who were armed, were
being held at the airfield. The President said, however, that neither
he nor the Chilean Government would take any official cognizance of

Chile  265
Castro’s arrival, as whatever invitations had been issued to the Cubans
had come purely from individuals representing opposition political
groups and the Cubans themselves had never even visited the Chilean
Embassy in Habana to learn whether the visit would be acceptable to
the Government. In sum, the President thought the Cubans had lost a
great deal of prestige by the manner in which they had behaved and
had only succeeded in making themselves ridiculous. The Secretary
again complimented the President on the way in which the Chilean
Government had handled this potentially difficult situation, which
was strictly in accord with Chilean laws and regulations and to which
nobody could have valid objection.
The President then continued that his government was grateful
for the financial assistance received from the United States through
the series of credits which were recently approved and emphasized
that the present administration was a responsible one, seriously con-
cerned with putting Chile’s financial house in order and establishing
its economy on a firm basis for growth. Here Mr. Rubottom mentioned
the general respect in which the present Government of Chile was
held in the United States and added that he ventured to feel that Chile
was not alone in showing this sense of financial responsibility, men-
tioning specifically the efforts being made by President Frondizi to
improve the situation in Argentina, and the program just now being
developed by Sr. Beltrán, the new Prime Minister and Minister of
Finance of Peru. The President agreed that these developments were
all encouraging and mentioned that Sr. Beltrán had been following
closely for the past eight months the development of the program in
Chile and had indicated that it would have a strong influence on his
own plans for Peru.
The President went on to say that he felt that the International
Monetary Fund needed to show more flexibility in dealing with the
problems of the underdeveloped countries of Latin America. He
emphasized that, while Chile was perfectly satisfied with the treatment
it had received, in his opinion it was not necessarily sound policy to
apply the same type of rules which might be applicable to the highly
developed countries of Western Europe to the nations of Latin America,
and that, unfortunately, this alleged rigidity of the IMF often resulted in
the United States bearing the brunt of the criticism. The Secretary then
pointed out that, as the President knew, the United States did not con-
trol the IMF but that we felt it was important to work through and in
close consultation with it and the other international lending agencies.
The President replied that he of course did realize that the IMF was an
international and not a United States agency, but, nevertheless, the fact
remained that the United States was often blamed for policies which,
in his opinion, were frequently too inflexible. He then went on to say

that even the U.S. lending agencies frequently seemed to demand more
of sound responsible governments than they did of irresponsible gov-
ernments which did not have the courage nor will power to take steps
to put their own houses in order. While he didn’t mention any specific
countries, he implied that both the United States and the international
lending agencies should have sufficient confidence in responsible gov-
ernments, such as his own, so as not to insist on tying then up with
strings which were frequently tighter than those applied to more irre-
sponsible governments.
Comment:  While the President specifically said that he was not com-
plaining of Chile’s treatment by the IMF, information
reaching the Embassy from other sources close to the
government suggests that in fact the government, or at
least some of its high officials, may be chafing somewhat
under some of the restrictions placed upon it by the IMF.
The Secretary stated that he was very appreciative of the oppor-
tunity to converse with the President and to hear some of his views.
The Secretary continued that both during the negotiations for the
credits and in the arrangements leading up to the Meeting of Foreign
Ministers, Chile’s Ambassador in Washington, Mr. Walter Muller, had
gained the respect of all the people in the State Department and the
other U.S. government agencies and he wished to assure the President
that Chile was extremely well represented in Washington and also
that the U.S. Ambassador in Chile had his entire confidence. The
President replied that he had known and worked with Ambassador
Muller for many years and that it was because of his confidence in
him and respect for his judgment that he had asked him to undertake
the important mission in Washington. In closing, the President asked
Secretary Herter to convey his sincerest greeting and best wishes to
President Eisenhower and expressed once more his pleasure at hav-
ing had the opportunity to welcome Secretary Herter to Chile and to
talk with him.

Chile  267
CH–24.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1
Washington, October 23, 1959.
SUBJECT
Communist Chinese Offer to Buy Copper from Chile
PARTICIPANTS
Assistant Secretary Rubottom, ARA
Chilean Ambassador Walter Muller
Mr. Jorge Burr, Minister-Counselor, Chilean Embassy
Captain Jorge Swett, Naval Attaché, Chilean Embassy
Robert M. Phillips, WST
Mr. Rubottom said we had been greatly concerned to learn from our
Embassy in Santiago that Chile had received an offer from the Chinese
Communists to buy 50,000 tons of copper wire and sheets and that the
Chilean Government was thinking of permitting the sale of as much
as 30,000 tons. Although the U.S. Government would not make formal
objection to the proposed transaction, we believed Chile should be con-
cerned with the impression likely to be created in the U.S. and other
countries by the magnitude of this sale to the Chinese Communists.
We were particularly disturbed to see Chile become apparently the pri-
mary target of Chinese Communist overtures in Latin America, and
we considered that this might have serious political implications for
Chile’s relations with the U.S. and other countries of the hemisphere.
Ambassador Muller said this was the first he had heard of this
development and that he, too, was concerned over it. Nevertheless,
he hoped we understood that the Government was facing a difficult
internal political situation and could not afford to risk criticism that
it was obstructing commercial transactions for political reasons. The
Government was very much concerned with developing markets for
Chile’s exports, and it realized that the presently favorable copper mar-
ket would not last too long. In fact, in recent conversations with the
New York representatives of the copper companies operating in Chile,
the Ambassador had been given to understand that world production
of copper next year would exceed demand by approximately 10%. It
was for this reason that Chile was particularly interested in finding new
markets for its copper.
Mr. Phillips said that, following the removal last year of stra-
tegic controls on copper, Communist China had been able to get all

the copper it wanted, chiefly from the U.K. and West Germany. The
switching of Communist China’s purchases to Chile would in no way
affect world copper demand. The Chilean Government might ask itself
whether there was any commercial reason for Communist China sud-
denly to offer to switch the bulk of its copper purchases to Chile. We
were inclined to believe that this offer was largely or entirely moti-
vated by political considerations. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the
sale of even 30,000 tons would represent in value considerably more
than the total of Latin American exports to Communist China in 1958.
Since we had made special efforts to assist the new Government of
Chile, as one closely identified with our own principles, we would
undoubtedly be called on—­if this sale went through—­to explain why
the Chilean Government had apparently become so deeply involved
with the Communist Chinese. Not only would this complicate relations
between Chile and the U.S. but it would also weaken the opposition of
other Latin American countries to the growth of Chinese Communist
influence in this hemisphere. When he had been in Santiago in May,
Mr. Rubottom had expressed to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the
Minister of Justice and others, our concern over the obvious campaign
the Chinese Communists were waging to develop relations of all kinds
with Chile.
Ambassador Muller said his Government was aware of the
Communist bloc interest in Chile and that it was trying to deal realis-
tically with this situation. He gave a brief resumé of his earlier conver-
sation with Acting Assistant Secretary Snow concerning the Chilean
Government’s proposal to send a trade commission to the bloc coun-
tries (see memcon August 26).2 He also mentioned that Communist
China had arranged to buy 10,000 tons of nitrate from Chile and that
the Chilean Government had not received any indication that we
might object to this. If 30,000 tons of copper seemed to us an excessive
amount for Chile to sell to Communist China, what would we con-
sider a reasonable amount?
Mr. Rubottom replied that it was not our purpose to try to tell
the Chileans just how much copper they might reasonably sell to
Communist China. We hoped they would realize that this was a sensi-
tive political situation in which any sale might create a problem for them
and for us. The Chilean Government should not be under any illusion
that our China policy might be changing. As the Ambassador knew,
the U.S. distinguished between Communist China and the European
Soviet bloc. Even though the CPR and the USSR shared the same ulti-
mate aim of Communist domination of the world, the CPR has been
2 Not found in Department of State files.

Chile  269
unique in its flagrant disregard of the principles of the United Nations,
as most recently demonstrated by its actions in Tibet and other places.
A particularly sensitive aspect of the proposed transaction,
Mr. Rubottom continued, was that our Export-Import Bank now had
under consideration loan applications submitted by two of the three
copper fabricating firms in Chile, and we understood that these
firms would expect to participate in this sale. We hoped the Chilean
Government would understand that it could be extremely embar-
rassing to all concerned if it became known that an agency of the U.S.
Government was considering lending money to a foreign firm which
would use U.S. funds to develop facilities for trading with Communist
China while U.S firms are forbidden by law to engage in such trade.3
Mr. Phillips asked the Ambassador whether he had seen a study on
copper prepared by W.R. Grace & Co. which was fairly optimistic con-
cerning copper’s prospects over the next few years. The Ambassador
said he knew of this study and hoped its optimism would prove to be
justified, but the Chilean Government was worried primarily by the
probability of a weak copper market in the particular year 1960.
(Mr. Burr called Mr. Phillips at home the morning of October 24,
saying that he wished to verify one point in yesterday’s conversation
before reporting by cable to the Chilean Foreign Ministry. The Embassy
was particularly interested in knowing just how much copper the
U.S. Government thought Chile might reasonably sell to Communist
China if it did not sell the proposed 30,000 tons. Mr. Phillips said he
thought that no official of the U.S. Government could or should attempt
to set a quota for Chile’s possible copper sales to Communist China.
The Department had no intention of reopening the question of inter-
national strategic controls on copper. The issue posed by the Chinese
Communist offer we considered to be a political one, and, in this con-
text, we hoped the Chilean Government realized that the less business
it did with Communist China the better.)
(At a luncheon on October 26, Ambassador Muller told
Mr. Rubottom that the Chilean Embassy had been instructed to inform
us that we had nothing to worry about regarding the proposed sale.
The Chilean Government intended to find the means of frustrating the
proposed sale and was only concerned with doing this in a way which
would not involve it in internal political difficulties or make it appear
that the Government had acted under U.S. pressure. Mr. Burr also con-
firmed this in a later conversation with Mr. Phillips.)
3 The Department subsequently informed the Export Import Bank that it saw no
objections to approval of the loans to the copper fabricators. (Memorandum from Phillips

CH–25.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of West
Coast Affairs (Coerr) to the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, November 18, 1959.
SUBJECT
Alessandri Administration Celebrates First Anniversary
According to Embassy Santiago, probably the single greatest accom-
plishment of Alessandri during his first year has been the reestablishment of
public confidence in the dignity, seriousness of purpose and honesty of the
Government. This confidence is not only felt in business circles, but even
by the average man on the street, even though he may not have voted
for Alessandri. The greatest failure of the Administration has been its inabil-
ity to control the continuing upward surge in the cost of living.
Alessandri’s first year has been devoted in large part to bringing order
to the chaotic financial situation which he inherited from President Carlos
IBAÑEZ, and in laying the basis for reorganizing the haphazard struc-
ture of the government and planning the specific programs to be carried
into effect during the second year of his Administration. The Government
has shown itself friendly to, and desirous of cooperating with, the United
States both in international affairs, and in matters concerning Chile’s inter-
nal economy. If President Alessandri can bring Chile’s inflation under control,
he gives promise of providing the nation with one of the most effective govern-
ments it has seen in decades. Most of the basic changes envisaged by the
Government are being effected under the special powers law which gives
the President power to act without Congressional approval.
So far, major Government efforts have been concentrated in the eco-
nomic field. The Government has sought to: 1) bring order to the public
finances (it has set up a revised, single budget system, refinanced the
public debt, and claims to have presented the country with a budget for
1960 which for the first time in many years will be balanced); 2) stim-
ulate production (by setting a more realistic exchange rate; lowering
import deposits for essential machinery and goods; obtaining foreign
loans some of which have been made available to private businesses for
purchase of machinery and other essential imports; and reinvigorating
the Development Corporation (CORFO), giving it the task of directing
the country’s overall economic plan); 3) initiate more effective controls
over the banking and credit system (limited expansion of the means
of payment and instituted stricter controls over banking rediscounts);
Confidential. Drafted by Phillips; initalled by Coerr. The following notation by Rubottom
appears on the source text: “Thanks.”

Chile  271
4) liberalize foreign trade (eliminated lists of prohibited imports, main-
tained a steady exchange rate, increased general confidence in the eco-
nomic future of the country, and announced plans for the reform of the
customs structure); 5) obtain foreign loans and aid (mostly from the
United States and the Federal Republic of Germany). The Government
has also initiated much needed steps to improve the efficiency of Chile’s
agriculture, to stimulate the construction of low-­cost housing, and has
announced plans for development of the country’s transportation, elec-
tric power and steel industries. Plans are also under way to reorganize
many government organizations, including the expensive and often
mismanaged social security system.
WST Comment:
The air of confidence which Alessandri has managed to inspire
cannot last indefinitely if his administration fails to deal more effec-
tively with the continuing increase in the cost of living (up 36.9% in ten
publicly abandoned its position that there should not be a new round
of compulsory wage and salary increases in 1960, and in all probability
this will unbalance the 1960 budget (despite a balance on paper), with
further inflationary implications. The magnitude of the Government’s
problem in attempting to curb inflationary pressures during 1960 will
depend on a number of factors which cannot yet be measured, e.g.,
copper prices, foreign exchange reserves, level of wage increases, etc.
CH–26.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Chile (Howe)1
Santiago, November 25, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
President Alessandri
Senator Morse2
Mr. Pat Holt3
Ambassador Howe
After formal introductions the Ambassador explained briefly
to the President the purpose of Senator Morse’s trip to Chile and
to Chile.” Official Use Only.
2 Wayne Morse (D-Oregon)
3 Consultant to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.

other countries of South America, mentioning especially his desire
as Chairman of the Sub-­committee on Latin America of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee to learn for himself of the situation and
problems in the area. The President expressed his pleasure at having
Senator Morse in Chile and at having the opportunity to talk with him.
Senator Morse then said that he came primarily to observe and to study,
that party politics did not enter into the consideration of policy by the
Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate, and that he and the rest of
his Committee hoped to develop information for an objective appraisal
of conditions in Latin America. The President replied that he was glad
that the Senator had come to observe but was sure that he did not need
to study as he knew how much attention he had already given to Latin
America. Senator Morse than said he wished to congratulate President
Alessandri on the views expressed in his recent interview for the New
York Times on the subject of the burden of armaments.
President Alessandri thanked the Senator and then went on at
some length to reiterate his views with relation to this whole question
of armaments. To a considerable degree the President repeated what he
had said in the press interview but spelled out certain points in more
detail. He said that Chile, by restraining its military expenditures and
attempting to devote its resources to economic development, was,
he felt, following a sound course and setting a good example in the
hemisphere, but that unfortunately with certain of the neighboring
countries purchasing arms over and beyond those provided under the
MAP program, Chile was finding herself in a very difficult situation
internationally. He continued that it did not seem fair that a country
which attempted to follow a sound policy should thus, in effect, be
penalized for such policy. The President suggested that new thought
should be given to the MAP program as a whole as it referred to Latin
America, to consider whether the same treatment should be given to
countries which tied in their own defense expenditures with the MAP
program as to those which made additional and often unnecessary
purchases outside of the program. Similarly he felt that the lending
agencies, both international and U.S., such as the IBRD, the IMF and
the Eximbank, should take into account the nations’ military poli-
cies as well as their economic and fiscal management. He mentioned
the demands made by these agencies for sound fiscal management,
which he recognized as necessary, but then said that the same nations
which directly or indirectly provided the foreign credits through
the international or national lending agencies appeared to permit or
even encourage receiving nations to undertake military expenditures
which in reality could have just as unfavorable effects on both fiscal
policy and economic development as unsound financial policies. The
President said he hoped very much that Senator Morse, both directly

Chile  273
as Chairman of the Sub-­committee on Latin American Affairs and as
an influential member of the Senate, would do what he could to press
this point of view and to assist in giving leadership to a movement
towards a sensible approach to the whole arms question.
Senator Morse replied that as he had already indicated in congrat-
ulating the President on his remarks to the press, he shared to a very
large extent the views expressed by the President and that he knew also
that among his colleagues there were many who were seeking ways
to lessen the burden of armaments. Senator Morse then said that he
would be very happy to have any views that might be helpful to him
and to the Committee relating to economic problems or the economic
development of Chile.
The President replied at some length by retracing the pattern of
foreign credits over the past forty years. In doing this he emphasized
points that he has frequently made in the past, that up until the depres-
sion of the early 1930s Chile, along with other Latin American coun-
tries, was able to go into the foreign financial market, first in England,
later in the United States, and borrow money on long term for public
works and other necessary development projects. He said that it was
important to remember that in this earlier period such funds had not
only been available to defray the cost of imported equipment but had
also been available for conversion into local currency which could be
applied against local costs of development projects. With the depres-
sion this private foreign financing had largely dried up. In its place
various forms of financing had arisen, first through such agencies as
the Export Import Bank and later the IMF or IBRD. While such agencies
had made many useful loans, those credits did not provide the same
flexibility, particularly for public works and the development of the
economic infrastructure of an underdeveloped country. In certain cases
they were limited to covering the foreign currency costs of a project,
making no provision for local currency expenses. In other cases they
were directed towards or limited to specific objectives, again leaving
the recipient governments without the needed degree of flexibility. The
President continued that he admitted frankly that in Chile, as well as in
certain other countries, what he regarded as faulty domestic policy had
also limited the necessary growth of the fundamental economic infra-­
structure. Specifically he said that the mistaken policy of proceeding
governments in going into fields which could better have been left to
development of private enterprise and private capital had had a doubly
unfortunate effort. First, frequently foreign credits had been obtained
for such projects and had been in effect mortgaging an important
part of the financial resources of the government. Thus the servicing
of these credits had limited the potential foreign credits available for
development in other fields; and second, the same policies had forced

the diversion of the government’s own revenues towards meeting the
local costs of such projects, thus subtracting from the total funds which
could have otherwise been available for such fields of development as
highways, ports, schools and public health. The President continued
that in certain fields such as public power it would be very difficult,
if not impossible, to reverse what had already been done, but that his
government was determined to limit the use of government funds for
projects which should properly be developed by private capital to an
absolute minimum, using the government’s resources in those fields
which could only be developed with public funds. He said therefore
he and his government obviously were in favor of the investment of
private capital both domestic and foreign, and of giving every possible
encouragement to private initiative to do what in reality he felt it could
do better than the government in any case. In return he did hope that
there could be somewhat more flexibility in credits made available to
the government and necessary projects in the public sector, particularly
in giving consideration to the needs for the local currency costs of such
projects. He closed these remarks by emphasizing that Chile was most
grateful for the help given by the United States to his government and
that he was not complaining but only pleading for a broad and flexible
approach to this old problem of economic development. He mentioned
specifically a lack of flexibility in the use of local currency accruing
under PL-480.
The Senator replied that he was very grateful for having the
President’s views, which to a large extent corresponded to his own.
Senator Morse continued that the President might think it odd com-
ing from him as a Liberal, but that he had long felt that the most
important export the United States could make, particularly to the
underdeveloped countries of the world, was its faith and belief in eco-
nomic freedom. He emphasized his conviction that political freedom
of choice could not long exist without economic freedom of choice,
and that a strong and vigorous system of private enterprise was the
best guarantee of such economic freedom. Hence he was delighted to
know at first hand that the President shared his views on the respec-
tive roles that should be played by private enterprise and by the gov-
ernment in the economic development of the country. He also was
happy to have the President’s assurances of his receptivity to for-
eign investment as an aid in achieving such development. He added
that he had long felt that in addition to the direct investment which
could be made by foreign capital, further ways should be sought by
which the foreign credit agencies, both national and international,
could assist through loans in providing the capital to make possible
a healthy growth of domestic free enterprise within these countries.

Chile  275
Hence he felt it important that in addition to making credit available
directly to the governments, such lending agencies should be sympa-
thetic to the sound needs and requirements of private individuals or
companies for assistance.
The President replied immediately that he did, of course, fully
agree and actually in the case of Chile there had been just such expe-
rience. He mentioned specifically the $20,000,000 credit provided by
the IBRD to his own former company, Papeles y Catones, for the con-
struction of a newsprint and celulose plant. He said that during the
preceding administrations there had been much pressure from the
government to have this credit granted to CORFO, the government
development agency, but that the World Bank had insisted on making
the loan directly to the private company. The President added that the
Eximbank also had made a number of useful loans to private compa-
nies in Chile, both foreign and local.
Senator Morse then said that in his own behalf and in behalf of
Mr. Holt he wished to express his gratitude for the time the President
had been kind enough to give to this interview; that he felt he had
learned much and was happy to find that the President’s views coin-
cided to such a marked decree with his own. In closing he said he also
wished to tell the President how very helpful the Chilean Embassy
in Washington had been to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
and to assure the President of the high opinion which he and his col-
leagues on the Committee had of Chile.
The President thanked Senator Morse; that he was glad to have his
expression of appreciation for the helpfulness of the Chilean Embassy
in Washington which he assured him had the full confidence of the gov-
ernment here. He also expressed his appreciation for the understanding
and helpfulness of the United States Embassy in Chile with relation to
the problems of his government.
In departing Senator Morse said that, as a former professor, he
had been privileged to attend as a student a most useful seminar, and
congratulated the President on his helpful presentation of some of the
problems facing his government.

CH–27.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the
Department of State1
Santiago, January 8, 1960
No. 489.
SUBJECT
Object and Operation Plan for Chile3
Relations between the Governments of the United States and
Chile have reached a point of cordiality which is unusual in interna-
tional relations. For the first time in 20 years, the Chilean Government
is sincerely desirous of emphasizing free enterprise in the economy of
the country and is making a sincere effort to cope with the economic
problems which face the country because fiscal improvidence in years
gone by. Chile has given valuable support to the United States posi-
tion in the United Nations, particularly in such delicate problems as the
seating of Communist China. The political philosophy of the Chilean
Government is as strongly democratic and as opposed to all forms of
totalitarianism as is our own.
The election of Sr. Jorge ALESSANDRI Rodriguez as President of
Chile in September 1958 by a very slender margin brought into exis-
tence a businessman’s government which has utilized some of the best
brains in Chile in an attempt improve the country’s economy. But a
slight change in the vote would have brought into power a government
of the extreme left, dedicated to socialistic forms of economic organiza-
tion, and to collaboration with the communists; that such a government
would have posed serious problems for the United States goes without
saying.
It must therefore be the primary political objective of our policy
in Chile to do everything we properly can to ensure the success of the
Alessandri Administration politically and economically. We should
2 The referenced Department of State Instruction transmitted the “Regional
Operations Plan for Latin America,” approved by the Operations Coordinating Board on
3 The following individuals participated in the preparation of this despatch:
Ambassador Howe, William L. Krieg, Counselor of the Embassy, who drafted the doc-
ument; Donovan Q. Zook, First Secretary of the Embassy; Charles Katsainos, Second
Secretary; Norman M. Pearson, Labor Attaché; Victor Algrant, Commercial Attaché;
Ralph W. Richardson, Minerals Officer; Capt. Arthur M. Savage, Naval Attaché; Col.
Walter P. Goodwin, Army Mission Chief; Hewson A. Ryan, USIA Political Affairs Officer;
and L. Paul Oeschli, ICA Deputy Program Officer.

Chile  277
endeavor to enhance its prestige by having President EISENHOWER
visit Chile and inviting President Alessandri to visit the United States.
We should make it clear that we approve of the constructive steps
which the government has taken to cope with Chile’s problems.
At the same time, we must recognize that the political pendulum
has swung as far to the right in Chile as it is likely to go, and that the
return swing is likely to be evidenced in the Congressional elections
in 1961 and in the Presidential election of 1964. We must therefore also
maintain good working relations with the non-Communist parties of
the Chilean center and left and make-­every effort to clear up the misap-
prehensions which cloud their understanding of the policy and which
cause them to fail to see that the interests of Chile and the United States
are basically in harmony, not in conflict.
In the economic field, our course is not difficult to state though it
may be difficult to carry out in practice. We must encourage by every
legitimate means constructive action by the Alessandri Administration
to check inflation and provide a sound foundation for the country’s
economic growth. At the same time, it would be an error to forget the
political requirements of the Administration, and it would be self-­
defeating to insist on perfection overnight.
Alessandri was elected with less than one-­third of the popular
vote: his support in the Congress is based upon a delicately-­balanced
coalition which may disintegrate if the political sensitivities of the var-
ious parties are not continuously considered by the Administration in
designing its program. These factors cannot be overlooked by the United
States when we measure the effectiveness of Alessandri’s programs and
accomplishments. To stint in our support because of Alessandri’s failure
to achieve the ideal in his first year in office might lead to even, less satis-
factory progress in achieving stability politically; the alternatives would
certainly be less attractive from our point of view and less in line with
United States interests.
We should therefore lend such aid as we properly can to stabi-
lize the economy, and we should adopt a sympathetic attitude toward
requests for financial assistance designed to further the sound economic
growth of the country. Our technical cooperation program should be
carefully examined to eliminate what is less productive and empha-
size its most useful features. For the present, major emphasis should
be placed on the expansion of agricultural production and on the stim-
ulation of foreign and local investment in Chilean private enterprise,
including the private housing industry. At the same time, it may be
desirable to provide limited amounts of special assistance, probably in
the form of equipment, where it appears that a small investment will

put greater forces to work. For a more complete treatment of this sub-
It has been pointed out above that relations between the
Governments of Chile and the United States are excellent. This is not
true to the same extent of the sentiments of the Chilean people as a
whole toward U.S. government policies. Our enemies are working
vigorously and with considerable success to discredit us. Russian suc-
cesses in their satellite and space rocket program have raised questions
in the minds of many Chileans regarding the technical ability of the
United States to match Soviet progress; it is unpleasant to learn through
a straw poll that the majority of students at the University of Chile feel
that the United States is losing the Cold War.
Too many Chileans associate the United States with blind main-
tenance of the status quo and the USSR with social and economic
progress and the increasing welfare of the common people. We must
therefore be ceaselessly active in putting our case before the people,
and we should concentrate on the intellectual and labor groups. It is
here that we are at our weakest. The various programs for the exchange
of persons operated by the Department, USIA and ICA, have all been
extremely useful in spreading a better knowledge of the United States
among key figures in Chilean life. These program should be continued
at at least the present level and greater care should be taken in planning
then to ensure their success.
The celebration in 1960 of the 150th Anniversary of Chilean inde-
pendence presents an opportunity for the United States to participate
in a commemoration which will be close to the hearts of the Chilean
people. In the near future, the Embassy’s proposals for U.S. partici-
pation in this event will be forwarded to Washington, and it is hoped
that they may receive the support of the Department and other agen-
cies of the U.S. government.
Even in a country such as Chile, where the military traditionally
respects civilian control, the armed forces still represent a factor which
the government cannot ignore in developing its programs. Recent
events, especially the purchase of two fairly modern British cruisers by
Peru and of U.S. F-86F aircraft by Argentina, have caused the military
to bring pressure on the Government to increase the level of Chile’s
military equipment. Unless the United States can offer, over a period of
time, to supply reasonable quantities of surplus U.S. equipment to the
Chileans free of charge or on easy terms, there is little doubt that they
will eventually feel themselves compelled to squander a portion of their
limited resources on the purchase of military equipment elsewhere.

Chile  279
In these circumstances, the Embassy is unable to recommend that
the MAP Program here be discontinued and, in fact, hopes that forward
planning will become more definite so as to give the Chileans reason-
able assurance as to what they may expect to receive from us during the
next five years. As in the case of the technical cooperation program, a
more thorough discussion of the Military Assistance Program may be
The success of the Alessandri Administration in improving the
living standards of the Chilean people will have a strong influence in
strengthening democracy not only in Chile but in other countries of
Latin America as well. Conversely, its failure would be a body blow
to the principle of free enterprise and gain for anti-­democratic forces.
Consequently, there is no room for complacency in the conduct of our
relations with Chile. During the next few years we are going to have to
be alert to every opportunity to improve our situation and enhance the
prestige of the truly democratic elements in Chilean public life.
If the Embassy is to do these things and at the same time keep the
Department currently informed regarding developments here, it will
be necessary to have the proper tools with which to work. The Embassy
must be assured of reasonable stability in its personnel so that pains-
takingly acquired knowledge of the local psychology and an acquain-
tance with key individuals may not be wasted. Our primary problem
is not more personnel, although there are certain urgent requirements
the Department has been unable to fill; what we need most is a rea-
sonable degree of continuity so that our limited staff can be effectively
employed. Frequent changes of assignment not only reduce efficiency
but lower morale. It is also essential that allowances be adjusted
promptly and adequately to reflect changes in living costs if the United
States Missions are to maintain an adequate level of morale in the face
of the constantly worsening inflationary pressures felt by all members
of the government staff here and their families. It is recognized that the
Department faces many difficulties in the management of its numerous
Foreign Service establishments throughout the world and that special
circumstances will necessitate departures from normal standards of
personnel administration. However, it must always be borne in mind
that the operating efficiency of the U.S. Government in Chile is depen-
dent in large part on the maintenance of a reasonably stable and ade-
quately compensated staff.5
5 The enclosure, “Specific Objectives, Country Programs and Other Implementing
Operations,” is not printed.

CH–28.
Editorial Note
accompanied by Secretary Herter, Assistant Secretary Rubottom, White
House Press Secretary Hagerty and others, visited Chile as part of a
larger goodwill tour of South America. Documentation concerning
the President’s visit to Chile is principally in Conference Files, Lot 64
Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile”. The Embassy’s report
on Eisenhower’s visit was transmitted to the Department of State under
For documentation on the preparation for the President’s trip to South
America and its results, see Documents CH–28–30.
While in Chile, President Eisenhower held formal conversations
with President Alessandri on February 29, and Secretary Herter met
with Germán Vergar Donoso, Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs, on
March 1 at the Santiago Club. These conversations covered a wide range
of topics, and separate memoranda were prepared for each subject. All
subjects: “Argentine-Chile Frontier Matters” (US/MC/12); “Peruvian
Arms Purchases; the Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute” (US/MC/13);
“World Disarmament and Limitation of Arms Sales to Latin America”
(US/MC/16); “Chilean Diplomatic Approaches to other Countries for
Special Consideration by OAS of Arms Limitation in Latin America”
(US/MC/17); “The Connally Amendment and the International Court
of Justice” (US/MC/18); “The Summit Meeting” (US/MC/19); and
“South American Free Trade Zone” (US/MC/20).

Chile  281
CH–29.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of
Embassy in Chile (Krieg)1
Santiago, February 19, 1960.
US/MC/25
SUBJECT
Disarmament and Rearmament
PARTICIPANTS
Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place between 4:30
United States
The President
Secretary Herter
Ambassador Howe
Mr. Rubottom
Gen. Goodpaster
Mr. Hagerty
Col. Waltere
Mr. Krieg
Chile
President Alessandri
Foreign Minister Vargara
Sr. Walter Muller, Chilean
Ambassador to the U.S.
President Alessandri opened the conversation by stating that all
educated men must be grateful for the tremendous efforts and sacri-
fices being made by the United States on behalf of the entire free world.
He said he desired to cooperate fully with the United States and felt it
essential to this end that he explain frankly his points of view on vari-
ous pending problems.
Disarmament—President Alessandri then said that, in contrast with
some Latin American countries, Chile was a genuine democracy like
the United States, the United Kingdom and other western European
countries; Chile was proud of its democratic traditions, but as a con-
sequence was more vulnerable than certain countries to the onslaught
of Communism. He said he fully recognized that the principal respon-
sibilities for the welfare and progress of Chile lay with the Chileans
themselves; at the same time, he recognized the need for foreign help
and capital.
President Alessandri then stated that military expenses were a
heavy burden to the nation’s economy, holding back the government’s
efforts to develop the country economically. He intimated that he was
less concerned about the present level of expenditures than he was
about the possibility of future increases. In some countries, he said,
the Government was dependent upon the military for its continu-
ance in office and the civil authorities were therefore forced to yield
to the demands of the military for needless armament. For this reason,
President Alessandri said, he attached great importance to disarmament

and requested President Eisenhower to put the weight of U.S. influence
behind the disarmament conference which Chile has called for and to
help make the conference a success.2
President Alessandri said he thought that the possibilities for hold-
ing a general disarmament conference were good, but he believed it
better to have a preliminary meeting which would include all South
American countries except Bolivia and Paraguay and with the addition
of Mexico and the United States to prepare the way for a larger confer-
ence. He said that several countries had already accepted the invita-
tion but that Peru, Venezuela and Colombia had not yet replied to the
Chilean initiative. He said that he would like to have U.S. assistance in
assuring the success of the conference.
Aggression
President Alessandri said he believed it would be most helpful
if the United States would make a public promise to come to the aid
of a victim of aggression without waiting for action on the part of the
OAS. He said this would help a great deal to halt the armaments race.
President Alessandri also suggested that an agreement be worked out
among the American States (but not others) for recognition of the com-
pulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance
with Article 36 of the Court’s statute. This too, he thought, would be a
useful step forward in the direction of the limitation of armaments.
Rearmament
Turning to a new subject, President Alessandri said that he hoped
the United States would find it possible to provide credit for the recon-
ditioning of one additional destroyer and one additional submarine
for Chile. He confessed that this might appear to be inconsistent with
his previous statements regarding disarmament but the reason for
the request was that Chile had larger responsibilities for hemisphere
defense due to its geographic situation than certain other countries.
He said the Chilean forces were small in size and that both Peru and
Argentina had been buying more naval vessels. He suggested that the
United States military aid program be coordinated so that we would
not give assistance to countries which squandered their resources on
the purchase of foreign equipment. In other words, he explained, those
who don’t waste money on unnecessary purchases should get more
aid. He felt that these principles were consistent with United States
principles and would work to the advantages of all.
President Eisenhower said that he was interested in President
Alessandri’s remarks and would like to ask two questions. The first was,
2 [illegible in the original]

Chile  283
what portion of the Chilean budget was devoted to defense? President
Alessandri replied that it was 14% and went on to say that he would sug-
gest to the department conference that the definition of military expense
be unified since many other countries currently hid military items in
their budgets so as to disguise their expenditures. Chile had not only
done this, but he had put an end to this practice when he was Minister of
Finance several years ago.
President Eisenhower replied that exclusive of pensions and
payments to veterans, the United States spends 56% of its budget on
national defense. The President hastened to add that he did not say this
in a bragging way but merely to indicate how very sympathetic he was
to President Alessandri’s objectives.
President Alessandri suggested that the problem of armaments be
viewed as a problem of protesting the rear guard of the United States.
He also expressed the thought that funds saved from armaments could
be used for economic development and that this would help to combat
Communism.
President Eisenhower said that he fully agreed and asked what
effect the success of the disarmament conference would have on Chile’s
intention to purchase more naval vessels. President Alessandri replied
that Chile’s desire to acquire additional vessels was a result of recent
purchases by the Peruvians. President Eisenhower repeated his ques-
tion about the effect of a successful disarmament conference on Chile’s
desire to purchase naval vessels, and President Alessandri replied that
it would have a direct effect.
President Alessandri went on to say that when he came to power
he was under great pressure to acquire additional armaments because
of incidents with Argentina in disputed areas. President Eisenhower
said he would like to take that opportunity to comment on his meet-
ings with the Presidents of Brazil and Argentina. The President said
that while they had been less emphatic than Alessandri, he was con-
vinced that both were sincere in their desire for disarmament. Both had
stressed their devotion to inter-American friendship, and Frondizi had
specifically expressed the hope that the boundary disputes with Chile
would soon be settled. While it was true that Frondizi had wanted
more modern arms, his purpose in so doing was to reduce his defense
expenses in half by having smaller, more efficient forces.
President Eisenhower then said he would like to come to the second
of his two questions. He asked President Alessandri whether the latter
believed that each nation had a right to decide its own level of defense
for internal and basic defensive purposes. President Alessandri replied
that each nation did indeed have the right to decide on its basic defen-
sive requirements, but he saw this as no bar to mutual agreements for
the limitation of armaments. He stressed that Chile was exceptionally

vulnerable, that Chile would not attack anyone, but that certain ele-
ments in Peru and Bolivia harbor revengeful feelings toward Chile as a
result of 19th century conflicts.
President Eisenhower said that he had no intention of denying the
basic right of self-­defense to any nation but pointed out that economic
development would be greatly stimulated by an agreement on disarma-
ment. He said he felt it would prevent any tendency to push disputes
to an extreme. He concluded this phase of the discussion by saying
that he was strongly favorable to the principles set forth by President
Alessandri and suggested that the two Foreign Ministers study the
problem of the preliminary disarmament conference for ten countries.
CH–30.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of
Embassy in Chile (Krieg)1
Santiago, February 29, 1960.
US/MC/26
SUBJECT
Economic Problems
PARTICIPANTS
Information on the source text indicates that this memorandum was approved at the
White House on March 22.
United States
The President
Secretary Herter
Ambassador Howe
Mr. Rubottom
Gen. Goodpaster
Mr. Hagerty
Col. Walters
Mr. Krieg
Chile
President Alessandri
Foreign Minister Vergara
Sr. Walter Muller, Chilean
Ambassador to the U.S.
International Credit
President Alessandri referred to the joint declaration made by
Presidents Eisenhower and Kubitschek in Brazil regarding expanded
efforts toward economic development and expressed strong approval
of this statement, especially of President Kubitschek’s suggestion that
the Inter-American Bank should enter new fields and not simply dupli-
cate facilities which were available elsewhere.

Chile  285
The President said that the United States supported the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Export-
Import Bank, and other lending institutions and that he did not think
the IADB would replace or duplicate them. His objective was to com-
plement not to replace. President Eisenhower added that he felt the
Latin American countries would feel a greater sense of responsibility
because of the fact that their own monetary contributions formed part
of the bank’s capital.
President Alessandri then referred to Communist propaganda
to the effect that the United States provided aid to Latin America
exclusively for selfish motives and suggested that our aid be coordi-
nated into a basic plan to overcome the charge that the United States
neglects Latin America. A little later in the conversation President
Alessandri repeated this suggestion and urged that a development
plan to be carried out within a certain number of years be drawn up.
He felt such coordination would make the plan better known, and
recommended that the Department of State should answer charges
made against the United States and conduct a vigorous campaign of
counter-­propaganda. President Eisenhower said that he hoped the
Chilean Foreign Office would do the same. President Alessandri said
they would but that the Communists poured a great deal of money
into Latin America. President Eisenhower said jokingly he assumed
that President Alessandri was not suggesting that the United States
buy a newspaper in Santiago and turn it into an official U.S. propa-
ganda organ. President Alessandri laughed and said that of course
such was not his intention.
Copper
President Alessandri spoke briefly of the importance of copper to
Chile as a source of employment and as a source of revenue for the
government. He said there are two things connected with the U.S.
policy which concerned him: the first was the United States excise tax
on imported copper of 1.7 cents per pound, and the second was the
possibility that our copper stockpile might be liquidated, thus causing
a disastrous break in world copper prices. He said he hoped the tax
would be removed and that we would not liquidate the stockpile.
President Eisenhower said he did not know about the copper tax
and glanced at Secretary Herter and Mr. Rubottom who confirmed the
existence of such a tax. The President said he did not know what the
current situation was, that things were generally better and perhaps
the tax was no longer needed. In any case, the President said he would
have that matter looked into.

On the subject of the stockpile, President Eisenhower assured
President Alessandri that it was not the intention of his administration
to liquidate the stockpile. He said that it had been brought into exis-
tence and could by law only be used to meet emergencies; it would
never be used to depress prices. The President went on to say that at
one time when a strike had caused a great shortage of copper it had
been suggested that copper be released from the stockpile to supply the
fabricating industry and prevent unemployment and shortages of man-
ufactured goods; it was his understanding, however, that no copper
had actually been released at that time. President Alessandri expressed
warm appreciation for President Eisenhower’s assurances.
U.S. Investments
President Alessandri referred to U.S. investments in Chile and
added that Chile was consequently trying to improve the climate for
foreign investors and to give better guarantees. He gave President
Eisenhower his personal assurance of the maximum protection for for-
eign capital and stated that U.S. investment had on the whole been a
good thing for Chile.
The Latin American Free Trade Zone
To conclude his remarks President Alessandri said that Chile was
not trying to harm trade with the United States through its agreement
with other Latin American countries for a free trade zone. What he was
seeking was wider markets without detriment to the United States.
President Eisenhower expressed his appreciation for this assurance.
Conclusion
As the group prepared to break up, President Eisenhower stressed
again his confidence that the Governments of Argentina and Brazil
were sincerely desirous of maintaining good relations with Chile and
their other neighbors. President Alessandri acknowledged this and in
return stated that he desired to give the most absolute assurances of his
wish to cooperate fully with the United States.

Chile  287
CH–31.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of
the Office of East Coast Affairs (Briggs)1
Santiago, March 1, 1960.
US/MC/14
PARTICIPANTS
Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place between 3:00
and 5:30 p.m. at the Union Club, and that the memorandum was approved in the Office
of the Secretary of State on March 8.
United States
The Secretary
ARA - Mr. R. R. Rubottom
Embassy, Santiago – Mr. Krieg
ARA/EST – Mr. W. T. Briggs
Chile
Germán Vergara Donoso,
Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Carlos Vial Infante,
Minister of Defense
SUBJECT
Chilean Need for Naval Vessels
The Foreign Minister referred to his earlier comments on Peruvian
military links with Argentina and the existence to some degree of a
spirit of [illegible in the original] in Peru. He said that although he has
confidence in the bona fides of President Frondisi of Argentina, the
recent negotiations with the GOA on boundary matters have not been
heartening and the possibility that former President Odria of Peru may
again be a Presidential candidate with a good chance of election is a
cause for concern. These factors are leading to some internal pressures
in Chile, in the Congress and from the public as well as among the
armed forces, for strengthening the Chilean military position.
The Minister noted that the United States Congress has recently
released the figures on U.S. military assistance to Latin America.
These figures show, he continued, that during the last ten years Brazil
received the greatest amount of U.S. military assistance, followed by
Peru, with Chile a poor third. He said that President Alessandri had
said yesterday to President Eisenhower that the minimum which Chile
can ask is to reach an agreement with the U.S. Government which
would result in Chile’s receiving the two destroyers and two subma-
rines which she had expected to get under existing U.S. legislation. So
far only one submarine has been authorized, he said, the availability of
the other submarines and of the two destroyers depending on action by
the United States Congress. He mentioned Chile’s long coastline, with
innumerable channels and islands to patrol, and added that Chile has
become inferior in naval strength to both Peru and Argentina and is

beginning to feel vulnerable, both on the sea and in the air. He added
that during the present century Chile has had naval superiority in ton-
nage ranging from three to eight times Peruvian strength, but that now
the strength of the two countries is just about the same. The acquisition
of two cruisers by Peru from Great Britain, one of which has already
been delivered, is a matter of serious concern and the armed forces are
consequently pressing the Government for arms purchases which it can
ill afford. The Minister added that should Chile continue its present line
while her neighbors continue to grow militarily, a point may be reached
at which the armed forces, public opinion and the Congress will “say
something strong”.
Referring to the Minister’s mention of the Peruvian purchase of
cruisers, the Secretary said that we have assumed that this purchase
was motivated more by the Peru-Ecuador boundary situation than
by any problems Peru may have with Chile. The Minister of Defense
rejoined that Ecuador has neither cruisers nor destroyers and, given
the manifest weakness of the Ecuadoran Navy, this Peruvian conten-
tion is unacceptable.
Mr. Rubottom commented that it would be difficult to find more
frustrated people than we of the United States Government in so far
as these questions of arms are concerned. He said that the Congress is
criticizing the Department of State for making too many arms avail-
able to Latin America. He added that Prime Minister Baltran of Peru
has asked us to limit arms sales to Peru, at the same time confess-
ing that he cannot prevent Peruvian Government attempts to pur-
chase arms. At the same time, he went on, some of our other Latin
American friends feel that they have not been fairly treated, as evi-
denced by the Foreign Minister’s prior remarks. Mr. Rubottom said
that we certainly are sympathetic and understand the problem of the
Chilean Government and are anxious to be as helpful and construc-
tive as possible. We consider that President Alessandri’s initiative in
trying to put this arms question into the proper perspective is one of
the most heartening things we have seen in recent years and we hope
that it will prove feasible to work something out along these lines
within the inter-American system. Meanwhile, Mr. Rubottom contin-
ued, he thought President Eisenhower’s words today made it clear
that we regard the Rio Treaty as the shield on which the nations of
the Americas can depend for protection against aggression. For this
reason, he thought, governments might be enabled to resist patriotic
pressures for increased military programs in their own countries.
The Minister of Defense then reverted to the question of the two
destroyers which were to be made available to Chile under the 1958

Chile  289
U.S. legislation, saying that with these two destroyers the position of
the GOC vis-­a-­vis its armed forces would be much improved and that,
therefore, U.S. assistances in obtaining these two destroyers and the
one submarine still lacking is grandly desired.
Mr. Rubottom replied that our whole approach to inter-American
military cooperation has been based on our support of hemispheric
defense and not on bilateral problems between countries. With respect
to the specific items mentioned by the Minister of Defense, the Chilean
Ambassador in Washington has made this point well on several occa-
sions, he continued. Nevertheless, Mr. Rubottom added, we have a dif-
ficult budgetary problem and also the matter of Congressional interest
in and attention to hemispheric military affairs, which seems likely to
increase and which at times virtually ties the hands of the Department.
Moreover, he went on, the naval legislation of 1958 had originally pro-
vided for the recipient nations to pay for the rehabilitation of the naval
vessels involved, but the Department, feeling that such rehabilitation
costs would be a burden to Latin American countries, had asked the
Congress for authorization to assure responsibility for these rehabilita-
tion costs ourselves. This attempt to be generous has, in effect, delayed
implementation of the program in Latin America for almost two years.
With respect to the credit to Argentina for military purchases,
was for aircraft, a small amount for the rehabilitation of our subma-
rines, and the balance of 3 or 4 million for army equipment. We have no
Military agreement with Argentina, he continued, but we nevertheless
felt impelled to grant this credit on a politico-­moral basis, considering
that the [illegible in the original] of the whole continent is enhanced
by the consistency of constitutional government in Argentina. He had
hoped that with this minimum military assistance it might be possi-
ble to contribute to the continuance of Argentina on the constitutional
path, he went on, noting that we do not consider that the GOA has any
aggressive intent.

CH–32.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of
the Office of East Coast Affairs (Briggs)1
Santiago, March 1, 1960.
US/MC/14
PARTICIPANTS
Information on the source text indicates that this memorandum was approved in the
Office of the Secretary of State on March 8.
United States
Secretary Herter
ARA - Mr. Rubottom
Embassy, Santiago – Mr. Krieg
ARA/EST – Mr. Briggs
Chile
Germán Vergara Donoso, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Chile
Carlos Vial Infante, Minister of
Defense of Chile
SUBJECT
Cuban Situation
The Secretary stated that he would very much appreciate the
Foreign Minister’s views on the situation in Cuba, which is very dis-
turbing to us. When we asked our Ambassador to come home, the
Secretary went on, the personal attacks in Cuba on the President, the
Vice President, and the Secretary himself had become so inflammatory
that we feared that serious danger to American citizens might result
were these attacks continued.
Since our Ambassador left Havana, some friends of Castro from
other Latin American countries have spoken with him of the danger
of this foolish course and he has moderated his tone to some extent.
Nevertheless, we note with concern that he is surrounding himself
increasingly with people of Communist orientation and that the influ-
ence of persons of this type is extending rapidly into the schools, the
labor organizations and the army, as well as in the government itself.
We have no quarrel with Cuba on the basic question of land reform,
which we fully recognize is a matter of national sovereignty; but tre-
mendous confusion is occurring in the implementation of the Cuban
agrarian reform law and this confusion leads to doubt as to the intent or
the ability of the Cuban Government to provide the full, adequate and
effective compensation that is required for American interests affected
by expropriation.
The Cuban Government recently sent us a note, the Secretary
continued, requesting that we enter into discussions with them, but
containing the proviso that these discussions can only be undertaken
provided that the United States agree that neither its Executive Branch

Chile  291
nor its Congress will take any unilateral action which might affect
Cuba’s interests. This is manifestly impossible, given the independence
of the Legislative Branch under our governmental system. Moreover,
our sugar legislation expires this year and even should the Congress
renew the sugar legislation in its present form, this would be definable
as a unilateral act affecting Cuba’s interests.
The Secretary noted that a good deal of opinion is arising in the
United States to the effect that some action is needed with respect to
Cuba. One suggestion which seems to be gaining ground is that we buy
Cuban sugar at the world market price and put the difference between
that price and the price paid to Cuba under the quota system in escrow
to be used to pay damages for expropriation or other actions of the
GOC against United States interests in Cuba.
The problem of the moment, however, the Secretary went on,
is the question of whether to send our Ambassador back to Havana
or to keep him in Washington. There are pros as well as cons on this
question. Those who advocate the Ambassador’s return say that he
is needed in Havana in order to provide access to Castro and thus to
enable us to have official contact with him. On the other hand, however,
the Ambassador has often had to wait for three weeks or longer to see
Castro and has on occasion had great difficulty in seeing him at all.
The Secretary emphasized that we do not consider the Cuban prob-
lem as peculiar to the United States but feel that it is a Latin American
problem, inasmuch as the Castro mystique is beginning to appear in
other countries. Feeling, therefore, that this is a Latin American prob-
lem, we would like to consult thereon in order to insure that in deal-
ing with it we avoid mistakes which might affect the interests of other
American countries, the Secretary added. He mentioned parentheti-
cally that the status of the Guantanamo Naval Base has not been raised
at any time by the GOC.
The Foreign Minister replied that President Alessandri’s sympathy
for the United States position in the Cuban situation was shown by
his recent statement to Senator Smathers, when the latter asked what
the Chilean attitude would be if the United States Congress should
take strong action against Cuba. In order to give President Alessandri
a moment to collect his thoughts and reply to this unexpected ques-
tion, the Foreign Minister said, he himself had asked the Senator what
such action would be and what economic effects would be anticipated
therefrom. Before the Senator could answer, President Alessandri had
said: “All of our sympathies and those of most of the officials of the
Government of Chile are with the United States Government, because
we understand the damage which United States interests and the
United States itself have suffered in Cuba; but there is a great mass in
this country and that mass is more numerous than we are.” The Foreign
Minister went on to explain that by this comment the President had

meant that although thinking people realize the full implications of the
Cuban situation the masses are inclined to applaud the GOC, in other
Latin American countries as well as in Chile.
The Minister went on to say that in his view it would be better to
try to isolate Cuba than to act directly against it. He considered that
isolation would not necessarily remedy the situation there or materially
change that existing in other countries, but that it would be least likely
to make things worse. He described the recent visit of Cuban emissary
Lechuga to Santiago to obtain Chilean agreement to attend the con-
ference of under-­developed countries which the GOC is attempting to
promote. The Minister said that Lechuga had received a flat refusal in
Chile, but that in Peru the government did not refuse his request due to
the influence in the Peruvian Government of the APRA party through
Raúl Porras, the Minister of Foreign Affairs. “If you note this situation
in Peru, where the Government is conservative,” the Minister went
on, “you can imagine what it might be in others with less conservative
administrations.” In this situation, the Minister said, any strong action
by the U.S. Congress would be likely to be dangerous. The best solution
would probably be for the Congress to grant to the Executive permis-
sion to proceed in accordance with the circumstances.
The Secretary said that this authorization has been requested. He
then asked whether the Foreign Minister would advise our sending
our Ambassador back to Havana. The Foreign Minister replied affir-
matively, saying that it would be unfortunate to give the Cubans any
opportunity to divert the attention of the public of the hemisphere from
matters of substance to matters of form.
CH–33.
Memorandum from the President’s Staff Secretary
(Goodpaster) to the President’s Assistant (Persons)1
Washington, March 7, 1960.
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL PERSONS
During the President’s visit to Chile, President Alessandri
expressed to him very great concern over the impact of our copper
stockpile on world copper markets, referring specifically to the fact that
it “overhangs” the market, and to recurrent rumors from time to time
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.”

Chile  293
that large releases from the stockpile are under consideration or about
to take place with little or no notice.
The President stated he would like you to make it known within
the Administration and specifically to OCDM, that the whole spirit and
intent of our stockpile laws is to provide for the use of these materials
for emergency purposes only. While an emergency of a severe character
in the economic field might occur which would be of the same seri-
ousness as war itself, and thereby justify releases, it is not his intent to
release materials from the stockpile with the purpose of influencing the
market through the normal, commercial effect of such releases.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
Staff Secretary
CH–34.
Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Chilean
Affairs (Phillips) to the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, May 2, 1960.
SUBJECT
Balance Sheet on Chile
With reference to the note you attached to our memo of April 19,
following is a brief compilation of what the U.S. and Chile want from
each other.
Chile wants:
1. Credit to cover cost of rehabilitating vessels earmarked for Chile
under ship loan program.
2. Economic development loans far (1) construction of Pudahuel
airport, (2) termination of construction of University of Chile Medical
School, and (3) survey of natural resources, particularly ground waters.
3. A new PL-480 sales agreement, with local currency loan funds
to be earmarked for financing a savings and loan system to stimulate
housing construction.
Confidential.

4. A U.S.-Chilean convention for avoidance of double taxation,
including a tax-­sparing provision.
5. U.S.-Chilean investment guaranty agreement (convertibility only).
6. Additional U.S. support for a joint U.S.-Chilean program of sci-
entific research in Antarctica.
7. Continued U.S. backing for the Alessandri arms limitation
proposal.
1. Maintenance of political democracy in Chile plus more affective
action by Chilean Government to restore financial stability and affect
basic improvements in national economy and distribution of income.
2. Adoption of measures by Chilean Government to diversify
Chile’s economy and encourage production through stimulation of pri-
vate investment, including foreign investment. (We also want double
tax convention and investment guaranty agreement.)
3. Recognition by Chilean Government that its overly tolerant atti-
tude towards international Communist activities is creating problems
for Chile and rest of hemisphere.
4. To assist in financing construction of Pudahuel airport, but not
the medical school or resources survey.
5. A consular convention with Chile, particularly to facilitate
import privileges for non-­diplomatic U.S. personnel.
6. Chile to hold to a minimum its acquisition of new arms, partic-
ularly naval vessels.
7. To support the Chilean arms limitation initiative in so far as
practicable.
CH–35.
Instruction from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Chile1
Washington, May 13, 1960.
A-185.
SUBJECT
Chilean Proposal for Removal of U.S. Copper Excise Tax
Drafted by Phillips on May 10, and approved by Rubottom.

Chile  295
In the course of President Eisenhower’s February 29, 1960 con-
versation with President Alessandri, the latter expressed the hope
that the United States copper excise tax would be removed. President
Eisenhower said he would have the matter looked into. Following care-
ful examination of this problem by interested agencies of the United
States Government, the Embassy is requested to inform the Chilean
Government that removal of the tax does not appear to be practicable
at this time, for the reasons set forth below.
Suspension or removal of the copper tax could be effected only
through legislation. Legislation was passed suspending the tax contin-
ually from April 1947 through June 1958, with the exception of a brief
interval in 1950–51. These prior suspensions of the tax were enacted at
times when copper was in short supply, a situation which does not now
prevail. The present tax is 1.7 cents per pound so long as the United
States price remains at or above 24 cents per pound. At prices below 24
cents, the so-­called “snap back” point, the tax becomes 2 cents.
The current United States market price for copper is 33 cents per
pound, making the ad valorem equivalent of the existing tax only about
5 percent. It is felt that this tax has little restrictive effect at present and
that the Chileans have virtually full access to the United States market.
Indeed, a substantial part of total copper imports from Chile is reex-
ported after processing, and is therefore not subject to the tax.
The present copper market is thin and it seems probable that the
price will fall in the months just ahead. Removal of the tax might accen-
tuate the downward pressure on the United States copper price and
thus possibly cancel out any benefit which Chile might expect to derive
from suspension or removal.
The present session of Congress might be an especially inappro-
priate occasion to seek suspension or removal of the copper tax. It will
probably be a short session and the calendar is unusually crowded with
items which would take precedence over copper legislation.
There is sentiment in certain segments of the domestic copper pro-
ducing industry in favor of raising the level of the present tax on copper
or the “snap back” price or both. This sentiment is reflected in the atti-
tudes of some members of Congress. If repeal or suspension were rec-
ommended to Congress it is possible that Congressional action, if any,
would bring about a situation less satisfactory than the present one.
The copper situation is, of course, being closely and continuously
studied by all interested agencies of the United States Government,
and, should future circumstances appear to favor a removal of the cop-
per excise tax, the Administration would be prepared to consider sup-
porting an appropriate measure for this purpose.
The United States Government wishes to reiterate its willingness
to discuss with the Chilean Government any problem which might
affect a commodity of such importance to Chile as copper.

As soon as the above information is given to the Chilean
Government, please confirm by telegram the fact of delivery so that
the Department may give the same information promptly to the
Chilean Embassy. If the information is conveyed orally to the Chilean
Government, the Embassy is requested to submit (in reproducible form)
a memorandum of conversation. If it is conveyed by note, the Embassy
is requested to transmit to the Department a (reproducible) copy of the
note and of any communication received in reply.
Dillon, Acting
CH–36.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Chile (Howe)1
Santiago, May 17, 1960.
PARTICIPANTS
President Alessandri
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Enrique Ortúzar
Ambassador Howe
I called on President Alessandri this morning in order to transmit
personally to him the message from President Eisenhower included in
able to give me an appointment prior to this time because he has been
devoting himself fully to the completion of the address which he will
make to the Chilean Congress on May 21, which had to go to press
yesterday evening. I had last week advised the Foreign Minister of the
content of the message from President Eisenhower so that President
Alessandri was, in general, informed. While Ortúzar was present
throughout the conversation, he took no active part in it. Even though
the events of the past few days made the message somewhat anticli-
mactical I repeated the contents of President Eisenhower’s message
and President Alessandri expressed his deep appreciation and asked
2 The referenced circular telegram instructed the Embassy to convey to President
Alessandri a description of the objectives President Eisenhower wanted to achieve at the

Chile  297
that I convey his assurance of sympathetic support for President
Eisenhower in the difficult situation which he confronted at the Paris
meetings.
The President went on to say that while the world situation was
grave and the attitude of Khrushchev at Paris a cause for concern, he
personally was not surprised, as Khrushchev’s attitude was just such as
might be expected from one of his background, which Alessandri com-
pared to the background and attitude of many members of the local
opposition to his government here in Chile, with the common traits
of irresponsibility and demagoguery. He emphasized the increasing
danger of Communism in Latin America and said that no doubt the
Communists would exploit the current increase of world tensions to
serve their own ends here and in this continent.
Using these objectives and tactics of the opposition as a transition
from world affairs to his own problems in Chile, the President men-
tioned the current situation relating to the wage and salary readjust-
ment and his determination to explain it in the bluntest terms to the
Congress in the course of his address this week. He blamed these dif-
ficulties primarily on petty political maneuvering within and among
the various political parties, pointing out that with the congressional
elections coming early next year many, if not all of the parties, were
focusing their attention more on those elections than on the needs and
welfare of the country. [text not declassified] He said that his failure to
present to the Congress an administration-­sponsored project for wage
readjustment during the early months of the year was due entirely to
the fact that at no time had he been able to get sufficiently clear assur-
ance of support from the Radicals to provide such a project with a rea-
sonable guarantee of congressional approval. He said further that in
recent weeks the attitude of the Radical Party had further deteriorated.
Its official leadership continued to recognize the basic validity of the
government’s position and to be in general accord with its stability pro-
gram. Due to the approach of congressional elections, the leadership
was under more and more pressure from elements within its own party
and less willing or able to offer the administration the support which
it requires.
I remarked that I supposed that the Radicals, along with other
parties, would have their own proposals relating to wage readjust-
ments to introduce into the next Congress, after the 21st; the President
replied, of course, there would be many, but stated with great vehe-
mence that as long as he had the support of one-­third of the mem-
bership of either Chamber he would veto and continue to veto any
wage proposal that would endanger the government’s stabilization
program.

I remarked that while this was undoubtedly a difficult and critical
period which the administration was going through, that it had prob-
ably been inevitable from the beginning and that I had been pleased at
the generally favorable findings of the Mission from the International
Monetary Fund which was here last week. I said that members of this
Mission had been quite laudatory in their assessment of what the
Government had done in the past year and that actually the major
danger they saw ahead was the problem of the budget. The President
himself took this up and agreed wholeheartedly that the budget was
the country’s number one problem and one that was going to be
extremely difficult to solve. He emphasized the very greet need of not
only continuing the present but expanding the whole public works
program, and said that it was simply impossible to finance such a
program from current income. This gave the President an opportu-
nity to return to the theme which he has often developed, namely, the
urgent need for reopening foreign sources of credits and financing
comparable to those which existed prior to 1932. As he has said many
times in the past, he repeated that in order to meet the real needs of
Chile and other Latin American nations for economic growth, it was
not sufficient for foreign credits to be made available by the interna-
tional lending agencies or those of the United States to cover dollar
costs of various projects, leaving the usually much greater costs in
local currency to be met out of current operating budgets. He empha-
sized that he did not mean that such credits had to come from official
government financed sources but rather that countries such as Chile
should have access to the private lending market in the United States
under such controls as might be necessary to avoid the mistakes and
abuses which he quite readily admitted had existed during the 1920s.
In the course of his remarks on this subject he recalled with some bit-
terness that many of Chile’s current troubles went back to the projects
initiated by CORFO in the years after 1939, observing that many of
these projects were in themselves highly useful to the country but that
in initiating them with foreign credits for foreign costs CORFO had
left the large balance of local cost to be met by the government out
of current income, all of which had led to unbalanced budgets, defi-
cit financing, and the consequent evils of inflation. He remembered
that among the current leaders of the larger South American coun-
tries, mentioning especially Frondizi, Kubitschek, and Lleras, he was
the only one who had continuity of practical experience which went
back to the days of the late 1920s and ’30s. He repeated what he has
also said before: namely, the apparent lack of understanding of the
capable, theoretical economists and technicians connected with the
international lending agencies and U.S. credit institutions, of both the
pressing needs and practical realities of the growth situation in South

Chile  299
America. He emphasized again that there was a critical need for more
capital from abroad that could be converted into local currency for
public works, both to finance the urgently needed public works them-
selves and to take up slack in the employment without which it would
be increasingly difficult to hold the Communists in check and for gov-
ernments such as his to succeed in their program. He mentioned also
that such foreign credits, that could be converted into local currency,
would also be of great assistance to the United States in making avail-
able more dollars to Chile and, by implication, her neighbors, which
could be used for imports from the United States, and thus help to
relieve our own current export problem.
When the President ended his comments on this topic I remarked
that from recent conversations with Pablo Pérez, Minister of Public
Works, and Roberto Vergara, Minister of Finance, I understood that the
government was currently working on a program of public works, par-
ticularly in the fields of roads and irrigation. I said that I had expressed
to both Ministers the hope that when they had their programs suffi-
ciently developed they would make them available to us so that both
the Embassy and our technical assistance people would have an oppor-
tunity to study them prior to any actual application being made to one
of the international or U.S. lending agencies.
The President then returned to the international situation, repeat-
ing that he felt that the current crisis would be fully exploited by
Communists in Latin America as well as other parts of the world. He
expressed the view that Khrushchev’s belligerent attitude was deter-
mined at least in part by growing differences between Russia and
Communist China. Indicating that as between the two he felt that
Russia constituted the greater threat to the free world, he expressed
the wish that the United States could find it possible to follow a more
flexible policy with relation to Communist China, both in order to relax
tension with Communist China and with the idea of increasing the
tension between Russia and China. He said that information coming
to him from non-Communist visitors to China suggested that Chinese
Communism was different from Russian Communism in that many
Communist enterprises were apparently conducted through a mixed
form of public and private ownership. (Comment: While the sources
of President Alessandri on this subject are not fully known, it is quite
possible that he may have been influenced by conversations with
recent non-Communist Chilean visitors to China, including Liberal
Deputy Jorge Errázuriz, Juan Gómez Millas, Director of the University
of Chile, Francis Walker Linares, Director of Cultural Exchange activ-
ities.) I expressed some surprise at this, saying that while I certainly
did not claim to be a student of that area, my understanding was that,
if anything, Russia showed some signs of emerging from the primitive

and absolute form of Communism, while China was still more closely
tied to doctrinaire Marxist and Leninist teachings. I also remarked that
whatever adjustments might at some time be possible in U.S. policy,
that a relaxation of tension required a willingness on both sides and
that from all the information that had come to my attention there was
no indication whatsoever that Communist China was seeking either
a relaxation of tension with the United States or a less dominant role
throughout Asia.
The conversation closed with the President once more expressing
his appreciation for the message from President Eisenhower and saying
that while he could add no suggestions that could be helpful as to the
current difficulties with Russia, be fully shared the hopes and objec-
tives of President Eisenhower.
CH–37.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)
to the President1
Washington, June 2, 1960.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
SUBJECT
Disaster Assistance to Chile2
With your encouragement, the United States Government has
undertaken a major foreign disaster relief operation in Chile. We have
airlifted from the U.S. two Army field hospitals, each with 400 beds and
210 Army personnel. We have also airlifted ten helicopters to operate
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series.
2 Commencing May 21, Chile was struck by a series of earthquakes accompanied by
tidal waves, avalanches, and floods, which caused more than 5,000 deaths and property
damage estimated between $350 and $400 million.
On May 24, President Eisenhower sent a message to President Alessandri, transmit-
ted in Department telegram 869 to Santiago, which read as follows:
“Dear Mr. President:
“The news of the disasters in southern Chile has come as a personal shock to me.
Through you, I convey to the Chilean people the profound sympathy of the United States
Government and people.
“With assurance of my continuing regard.
Sincerely,
(signed) Dwight D. Eisenhower”
(Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile”)

Chile  301
in conjunction with the hospitals and to carry supplies to otherwise
inaccessible areas. From the Canal Zone and the U.S., we have airlifted
communications equipment and technicians, as well as large quantities
of tents, blankets, cots, field rations, and medicines. Those expenses of
emergency relief operations chargeable to the ICA contingency fund
are expected to amount to approximately $2.5 million. This represents
the cost of supplies and transportation but does not include the pay and
allowances of personnel involved.
Of course, your own direct appeal to the American people to help
Chile has had a dramatic impact both here and in Chile.3 U.S. volun-
tary private agencies, as well as firms and individuals, are making
generous contributions in cash and kind to Chilean disaster relief. The
American National Red Cross is organizing a major campaign which
should raise millions of dollars. Taking into account the sum total of for-
eign contributions and the efforts of the Chileans themselves, there appears
to be no need for any substantial new emergency assistance from the U.S.
Government.
Even before the emergency relief operation is completed, we
expect to devote urgent attention to Chile’s reconstruction require-
ments. Our Embassy in Santiago will soon be sending us a com-
munication outlining the Chilean Government’s general policy and
tentative action plan for reconstruction. On the basis of this commu-
nication, we hope soon to be able to make specific recommendations
for courses of action by the U.S. Government. In the meantime, the
Export-Import Bank has made available a $10 million dollar recon-
struction credit.4
Douglas Dillon
3 For text of President Eisenhower’s statement, see Eisenhower, Public Papers of the
4 For additional information concerning U.S. emergency assistance to Chile, see
Department of State press release [illegible in the original]83, dated May 26, printed in

CH–38.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American
Affairs (Coerr)1
Washington, June 16, 1960.
SUBJECT
United States Assistance to Chile.
PARTICIPANTS
President Eisenhower
Mr. Robert Merriam, The White House
Ambassador Muller of Chile
Mr. Jorge Schneider, Special Representative, Chilean Government
Mr. Wymberley Coerr, Department of State
Responding to the President’s inquiry as to the present situation in
Chile’s disaster area, the Ambassador described the plight of Valdivia.
He said it lay along the San Pedro River which normally drained Lake
Riñihue but had been blocked by an accidental dam that could burst at
any moment. He described the Chilean Army’s efforts to build tempo-
rary dams above the lake while simultaneously trying to dig channels
through the San Pedro River blockage so as to drain the lake’s excess
water without flooding Valdivia. In response to the President’s ques-
tion, the Ambassador confirmed that the United States Government has
sent an engineer who is an expert in flood control to assist the Chilean
Army in this job.
The Ambassador went on to express his hearty thanks for the
wonderfully prompt and efficient American aid that he said had had
a terrific impact on the Chilean people. He read aloud resolutions
of appreciation that had just been passed by the Chilean House of
Deputies and Senate. Observing that these resolutions had been passed
unanimously, he consented that Chile was a very democratic country,
that such unanimity was exceedingly rare and therefore evidenced
widespread gratitude.
Thanking the Ambassador for having read these resolutions, the
President declared he was glad to know the United States’ aid had
been useful. He said that, although he himself was wary of the danger
of over-­publicizing United States aid, some private citizens had been
talking to him urging that something spectacular be done to drama-
tize United States sympathy for Chile. For example, it had been sug-
gested to him that Chile had a tremendous need for doctors and nurses
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.” Official Use Only.

Chile  303
which the United States might supply and that the United States might
also send Naval ships whose generating plants could supply power to
coastal towns whose plants had had been damaged. The Ambassador
did not indicate any need for the ships’ power plants, and said that,
with the availability of the two American field hospitals for the imme-
diate emergency, Chile had no serious shortage of doctors and nurses.
The President said he had been thinking that it might be useful
for the two Governments to form a group to study the problem of
Chilean reconstruction. He said that possibly Ambassador Donnelly or
Dr. Milton Eisenhower might work with two or three Chilean represen-
tatives. The Ambassador did not respond to this suggestion when made,
but after leaving the White House told an officer of the Department
he would be very much in favor of implementing the President’s sug-
gestion. He said he would recommend that his Government, after the
President had returned from his Far Eastern Trip,2 ask the President to
send a personal representative to Chile to assist in studying the recon-
struction problem.
In response to the President’s question the Ambassador said his
Government estimated the total reconstruction costs at about $500 mil-
lion, equivalent to more than 50% of the Government’s budget. He said
area. Eighty thousand houses had been badly damaged, and 65,000
had been completely destroyed and could not be replaced for less than
$210 million. He said his Government also faced a huge problem in the
repair of roads, schools, sewage facilities, etc.
The Ambassador pointed out that unfortunately the natural disas-
ter had struck just as the Chilean Government was on the point of suc-
cess in its efforts to stabilize its currency and its cost of living. The rate
of exchange had held steady for a year and four months and the cost of
33% in the previous year. As a result of the disaster Chile would now
have to devote to reconstruction the resources it had hoped to devote
to development. He emphasized his Government was determined to
achieve reconstruction while maintaining stability.
Voicing his hearty approval of this objective, the President com-
mented that the Chilean Government would have to make a great effort
and might almost have to regiment all available people and resources.
He said he thought the influx of too much outside capital into the situ-
ation would seriously threaten to produce inflation, and a great effort
would obviously be required of the Chilean people. The Ambassador
2 Reference is to the President’s trip to the Philippines, China, and Korea in June
Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XIX, China.

replied that Chileans were used to hardship and to facing their own
troubles. He added: “We are not a banana republic”.
The President said he had been pleased to read recently that two
of the large United States copper companies, Anaconda and Kennecott,
had been completing plans for heavy new investments in Chile. The
Ambassador said that this was a fine development that had been
underway for some time.
In response to the President’s specific question the Ambassador
declared: “The emergency is over; now it is a question of rebuilding”.
He said specifically that his Government needed barges for logistical
work along the coast in the damaged area. He added, however, that
in order to determine the best type of ship for the purpose it would be
helpful if the United States Navy could send to Chile an officer trained
in amphibious operations who could analyze the problem in terms of
his knowledge of available ships. The President said this could easily
be done.
Mr. Merriam mentioned to the President that Mr. Jorge Schneider
had been sent to Washington by the Chilean Government specifically
to assist in initiating plans for the basic work of economic reconstruc-
tion. The President commented that now the greatest need is for sound
planning.3
that the White House had called President Eisenhower in Honolulu the contents of a
draft press release announcing a proposed grant of $20 million and the loan of 12 landing
craft to the Chilean Government for its long-­term disaster rehabilitation program, subject
the availability of funds under the Mutual Security Appropriation Act for FY 1961. The
telegram also stated that the Department would apprise the Embassy about the date and
CH–39.
Editorial Note
June 29, 1960
By an exchange of notes at Washington, June 29, 1960, entered into
force on the same date, representatives of the United States and Chile
signed an agreement providing for emergency relief assistance necessi-
tated by the recent disasters in Chile. For text of the agreement, see 11

Chile  305
CH–40.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1
Washington, September 2, 1960.
SUBJECT
United States Assistance to Chile
PARTICIPANTS
President Eisenhower
Chilean Ambassador Walter Muller
Lt. Col. John Eisenhower
Robert M. Phillips, ARA/WST
Ambassador Muller said he knew the President was extremely
busy and had many preoccupations, but he thought that the President
might want to hear something nice and which would not require any
action. President Alessandri had asked the Ambassador to deliver
a personal letter thanking President Eisenhower, the United States
Government and people for the generous assistance given to Chile
following the recent earthquakes. With the President’s permission,
the Ambassador read aloud the text of President Alessandri’s letter,
as follows [in translation prepared by the Chilean Embassy].
“Distinguished President and friend:
“I have the honor to address Your Excellency, interpreting the feel-
ings of deep gratitude of the people and of the Government of Chile,
for the generous assistance of that sister nation in the sad emergency
produced by the recent seismic disturbances, tidal waves and volcanic
eruptions, which have caused deaths and material damages of extraor-
dinary gravity in vast areas of Chilean territory.
“The moral solidarity of your great republic, at a particularly dif-
ficult moment of Chilean history, reaffirms our faith in an authentic
union among peoples, that will bring realization to the hope for the
construction of a better world.
“The very valuable material cooperation that the Government and
the people of the United States has given us, has helped effectively to
take care of the most urgent needs of the victims of the catastrophe
and to then undertake the hard task of reconstruction of the devastated
zones.
“Accept, Excellency, the most sincere thanks of the Government
and the people of Chile for the very noble attitude of the Government
and people of the United States of America, together with the expres-
sion of my profound personal gratitude and of my very highest esteem
and friendship.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Official Use Only.

President Eisenhower said he was very glad to receive President
Alessandri’s letter and would send a personal note in reply as soon as
possible. Meanwhile, he hoped that Ambassador Mueller would inform
President Alessandri that he (President Eisenhower) was even gladder
to know that the situation in Chile was getting better. We wanted to
give all possible help to enable Chile to recover from the disasters, as
evidenced by the recent authorization of $100 million in special assis-
tance to Chile.2 The President also asked the Ambassador to convey to
President Alessandri his particular appreciation for the support we had
received from Chile in recent international difficulties, in contrast to the
attitude of some weak-­kneed countries. Secretary Herter, on returning
from Costa Rica, had given him a full account of the effective backing
the United States had received from Chile and from other countries,
such as Argentina.
Ambassador Muller said he had not known Chilean Foreign
Minister Ortúzar well, since he had been acting in this capacity only a
few months, and had been pleasantly surprised to find him so effective
at the San José meeting. He agreed that the Argentine delegation had
been helpful but in a less decisive fashion. Venezuela had found itself
in a ridiculous position because Foreign Minister Aroaya was going
against his instructions in trying to follow a line he thought would be
profitable in terms of domestic politics.
The President said the most incomprehensible aspect of the Cuban
situation was the Castro Government’s attitude towards private invest-
ment. All the Latin American Presidents and Ambassadors he had
known had praised private investment for its contribution towards
economic development, a contribution much greater than any govern-
mental aid program could make.
Ambassador Muller said he agreed entirely and cited the encour-
agement given by Chile to private investment, mentioning partic-
ularly United States investments in the copper industry. Cuba’s
irresponsible action could harm all of Latin America by frightening
off prospective investors who might fear similar developments in
other countries.
The Ambassador went on to congratulate the President for his
proposed new program of assistance to Latin America. The “social
development” proposals recently outlined by Mr. Dillon represented
a revolutionary approach to the problems of economic development.
sum of $500 million for the Inter-American Fund for Social Progress, and in the same bill
reconstruction and rehabilitation of those areas of southern Chile devastated by fire and
earthquake. Documentation concerning the subject is contained in ARA/WST Files, Lot
63 D 85, “Earthquake.”

Chile  307
Heretofore practically all assistance had been given on a project basis
and often did not reach a large part of the people. While the project
approach would continue to be a useful device, it was most gratifying
to know that assistance could now be given in such important sectors
as housing, agrarian reform, public health, schools, etc.
The President said he thought this type of program was the
best answer we could make to the aggressive tactics of international
Communism, and the Ambassador agreed.
CH–41.
Editorial Note
October 28, 1960
By an exchange of notes at Santiago, October 28, 1960, entered into
force on the same date, representatives of the United States and Chile
signed an agreement providing for a grant of funds to Chile for pur-
pose of disaster rehabilitation. For text of the agreement, see 11 UST

Colombia: U.S. Relations with Colombia
CO–1.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Colombia (Cabot)1,2
Bogotá, January 16, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
The Minister of Government, Brigadier General Pioquinto RENGIFO
The American Ambassador, John M. Cabot
General RENGIFO assumed office on January 8, and I today called
on him at my request in order primarily to discuss the question of the
closed Protestant churches. General Rengifo had been Governor of
Antioquia at the time that I had accompanied Dr. Milton Eisenhower on
his mission around South America,3 and we therefore briefly exchanged
reminiscences.
I then said to General Rengifo that he doubtless knew that the sub-
ject I had come to discuss was the question of the Protestant churches of
Colombia. This was a matter which was of great interest to millions of
Protestants in the United States since they had sent money for the con-
struction of many of these chapels, and other contributions, and many
had American pastors or other American connections. For decades
the Protestant churches had existed in Colombia without any serious
­trouble - indeed, the Presbyterians had been invited by the Government
2 This memorandum was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of
despatch 596, January 16. In the covering despatch, Ambassador Cabot stated in part the
following:
“The Department will note that General Rengifo gave me no explicit assurances, and
that we may be faced with further indefinite stalling on this question. Nevertheless, he
seemed to take a somewhat more affirmative position than his predecessor, and I am
hopeful that he will be willing at least to reopen some of the churches in the non-­mission
territories within the foreseeable future. I shall of course continue to press this matter as
much as I feel is likely to produce favorable results.”
to conduct a fact-­finding mission for the President. For documentation on the visit, see
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The American Republics.

Colombia  309
to come to Colombia 100 years ago. In the last ten years they had had
mounting difficulties which had culminated under the Rojas Pinilla
administration. I had not heretofore pressed this matter due to the
many other serious problems facing the Government, and Villarreal’s
resignation, but now that the Government had a legal mandate from
the people it seemed an appropriate time to move ahead.
I mentioned the assurances I had been given since arriving here
and described my conversations with Minister Villarreal. With regard
to the circular which the latter had sent to the respective Governors in
September as a result of my intercession, I said that I understood that at
least some favorable replies had been received.
I said there were two phases to the question. In some cases the
Protestant churches had been closed in the so-­called mission territories.
The Colombian Government had alleged that Protestant churches were
forbidden in these territories under the terms of its agreements with
the Vatican. On the other hand, there were a number of churches which
had been closed outside the mission territories where no legal authority
seemed to exist except the arbitrary fiat of the Government. I gently
emphasized how arbitrary the attitude of the Rojas Pinilla adminis-
tration had been in this regard, since General Rengifo had mentioned
earlier that he had been “out of grace” with that administration. I said
that we hoped that these churches at least could be opened as a starter.
General Rengifo asked if we had a list of them available, and I handed
him a copy of our Note of August 6, 1957, with this list.
I said we recognized that this was a delicate matter and that a
gradual approach might be better than a drastic one. I did want to
say, however, that while we felt that the case was clear in regard to
the churches in non-­mission territory we hoped that in due course the
churches in mission territory could also be reopened. Although the
Rojas administration had claimed that the agreements with the Vatican
precluded Protestant churches, the text of the agreements did not bear
this out, and the Nuncio had informed the Embassy that he did not
so interpret them. I said that so far as I knew, although some parish
priests and a few bishops were against the reopening of the Protestant
churches, I had been informed by Minister Villarreal that the Cardinal
and the Nuncio were quite willing to have them reopened, provided
they did not proselytize. I said that I had no instructions to ask that
they be permitted to proselytize and that I did not think that this was
by any means as sore a point among Protestants in the United States as
the basic question of liberty to worship, which was guaranteed by the
Colombian Constitution and observed in practically every country in
the world outside of the Communist bloc.
General Rengifo said that he did not think there was any opposi-
tion to Protestants worshipping in their own churches. He recalled that

there had been a Protestant chapel opposite his home in Sogamoso and
that it had been attended by very decent, well-­behaved people. In other
areas, however, they insisted on distributing Protestant propaganda
and thereby irritated Catholics. I said that although I was a Protestant
I recognized that Protestant propaganda occasionally touched Catholics
on a very sensitive spot and that I had even heard that it had at times
outraged Catholic sentiment. I thought the latter reports were generally
exaggerated, if not untrue, but I certainly did not support anything of
this kind if it did happen. I mentioned that I had steadily urged moder-
ation on the Protestant leaders, notably when talking with a number of
them in New York in October.
I said that there was one other matter which made this problem of
particular importance at the present time. Every time that we tried to
do something for Colombia - for example, at the time of the $60 million
loan - there had been outcries among the Protestants in the United States
which had been reflected in Congress. In the ultimate analysis we could
do nothing to help Colombia without Congressional approval, and I
feared that some time at a most inopportune moment this might not be
forthcoming. I therefore hoped that Colombia, for its sake, would feel it
advisable to do something to correct the situation. I again made a plea
for at least gradual action.
General Rengifo said that as Governor of Antioquia he had been
familiar with Minister Villarreal’s circular, and that he had discussed
this matter with our Consul. He felt that there were some areas of the
country, where violence was still prevalent, where it would be inad-
visable to act in the present circumstances but there were other areas
(such as Boyacá) where he saw no reason why the churches could not
be reopened. He told me he would take up Minister Villarreal’s circular
and follow through on it. I asked that he let me know when anything
concrete developed.
Our talk was at all times very cordial.4
4 Ambassador Cabot discussed the matter of reopening the Protestant Churches
in Colombia again with Minister Rengifo on February 18. In despatch 695, dated
February 19, transmitting the memorandum of that conversation to the Department, he
made the following statement:
“The Department will note that General Rengifo indicated that a few churches
might be reopened and that he will confirm in writing the oral information which he
gave to me in this regard. Some governors, however, are unwilling to have the Protestant
churches in their departments reopened and a number of governors, for one reason or
another, have not replied to the Minister of Gobierno’s inquiry. I think it can safely be
assumed that these governors are reluctant to reply and will stall as long as they can
before making a decision. I shall try personally to see one or two of these governors on
forthcoming trips and hope in this way to make further progress in getting the churches

Colombia  311
CO–2.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Bogotá, February 10, 1958
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 2 pages not declassified.
CO–3.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Colombian Affairs (Gerberich)1
Washington, February 20, 1958.
SUBJECT
Colombian Economic Situation.
PARTICIPANTS
Colombian Ambassador José Gutiérrez Gómez
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
OSA—Mr. Gerberich
The Ambassador said he first wanted to mention the visit of two
officials of the Soviet Embassy in Mexico to Colombia. There has been
a lot of loose newspaper talk about what happened and he wanted
Mr. Rubottom to have the true facts. The Colombian Government is
favorable to an arrangement whereby a sizable amount of coffee can be
marketed behind the Iron Curtain, and there is talk of receiving wheat,
fertilizers and certain construction materials in return, which would
be very acceptable. But actually no agreement was reached between
the Coffee Growers Federation and the Russians, although it is hoped
that one can eventually be worked out. There is not the slightest truth
in reports of permanent diplomatic and consular relations developing
from these talks.
Mr. Rubottom thanked the Ambassador for this information and
said he could see that the trade proposed by the USSR would inter-
est the Colombians, if the Russians fulfilled their commitments. Past
drafted this memorandum on February 21; it was initialled by Assistant Secretary
Rubottom.

history unfortunately shows that the Russians do not always abide
by their agreements and use trade talks as an opening wedge for
attaining other objectives. He was glad to hear that the Colombians
are aware of this and are taking precautions to prevent any such turn
of affairs.
The Ambassador said the economic situation of Colombia is very
bad, and it is natural for the Colombians to try to find new coffee
markets wherever they can. The next two years are the critical ones.
It will take $85 million to service the commercial debt in 1958 and
$83 million in 1959. After that, they will be over the worst. But with
coffee prices falling considerably below the budget estimates, it will
impose an almost intolerable burden to meet all foreseeable obliga-
tions. Imports must be held to $18 million a month in order to come
out even. The Ambassador did not see how this could be done. From
month; in 1957 they averaged $35 million; since October they have
it is impossible to continue at this level. It would mean closing down
some industries, it would not permit a sufficient supply of raw mate-
rials, it would restrain normal economic development. He assumed
Mr. Rubottom had heard of the credit measures taken yesterday: this
was a step in the right direction, but only a short step.
Mr. Rubottom said he was very conscious of the difficulties fac-
ing the Colombians, and could assure the Ambassador of our sym-
pathy and desire to collaborate in solving them. It was unfortunate
that when coffee prices were at their maximum a few years ago the
Colombians continued spending at such an excessive rate. He said
he would urge the Colombians to tighten their belts as much as pos-
sible, and he said he supposed the Ambassador is aware that we in
the United States are going to have to do the same. He said he had
confidence that over the long term we would both come out all right.
He also referred to the evidence of our willingness to cooperate which
was given quite recently by the Export-Import Bank when it made
available, in conjunction with New York commercial banks, a credit
of $87 million dollars to help in financing the commercial backlog.
The Ambassador said that he would be the first to recognize this, and
Colombia was grateful for it.
Mr. Rubottom said he wanted to mention another matter, for he
felt that the Ambassador should understand the facts and inform the

Colombia  313
Foreign Minister accordingly. We have given consideration to the lat-
ter’s proposal that the U.S. finance the purchase of the two destroyers
which have been built for the Colombians in Sweden2, and he was sorry
to have to tell the Ambassador frankly that there is no possibility of
doing this, regardless of any merits that the plan might have. We still
have hopes that the two destroyers allotted to Colombia in the “ship
bill” will be made available before the end of the year, however.
Mr. Rubottom added that he plans to visit Caracas and Bogotá
next week, leaving Washington on Wednesday, February 26, and
arriving at Bogotá on Saturday, March 1.3 He said his plans were made
somewhat hurriedly and he had not had an opportunity to inform the
Ambassador sooner. The Ambassador said he was glad to hear that
this trip was planned, and was sure it would have most beneficial
results.
2 Ambassador Cabot had transmitted the Colombian proposal to the Department in
of the total $27 million cost for the two destroyers the United States pay with grant aid
funds $7 million still owed to Sweden and refund the $20 million Colombia had already
paid to Sweden on account by paying off Colombian debts in the United States to that
amount.
A briefing memorandum on the military assistance program in Colombia, prepared
for Assistant Secretary Rubottom’s visit by Weldon Litsey of the office of Inter-American
Regional Economic Affairs, dated February 25, read in part as follows:
“Defense and the Navy strongly oppose paying for the Swedish destroyers. They
point out that the ships were purchased over strong United States recommendations
against such purchase: that in no way can it be substantiated that we have any obliga-
tion to pay for the Swedish destroyers under our MDAP agreement with Colombia, as
Colombia claims; that there would be no justification on the basis of current MAP objec-
tives to use MAP funds in this way; and that we have two destroyers for Colombia in the
pending Ship Loan Bill.
“ARA agrees that the United States should not pay for the two Swedish destroyers
with grant aid funds. If the Ship Loan Bill is passed, Colombia would do well to try to sell
the Swedish destroyers (but not in the hemisphere) and should be encouraged to do so.”
(ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 106, “Visits to Colombia”)

CO–4.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Colombian Affairs (Gerberich)1
Washington, March 4, 1958.
SUBJECT
Religious problem in Colombia.
PARTICIPANTS
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
OSA—Mr. Bernbaum
OSA—Mr. Wardlaw
OSA—Mr. Gerberich
Mr. Rubottom said that the first question he took up with the
Foreign Minister2, on arrival at Bogotá was the matter of treatment
of Protestants. He told the Foreign Minister that it was disappoint-
ing that no churches had been reopened except two in all the months
that have passed since the new administration has been in power.
The Foreign Minister said it was dangerous in some cases to reopen
Protestant churches, as it might develop into a question of public order
and safety, but the Government had opened some additional churches.
Ambassador Cabot, who was present, said, “I am sorry, Mr. Minister,
but none of these churches except Berranca Bermeja have been opened.”
The Minister then spoke to his assistant and there was some discussion
between them, after which he told Mr. Rubottom that he thought some
of the churches on the list could and should be reopened.
Later in a conversation with Gen. Navas Pardo of the Military Junta
Mr. Rubottom brought up the question of the closed churches again. He
pointed out that it is very difficult for us to talk of economic or tech-
nical or military aid to Colombia when this question of treatment of
the Protestants still remains unsolved, for some one is sure to raise the
question of reopening the closed Protestant churches. Gen. Navas said
he was aware of this, and Mr. Rubottom could be sure that some of the
churches will be reopened.
Secretary Rubottom initialled this memorandum
2 Carlos Sanz de Santamaría.

Colombia  315
CO–5.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Colombian Affairs (Gerberich)1
Washington, March 4, 1958.
SUBJECT
Colombian Coffee Problem; critical economic situation.
PARTICIPANTS
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
OSA – Mr. Bernbaum
OSA – Mr. Wardlaw
OSA – Mr. Gerberich
Mr. Rubottom said that while in Bogotá he had discussed the
Colombian economic situation in detail with officials of the Colombian
Government, and there was no doubt in his mind that the situation is
serious. With regard to coffee, he said that the Colombians were hoping
ardently that the United States would join the world coffee organiza-
tion, even if the regulations have to be changed.2 He offered some hope
but made no commitment.
In the discussions of the backlog and the possibility of refunding
the debt in the United States, Mr. Rubottom was careful to impress
on the Colombians that if they want more economic help from the
United States the first essential is to put their political house in order.
Mr. Rubottom was satisfied that the Colombians are quite aware that
this is a prime necessity.
Secretary Rubottom initialled this memorandum.
2 Documentation relating to this subject is included in the compilation on United
States regional economic policy toward Latin America.
CO–6.
Editorial Note
On March 14, 1958, the United States and Colombia signed at
Bogotá an agreement, with accompanying memorandum of under-
standing and related exchange of notes, providing for the United States
to finance the sale to authorized Colombian purchasers for pesos cer-
tain surplus agricultural commodities produced in the United States,
under the provisions of Title I of the Agricultural Trade Development

1960, the United States and Colombia entered into an agreement pro-
viding for a grant by the United States to Colombia for the acquisition
of nuclear training and research equipment and materials. The agree-
On October 6, 1959, the United States and Colombia signed an
exchange of notes at Bogotá, entered into force on the same date, con-
stituting an agreement by which the United States would undertake to
finance the sale to authorized Colombian purchasers for pesos certain
surplus agricultural commodities produced in the United States, under
the provisions of Title I of Public Law 480. For text of the agreement, see
CO–7.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to Milton S. Eisenhower1
Washington, April 9, 1958.
Dear Dr. Eisenhower:
I am rushing this letter to you by special delivery in the hope that
you will receive it before you meet with the Colombian Foreign Minister.2
We anticipate that the Foreign Minister may take up some of the
following matters with you:
1. Commercial Arrears. Colombia has accumulated a backlog of $470
million in commercial debts over the past four years or so, due in large
part to careless financial policies of the previous administration. Last
year arrangements were made to liquidate about $450 million of this
through funding agreements, a credit of $60 million from the Eximbank,
and other means. Colombia is finding it extremely difficult to meet pay-
ments due on this backlog and is hoping to obtain a long-­term loan
to refund the commercial arrears debt. You might tell him, if this is
brought up, that we realize the heavy burden of debt they carry and
appreciate the measures they have already taken to maintain financial
source text is a carbon copy bearing Rubottom’s typed signature.
2 Colombian Foreign Minister Carlos Sanz de Santamaria visited the United States

Colombia  317
stability, that we have shown our willingness to be of assistance by the
Eximbank loan granted last year, and that we hope to continue to be
helpful within the limits of available resources.
2. Economic Development Loans. The Colombians have indicated, with-
out being specific, that they plan to seek loans for economic development
projects. The Eximbank may wish to consider their applications if their
stabilization program shows further progress, but we cannot speak for
the Bank. The IBRD has its own policies. The DLF might be interested in
applications that meet its criteria, but funds for this purpose are limited.
3. Coffee Prices and Quotas. 85% of Colombia’s foreign exchange is
derived from sales of coffee abroad. Coffee prices have been falling,
and every cent that coffee drops on the New York Market means a loss
to Colombia of $8 million in foreign exchange. The Colombians may
urge us to assist them in stabilizing coffee prices and imposing coffee
quotas. We are now studying various possibilities of cooperating on
the coffee problem, but these have not yet been cleared through the
Government, and until such time as we have reached full agreement,
no hopes should be aroused in the Colombians.
4. Swedish-Built Destroyers. The Colombians will have two modern
destroyers ready for delivery from Sweden about May 1, on which they
still owe $7 million. The Foreign Minister has suggested that we provide
the Colombian Navy with these vessels under the MAAG agreement by
taking over the payments due. There is no way that we can do this. We
hope the ship loan bill recently introduced in Congress will enable us to
transfer two destroyers to Colombia, which would give them some flexi-
bility in deciding what to do with the Swedish-­built ones.
5. Religious problem. The Protestant problem has two important
phases:
(a) The closed churches and schools, both inside and outside of Mission
Territory, have not been reopened, with four or five exceptions. About
100 churches and chapels inside Mission Territory and 40 churches and
chapels outside Mission Territory remain closed. About 200 Protestant
schools are still closed. Our Ambassador has taken up this question
with the Foreign Minister on several occasions, urging that a formula
be found to permit the churches and schools to be reopened, but the
Foreign Minister says that the clergy and masses are opposed to any
such action and it is very difficult for the Government to intervene for
this reason. The Ambassador has warned him that if nothing is done
the success of his mission in the United States may be endangered.
(b) Violence. Sporadic cases of violence against U.S. Protestant mis-
sionaries still occur from time to time. Recently the residence of a U.S.
missionary in Supfa, Caldas, was dynamited following attacks upon
her from the pulpit by the local priest. Our Embassy brought this case
to the attention of the Foreign Minister, expressing some surprise that
no action was taken against the priest for this. The Government rarely

takes effective action against those responsible for stirring up anti-­
Protestant violence, but usually promises protection.
It is felt by the Department that the matter of the closed churches
could be adjusted by the withdrawal of a circular letter of the Ministry
of Government under the previous administration, which ordered the
closing of the churches in Mission Territory, especially since its legal-
ity and accuracy have both been questioned. Should this be done, the
situation would revert to its prior status, worship being permitted in
churches and chapels although public proselytizing and propaganda
would be prohibited. The problem of the schools, especially those func-
tioning outside of Mission Territory, would be greatly alleviated if the
regulations governing the processing of licenses were applied promptly
and without discrimination.
I hope that this information will give you sufficient background
information to be useful to you in your conversation with the Foreign
Minister.
Sincerely yours,
R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
CO–8.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs
(Turkel)1
Washington, April 11, 1958.
SUBJECT
Meeting of Colombian Delegation with Secretary
PARTICIPANTS
Situation.” Official Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
The Secretary
ARA – Mr. Rubottom
E – Mr. Mann
REA – Mr. Turkel
Dr. Carlos Sanz de Santamaria, Minister of
Foreign Relations
Alfonso Lopez Pumarejo, ex-President
Mariano Ospina Peres, ex-President
Rafael Delgado Barrenechea, ex-Minister of
Finance
Antonio Alvarez Restrope, ex-Minister of
Finance
Ignacio Copete Lizarralde, Director, Bank of
the Republic

Colombia  319
The Secretary apologized for being late since he had to confer with
the President with respect to the latest Soviet note on a summit meeting
and on Tunisia.
Foreign Minister Santamaria stated that Colombia had made tre-
mendous efforts to restore a democratic regime and to restore financial
stability. It had ran into grave difficulties because of the fall in coffee
prices, and although it had followed the advice of the International
Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, it needed help. To underscore that need, the Colombian
Government had sent two ex-Presidents, two ex-Ministers of Finance
and the Director of the Bank of Colombia. He said that President Lopez
would make the main statement.
President Lopez stated that Colombia faced a three-­fold problem:
be dealt with at the same time. He said that in the political field they
have been very successful and had settled historic political difficulties
in less than 10 months. A reorganization of the Government had taken
place and there was agreement to have presidential elections in May
and a new President installed in August.
In the meantime economic developments were fast overtaking
Colombia. Last June a settlement of the commercial arrears was made,
but the settlement was thrown out of gear by the fall of 10 cents a
pound in the price of coffee. Since there were some 6 million bags to
be exported the loss was close to $100 million. The arrears settlement
and $220 million was left to be dealt with.
In the domestic situation, the Military Junta had done everything
possible to restrain inflation, to restrict credit and currency issues. It had
imposed heavy new taxes. The Junta had first placed a tax of 15 per cent
on the sale of foreign exchange plus an additional 10 per cent on import-
ers. To this they had recently added a 10 per cent tax in kind on coffee
exports. All these were inadequate to make up the loss of $90 to $100
million per annum in the fall of coffee prices.
The social consequences of the foregoing were serious. With the cut
in the imports and the rise in the rate of exchange there was a corre-
sponding increase in the cost of living. Although production was going
fairly well there has been increasing unemployment. The situation has
now reached the point where Colombia is unable to pay for the impor-
tation of the raw materials necessary to keep its industrial plant going.
Columbia was short of imports by about $7 million per month. It is the
purpose of the present Mission to refinance prior debt to keep things
going. The Colombians now thought they were too hasty in trying to pay
off $440 million in debt in a mere 30 months. This over-­eagerness and the
loss of $100 million in coffee earnings had led to the failure of their hopes.

In the political field the Liberals and Conservatives now share
the responsibility of Government. In response to the Secretary’s ques-
tion whether they had agreed upon a candidate for the President, ex-­
President Lopez stated they had not done so, but they expected to do
so in a couple of days, at the initiative of the Conservative Party. They
will, however, propose a Liberal, Lleras Camargo, as President with a
Conservative Vice President.
The Secretary then stated that we had known Senor Lleras very
favorably as Secretary General of the Organization of American States.
President Lopez concluded the discussion of the political situation by
noting how markedly the situation had improved as compared to the
troubled times of preceding years. The present problems were mainly
social.
From this President Lopez went on to discuss coffee. He said that
all of the coffee-­producing countries of Latin America faced the prob-
lem of stabilizing coffee. There had been a violent decline in prices
from 90 cents per pound to the present 55 cents per pound. Colombia
was having difficulty in financing the coffee crop. The immedi-
ate problem was whether they could hope for cooperation from the
United States. What they wanted above all was assurance of some
procedures to prevent the coming heavy Brazilian crop from being a
catastrophic crisis. We assured the Secretary that all Latin Americans
thought alike on this subject and asked what the Secretary thought
about price stabilization.
Mr. Rubottom here stated that while he was in Brazil 3 weeks ago
he had heard the same analysis of the coffee problem and had stated
that we were studying the coffee matter on a day-­to-­day basis. We then
had and still have a hope of organizing an international coffee study
group, but if this study were to lead to quotas and price stabilization
it would be very difficult for the United States and it is still unclear
whether or not we can participate to that extent.
Here the Secretary observed that the problem of curing an inter-
national commodity surplus was very difficult. Sometimes the cure
makes the disease worse rather than better. The United States has had
(and still has) the problem of stabilizing the prices of our own agricul-
tural production. It has cost us fabulous sums and has not done much
good. For example, our cotton policy has resulted in many other coun-
tries beginning to grow cotton. Now we sell only a small percentage
of the world’s imports and the plight of our cotton families is worse
than ever. The Secretary invited the Colombian Delegation to meet
with Secretary Benson, if they had the time, to review this matter. The
Secretary remembered the Brazilian stabilization scheme of several
years ago and how Brazil went practically broke on that scheme. An
agricultural scheme that does not cut production is no good. Efforts to

Colombia  321
limit acreage cannot do the job since farmers use fertilizer to increase
the productivity per acre. In cotton they are putting 50 per cent more
per acre.
The Secretary said there was no question at all as to our objectives;
we are agreed that a greater measure of stability is desirable at reason-
able price levels. The only question is how to achieve that. Our expe-
rience has been disastrous. This is not to say that the job is impossible.
All we can now say is that our own economic people will work closely
and sympathetically with you, although we have a certain skepiticizm.
He asked the Colombians to remember that there were certain legal
restrictions on Americans against restraining trade but this does not
apply to foreigners.
President Lopez summarized the Colombian situation by saying
that they had two problems: (1) an exchange problem, and (2) what
could be done in cooperation with other coffee-­producing countries for
price stabilization.
The Secretary said that with respect to the dollar gap, the
Colombians should see the Eximbank, which is a separate department
of Government here. He could ensure the Colombians that they will get
sympathetic consideration there, although they could expect no bail-­
out loan. At this point, Mr. Mann said that we had granted Colombia
$60 million in Eximbank funds last year for a bail-­out loan.
President Lopez said that the Colombians wanted an extension of
time from the Eximbank on pending payments plus additional facil-
ities. They also had need for additional agricultural machinery in
order to increase agricultural production. In response to the Secretary’s
inquiry, he said that the increase in agricultural production would not,
of course, apply to coffee.
Mr. Mann and Mr. Rubottom here observed that they had been
much impressed by what Colombia had been doing day by day in the
field of expanding its agricultural production.
The Secretary asked how much of a military program they had
and Senor Alvarez stated that it was about $280 million pesos or some
20 per cent of the budget.
Santamaria then stated that the Military Junta had cut the mili-
tary budget by about 100 million pesos and further cuts were pre-
vented only because so much was owing on prior debt. The Provisional
stopped all military construction; it has bought no armaments, only
maintenance items. Finally, much of the 280 million pesos went for
salaries.
Mr. Rubottom summarized by saying that there had been in
Colombia a remarkable de-­emphasis on military activity. The Secretary

said this was a happy development for in the Middle East the reverse
had taken place.
President Lopez stated that they had very serious transportation
problems. The dollar shortage had forced them to cut down drastically
on imports of cars and trucks and now the absence of replacements had
put the transportation situation in a highly critical position.
Mr. Mann highlighted the decline on imports by stating that under
Rojas Pinilla it had been $670 million and had been cut in a single year
to $450 million. (President Lopez here said that the present rate of
imports was only $25 million per month).
The Foreign Minister then asked what the Colombian Delegation
should do.
The Secretary summarized as follows:
The Delegation had three aspects to its problems:
1. First was its need to finance essential imports. For this they
should turn to the Eximbank.
2. They had to deal with the backlog of commercial arrears. For this
they should turn to the Eximbank.
3. Finally, they had a coffee stabilization problem. For this they
would have to turn to Mr. Mann and Mr. Dillon.
About all the Secretary felt the Colombians could expect from the
United States on coffee is an attitude of benevolent neutralism. The
United States does not have enough money to embark upon coffee sta-
bilization schemes.
Here the Colombians almost unanimously burst forth that they
want no money for coffee stabilization. The Foreign Minister sum-
marized their position by saying that coffee is the backing for the
Colombian currency. It means everything in Colombia and yet it is
beyond their power to control. The Colombians did not want to direct
prices they merely want to avoid a fall and to seek stability.
Here the meeting ended.
CO–9.
Editorial Note
as part of a larger goodwill tour of South America during the period
April 27–May 15. He met with the Colombian Foreign Minister and the
Military Junta of Government on May 11, but no memoranda of those
conversations were found in Department of State files. Documentation

Colombia  323
For documentation on the Vice President’s South American tour, see
Document CH–5, footnote 5.
During his stay in Bogotá, anti-Nixon and anti-United States
demonstrations occurred. The Embassy reported on these activities in
part as follows:
“The Embassy feels that the anti-Nixon and anti-U.S. demon-
strations which occurred during Vice President Nixon’s visit were
certainly not spontaneous but were obviously contrived affairs led
by Communists and other malcontents. Despite efforts to rally mass
support, the demonstrations were small-­scale affairs and attracted no
appreciable support beyond the initially organized groups. Advance
efforts to rally general student support for the demonstrations largely
failed, as did on-­the-­scene efforts to arouse the general public. Thus,
we believe that these demonstrations did not represent the views of the
Colombian man-­in-­the street of any social or economic stratum. The
public was either favorably disposed toward the Vice President or apa-
CO–10.
Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Colombian
Affairs (Gerberich) to the Deputy Director of the Office
of South American Affairs (Sanders)1
Washington, May 12, 1958.
SUBJECT
In its latest Weeka3 our Embassy states that the Colombian
Government was lucky to dispose of the revolt as successfully as it
did. Practically all of the Military Police in Bogotá and considerable
elements of the National Police, including their commanders, were
also to Andrew B. Wardlaw, Officer in Charge of North Coast Affairs in the Office of
South American Affairs.
2 The Embassy in Bogotá transmitted a post-­mortem analysis of the uprising of
May 2 against the Military Junta of Government and a report on the presidential elections

involved. The latter had set up road blocks leading into the center of
the town, but loyal troops from Usaquen barracks rolled them up and
disarmed the police early in the day.
When the pilot of the charter plane abandoned Rojas in Bermuda
and flew back to New York, the revolt was, moreover, deprived of
the leader it had planned to rally around. The rebels were unable to
use the radio stations which they captured, as the civilian technicians
were stopped at the road blocks and prevented from going to work.
Thus there was little rabble-­rousing over the airwaves.
Col. Hernando Forero, the leader of the revolt, who is in asylum in
the Salvadoran Embassy, has all sorts of charges of brutality and mur-
der pending against him, including the dumping of guerrilla prisoners
out of an airplane, the personal murder of a civilian and the murder of
guerrilla prisoners in Tolima. The Embassy does not believe the gov-
ernment will give him a safe conduct.
because of Conservative abstentions and apathy on the part of many
of both parties who looked upon his election as a foregone conclusion,
his victory in some quarters was most surprising. Antioquia, once the
stronghold of the Conservative Party, was carried by him by a vote
of 9 to 1. The Departments of Boyacá and Santander, where Alzatista
and Rojista strength was greatest in the congressional election, went
to Lleras with comfortable margins (in Santander his majority was
over 65,000 votes). In Valle, however, Leyva got a much better vote
than was expected; our Consul at Cali reports that in some districts
Lleras voters were kept away from the polls by force. Sample returns
from such areas are:
Ansermanueva - Leyva
7,000
Lleras
Argelia
2,592
El Cairo
Our Consul remarks, and I believe seriously, that the pro-Lleras
voters are now marked for death.
Nevertheless the Junta and Army gave a splendid demonstration
to have an orderly election. With the Army out in force and troops
stationed at polling places, it wasn’t necessary to suspend voting in a
single municipality. Perhaps the surest proof that the election was gen-
erally fair is the fact that Leyva is convinced on the basis of his 585,000
votes that he made a good showing and he has decided to remain in
Colombia and continue as active leader of the dissident Conservative
faction. He hopes to make a serious attempt to combine this fac-
tion with the Valencistas on the basis of their common opposition to
Laureano Gomez. The Embassy reports that Secretary Dulles’ message

Colombia  325
of congratulation to Lleras received excellent press coverage. So did
similar messages from Ambassador Cabot and former Ambassador
Spruille Braden.
CO–11.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to
the Department of State1
Bogotá, July 11, 1958.
No. 20
SUBJECT
The Religious Question in Colombia
On considering further the religious question in this country
after the very helpful talks when I had during my consultation in
Washington,2 I thought it might be useful to the Department if I put on
paper my thoughts regarding it in the present conjuncture.
1. What should be our basic purpose?
Americans believe firmly in the principle of freedom of worship.
That principle is being flagrantly violated today in Colombia—­only
less so under the present Government than under the three preceding
administrations. It is unquestionable not only that there has been vio-
lence against Protestants, their property, and their legitimate rights and
interests by private individuals, but also that the Government by arbi-
trarily closing churches and schools on one pretext or another or by
preventing the opening of churches and schools is deliberately interfering
with freedom or worship.
Strongly as we are attached to the principle of freedom of worship
I question, however, whether it is a proper subject in itself for diplo-
matic representations, and I doubt that it is wise to attack the religious
question from this angle. We do not, as a matter of proper interest,
work to uphold in other countries freedom of the press, individual
rights, and the other great liberties of a democratic system. It is per-
fectly proper that individuals and private organizations should seek to
muster public opinion in the United States and other countries behind
the maintenance of these principles. It is doubtful whether it is proper,

and it would indeed appear to be contrary to the charter of the United
Nations and many other international instruments, for us as a govern-
ment to seek to uphold those principles in other nations, since they are
normally considered internal matters. We should not permit our pri-
vate sense of outrage to override diplomatic prudence.
We must then, as I see it, fall back on a second method in seeking
to defend Protestant interests in this country. Many of the Protestant
missionaries and ministers active in this country are Americans; much
Protestant church property is owned by American individuals and and
companies; many churches and schools derive a substantial part of their
support from American contributions; and I believe there are cases in
which, while no immediate connection with the United States exists,
there is a historical and sentimental tie. Since cases in which legitimate
and long standing private American interests exist are so large a pro-
portion of the cases which come to our attention, it seems to me that
we should make them the basis for our official representations to the
Colombian Government. We cannot claim that these pastors, churches
and schools should be permitted to function as a matter of international
right, but we can legitimately make representations on their behalf on
the basis of comity without raising inconvenient questions of propriety.
As a practical matter, it seems unlikely that the Colombian Government
would yield in the many cases in which United States citizens and
organizations had legitimate interest without establishing general
rules equally applicable to churches and schools in which no legiti-
mate American interest can be shown. Without, therefore, spelling it
out that we are not making representations on behalf of Protestant pas-
tors, churches and schools where no American interest can be shown
to exist, I believe that our representations should be more restricted
and explicit in order that we may not lay ourselves open to charges of
improper interference in this highly controversial matter.
2. What is the present Colombian Government’s attitude towards this
question?
The Department will recall that Assistant Secretary Rubottom and
the Embassy have been steadily making representations regarding
Protestant schools and churches ever since the new Government came
to power. Unfortunately, none of our representations has accomplished
much. We have succeeded in reopening a few churches and in getting
a few other concessions (such as visas for incoming missionaries and
pastors) but the problem is almost as unsolved as ever. We have every rea-
son to believe that the present Government is moderate, broad-­minded
and basically friendly to the United States. Why, therefore, has it not
acted in response to our repeated representations? There can, of course,
be no doubt that the Government has some reasons for procrastina-
tion. One undoubtedly is that the Government does not wish to take an

Colombia  327
unpleasant decision; the second is that it is apprehensive that the gen-
eral reopening of Protestant churches and schools would produce very
unfortunate public disturbances. The third is that, if they can stall long
enough, they probably hope to get out of office before they are forced
to reach a decision.
I have reason to suppose that a fourth, and perhaps the most
important, reason of all from the Government’s viewpoint is that at
some time in March the position of the Catholic Church in this mat-
ter hardened. It seems quite possible on the basis of various bits of
evidence which reach the Embassy that at some time in the month
of March the Colombian Government, anxious to make real progress
in the matter of financial assistance to Colombia in the crisis it then
confronted, was prepared, as a result of Mr. Rubottom’s and my rep-
resentations, to make substantial concessions to us. It is clear that at
the beginning of the month the Foreign Minister seemed receptive to
such a move. When he talked to me on the eve of his departure for
Washington, it being clear at that time that only American good will
(rather than strictly economic considerations) would induce us to bail
Colombia out financially, the Foreign Minister should have been most
anxious to humor us in matters of interest to us, yet in point of fact
something had happened which forced him stubbornly to defend the
present situation. I can think of no force which would have the power to do
this except the Catholic Church.
It is also interesting to note the chronology of attacks in the Catholic
review America on this Embassy. The first major blast appeared in the
March 8th issue. Rather obviously, it did not just happen, and as a further
point the writer of the article showed no interest in getting the Protestant
side of the question. It is at least plausible that the Colombian Catholic hier-
archy, aware of our pressure to reopen Protestant churches and schools,
decided to mount a counter-­offensive in the United States to stir up the many
millions of our Catholic citizens to protest that the Embassy was acting
in the interests of the Protestant sects rather than the nation. I think we
can tentatively conclude that the present Government will stall for the
remaining month that it stays in power.
The present government is perhaps not quite so inclined to main-
tain discrimination against Protestants as would appear from its failure
to take remedial action. (As the Department is aware, the only remedial
action taken to date with regard to closed churches and schools has been to
permit one church in Mission Territory and five chapels outside of Mission
Territory to reopen, while scores of churches, chapels and schools both within
and outside of Mission Territory remain closed.) The Foreign Office indi-
cated to us informally that it would have no objection if any closed
churches and chapels in Mission Territory were able to reopen quietly
with local permission pending an over-­all resolution of the matter, and

we have received reports indicating that some were able to reopen in
this manner. However, this has not proved to be a very satisfactory
approach, since in many of these instances the Departmental and
local authorities have recently re-­closed the churches and chapels—­
usually under pressure from the Catholic clergy—­on the grounds that
the central government’s prohibition on Protestant activity in Mission
Territory still stands. Apparently, even where the Departmental or
Local authorities are favorably disposed toward a reopening of these
churches and chapels, they cannot withstand Church pressure without
the official backing of the central government in the form of a recision
of the prohibitions. Nevertheless, there is some reason to suppose the
present Government tacitly favors local action as a means of keeping
the situation in hand and moving slowly toward greater liberalization
in the treatment of Protestants in this country.
3. What is the emotional atmosphere?
It seems to me essential that the Department should appreciate the
emotional atmosphere in Colombia (as well as in the United States) in
which this question must be settled. In regard to their Catholic faith,
most Colombian Catholics tend to be fervent, and many are bigoted
and fanatical. They belong, in far too many cases, to a generation
which has passed in other countries and which thought that the only
good non-Catholic was a dead non-Catholic. Even relatively moderate
Colombian Catholics will rationalize their bigotry by claiming that they
do not want the unity of the country to be affected by religious dis-
pute or by saying that there is a link between Colombian Protestantism
and Communism. A more respectable argument is that the troubles the
Protestants have had in Colombia in the past ten years have merely been
a by-­product of the general atmosphere of violence which has prevailed
in large sections of the country during that period. There is undoubt-
edly truth to this argument since, among other things, it is a fact that
the great majority of Protestants are Liberals, and political persecution
was generally directed against Liberals. There is also indirect truth in
it in that, when law and order have largely vanished, fanatics among
the majority have a better chance to unleash mob passions against a
hated minority with whom they would ordinarily live at peace. My
impression is, however, that many cases cannot be exculpated on any
such grounds; on the contrary, that much Protestant oppression has occurred
in areas where there has been little or no violence. Catholic priests have in
numerous instances preached violence against Protestants with impu-
nity; Local authorities have yielded to Catholic pressure and taken arbi-
trary, oppressive action against Protestants. In the interests of fairness it
should be added that the Protestants are by no means devoid of fanati-
cism; the Embassy is aware of cases where they have stirred up trouble.

Colombia  329
It stands to reason, however, that as a tiny beleaguered minority they
tend to restrain themselves.
The America articles mentioned above have undoubtedly acer-
bated a feeling which is latent among Colombian Catholics that the
real purpose behind our representations is to cram Protestantism down
their throats. This is obviously not a rational reaction, as they would
quickly realize if they considered that Protestant missionaries, churches
and schools operate with far greater freedom in all of the other 20 Latin
American republics than here and yet that the peoples of those coun-
tries are no less Catholic than are the Colombians. Moreover, the greater
part of the food we give the Colombian people is distributed through
the Catholic clergy. Nevertheless, the emotion does exist, and it would
be foolish to disregard it. I believe that this is a valid reason why we
should be more specific as to our objectives. If Protestant organizations
claim that by doing this we are cutting the ground out from under their
feet, it would seem to me the best evidence that we had been interven-
ing in this matter to an undue degree, thereby laying ourselves open to
the very serious charge so often made by Colombian Catholics that we
are disregarding Colombian sovereignty.
The Department should note that any further representations
made by this Embassy which come to public knowledge and any favor-
able results which come from such representations will inevitably be
considered by fervent Colombian Catholics as proving our desire to
Protestantize Colombia. Given the emotional atmosphere in which this
matter must inevitably be considered and the Latin temperament of
Colombians, I believe that, confronted with such pressure, they will
simply dig their toes in and not yield even at the expense of grave harm
to Colombia. Any such situation would not only be directly prejudi-
cial to American interests in Colombia, it would also be very harmful
to our basic objectives of promoting peace, stability and progress in
Colombia. If, therefore, we are to pursue our representations on behalf
of Protestants, it seems to me essential to clear the air somehow of this
emotional Colombian belief. Moreover, we cannot get this message to
the Colombian Catholic campesino—­and it is he whom Catholic priests
have stirred up against Protestants—­without running the risk of some
controversy. I do not mean by this that we should engage in polemics
or make controversial statements. I do mean that we must ourselves
adopt a moderate course and explain in moderate terms what it is and
what facts lie behind it. We may not get anywhere by such a course;
we may indeed do harm by it, but we are, in my opinion, less likely
to do harm by this course than by pursuing our present one which, I
believe, will simply amount to butting our heads against a stone wall.
I doubt this will accomplish anything, and I fear it will prove seriously
prejudicial to our relations with Colombia. We should not think that

by keeping silent we—­or I—­are going to avoid controversy; in addi-
tion to the wildly inaccurate items which have appeared in America and
been reprinted in El Catolicismo, the Consul in Medellin has just tele-
phoned to say a vicious personal attack has appeared in El Heraldo, the
church paper in that city, and another malicious article has appeared in
Manizales.
In considering this entire question, we must remember that
there is a strong current of anti-­clericalism in the Liberal Party. The
Protestants originally entered Colombia a century ago at the invitation
of the Government and there are many Colombians who, while devout
Catholics, are less than impressed with the Church’s arrogance in mat-
ters which should not properly concern it. The possibility of defying the
Church in matters beyond its proper competence was vividly illustrated
in the March congressional elections when the Laurcanitstas won an
overwhelming victory in the Conservative Party despite the fulmina-
tions of the Catholic hierarchy. It would, of course, be impossible for us
to get the Protestant case before the Colombian people to the extent that
Laureano Gomez got his before them, but nevertheless I suspect that the
Catholic Church in Colombia might be rather unhappy to be smoked out
in all its fanaticism if, by making no more than reasonable concessions, it
could have peace. It is, in my opinion, precisely the fear which exists that
our objectives may be far more ambitious than they appear which has
induced the Catholic Church and the Colombian Government to take the
firm stand they have.
4. What may we expect of the future Colombian Government?
Dr. Lleras Camargo, the President-­elect, is a devout Catholic. He is
also an able, broad-­minded Liberal. I have little doubt that he appreci-
ates that the Protestants have not been fairly treated in Colombia and
that he deplores this. At the same time, it seems to me that, even if he
were far hotter under the collar regarding the treatment of Protestants
than I have any reason to believe he is, he would still be most reluctant
to take any vigorous action in the religious question. He has inherited
a virtually bankrupt government, a frightful situation of widespread
violence in the countryside, a country exhausted by ten years of bitter
partisan strife. His obvious desire is to heal the wounds of the past ten
years and restore the country’s unity and prosperity. He must work
in harness with his Conservative allies and can accomplish nothing
without them. Under these circumstances, are we to suppose that he
is going to stir up a bitter controversy to meet our representations? He
realizes, of course, that he must have our support in many matters, but
he also realizes that, given the alternatives, we have practically no choice other
than to give him that support. The proof of the pudding is the loan which
we have given Colombia following his election, and the way in which it
was given. I do not mean in any sense to criticize this loan; I merely use

Colombia  331
this as a further indication that we must ourselves think this problem
through.
It seems to me probable under the circumstances that the Lleras
administration will try to sweep this whole matter under the rug to
the best of its ability. I think it reasonable to surmise that the Lleras
administration, like the present Government, will try gradually to
ameliorate the situation, will take remedial action in more flagrant
cases, and will make concessions from time to time. I doubt, however,
that we can expect any drastic shift. Lleras may indeed try to shove the
whole issue into the courts on constitutional grounds and thereby
delay matters further.
Given the present situation in Colombia, I also question whether
we can afford to press Lleras into a corner on this issue. The probable
alternative to Lleras is chaos, and in the coming years it may be quite
hard to prevent precisely that. Given the social unrest in Colombia,
the growing Communist activities, and Colombia’s geographical posi-
tion, to mention but a few of the more obvious considerations, I do not
believe that we can afford to finger the rug under Lleras on an issue
which is not vital to the United States.
5. What, then, should be our course of action?
The present Government has one month to live. I doubt it would
be willing in that month to take any action which might annoy or upset
a great many people in Colombia. We do not have the time to prepare
the ground for further vigorous representations. We are not likely,
therefore, to get any important remedial action from it.
We should not, as I have already pointed out, make vigorous rep-
resentations during the early part of the Lleras administration. We may
hope that the situation will gradually improve. We may properly make
representations in specific cases or press gently when the moment
seems propitious, but we should be careful how far we go. We should
try to clear the air of the poisonous fumes now in it by a positive pro-
gram of publicity. Obviously, such a program should be geared to the
tempo of our representations. If the premise that we should go slow
regarding representations is accepted, then our efforts to clear the air
through publicity may also be pitched in a low gear. In sum, I have the
feeling that this is another example of what Talleyrand meant in his
comment about zeal in diplomatic affairs. Like the violence which is
still desolating the Colombian countryside, this situation is one which
it may take years to correct, and it can be corrected only as the demo-
cratic warp and woof in Colombian life are strengthened.
We should also bear in mind the possibility of solving this religious
problem by court action. When the state of siege is lifted, as it presum-
ably will be as soon after the inauguration of the new administration

as it can be without creating legislative chaos, Protestant churches
and schools can seek through the courts to obtain their legal rights.
Obviously, it would be better from the viewpoint both of the Embassy
and of the Colombian Government if the problem could be solved in this
manner. We would not be placed in the unhappy position of flying in
the face of Colombian Catholic prejudices and of being accused of tak-
ing action far beyond anything we in fact contemplate. The Colombian
Government, in reopening churches and schools, could say that they
were simply respecting court decisions. Moreover, if the Protestants can
secure their rights by court action, it would then be of doubtful propri-
ety for the Embassy to continue to make representations, at least until a
denial of justice had occurred.
However it must be borne in mind that many Colombian judges
doubtless share the fervor of the general populace in their Catholic
predilections and some might, therefore, yielding to Catholic pressure,
find legal quibbles or devise endless delays by which Protestants might
in fact be further deprived of their rights. On the balance, nevertheless,
it would appear to me that this course should be urged upon the Protestants
as soon as it is clearly open to them, despite the dangers which it involves.
If it should prove impossible through the Colombian courts to secure
Protestant rights, it is also true that in most of the Latin American
republics an American company cannot be entirely sure of securing its
rights. I question whether we should go further to secure Protestant
rights, even where a legitimate American interest is clearly involved,
than we should in securing any other American right which has been
violated by the Colombian authorities. We should perhaps remember
that our original representations were with regard to violence visited
upon American Protestant missionaries, their churches and schools
when requests for adequate protection were obviously a duty as well as
a right, and that we may not have perceived the line beyond which the
law should have been invoked before we made representations regard-
ing the allegedly arbitrary actions of Colombian authorities. Our rights
and duties in this matter are precisely the same as they would be in the
protection of any legitimate American interest, and we should not be
swayed in it by emotion, or beyond the bounds of prudence or propri-
ety by our devotion to the democratic principle of freedom of worship.
John M. Cabot
American Ambassador

Colombia  333
CO–12.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to
the Department of State1
Bogotá, July 11, 1958.
No. 31
REF
SUBJECT
Memorandum of Conversation—Carlos SANZ DE SANTAMARIA, Foreign
­Minister, and John M. Cabot, American Ambassador, on July 9, 1958
The Foreign Minister mentioned to me that he wished to see me
and I consequently secured an appointment at 5 o’clock on Wednesday,
July 9th.
The Foreign Minister first referred to the religious question. He
read to me and then handed me a Note proposing that a commission of
two Americans, one Catholic and one Protestant, be sent to this country
to investigate the entire religious situation and render a report. This
Note and a translation thereof are enclosed.3 I did not comment on the
Note at this time. The Foreign Minister mentioned that he had no objec-
tions to my suggestion that the commission should include Catholic
and Protestant representatives from other nations if that were consid-
ered convenient.
The Foreign Minister then referred to the cafeteria matter which
I had raised with him in our previous conversation. He said that he had
concern about allegedly imminent efforts to reestablish dictatorial governments in vari-
request for the United States to send a special mission to LLeras Camargo’s inaugura-
receipt of a note from Sanz de Santamaria formally suggesting establishment of a com-
3 The referenced note is an Aide-Mémoire, dated July 8; neither the Aide-Mémoire
nor the translation is printed.
In an Aide-Mémoire delivered to the Colombian Ministry of Foreign Relations
on August 4 by a representative of the Embassy in Bogotá, the United States agreed to
the Colombian Government’s proposal of July 8. The Aide-Mémoire stated in part the
following: “The Government of the United States, although not a party to the contem-
plated action, believes that efforts of this nature to bring about a better understanding
can aid significantly the finding of a just and definitive solution to these problems affect-
ing citizens of the United States which so frequently have been discussed by our two
Governments.” A copy of the Aide-Mémoire was transmitted to the Department of State

consulted three of the committee of ladies who had organized and were
running the cafeterias, and that they had flatly refused to abolish the 10
centavo charge. They had informed him that they would rather close the
cafeterias than do this. The cafeterias were organized as a social project
rather than as a charity. Under present conditions many self-­respecting
families were simply unable to get the food which they needed. They did
not want charity but if they could get food for a nominal charge it sup-
plied a vital need for them. If, on the other hand, the cafeterias were freely
opened to all comers, the self-­respecting element would be driven out, and
the cafeterias would be taken over by beggars and paupers. So far as the
committee was concerned, pure charity work was in the hands of the par-
ish priests and they did not wish to invade this field. The Foreign Minister
pointed out that “limosna” had a derogatory meaning in Colombia. It
really was essential in each country to take that country’s idiosyncrasies
into account. We should not insist on rigid rules on a world-­wide basis.
The Foreign Minister then proposed that signs be posted in the
cafeteria, spelling out that the milk and flour were given by the United
States, and he said that it could even be spelled out that the total cost
of the meals was, say, 40 centavos, of which so much was given by the
United States, so much by the Coffee Federation, and so much paid by
the 10 centavo charge. I said that the Department of Agriculture had
rejected this formula when I proposed it and insisted that no charge
could be made in connection with food given by the United States. I
said that I did not see how the position of the ladies’ committee and
the Department of Agriculture could be reconciled, but I felt a formula
must be found. I was sure that he agreed with me that if it were not, a
grave social crisis would result. He said that this was true, but I did not
get the impression that he was as concerned as I was. (I do not believe
that the upper classes in Colombia fully appreciate how close Colombia
is to social revolution. They talk much of this with their lips but I doubt
that they really feel it in their hearts).
The Foreign Minister then said he wanted to discuss with me
threats to the public order and that he would be as frank as he had
always been. He had received a series of messages which indicated that
a vast plot was being organized to overthrow the governments of var-
ious American republics and establish dictatorships. (He skipped from
one point to another and the following is therefore a synthesis rather
than a direct account of what he said).
With regard to Colombia there were indications that Rojas Pinilla
was again planning to return. The Foreign Minister referred to the let-
ter which Rojas Pinilla had written to the armed forces.4 He said that
4 No copy of the letter described here was found in Department of State files.

Colombia  335
the loyalty of the armed forces was questionable. The Junta was con-
vinced that the armed forces were loyal but then they had been sim-
ilarly convinced before May 2nd. The Foreign Minister then got out a
series of telegrams, apparently most or all of which originated in the
Colombian Embassy at Cuidad Trujillo.5 According to these telegrams
General Trujillo had suggested to the Panamanian Military Attaché
(Aued?) that he organize a coup against the present Panamanian
Government. Another message reported that Peron planned in con-
junction with opposition elements in southern Brazil to go to southern
Brazil or possibly Paraguay with the eventual purpose of re-­entering
Argentina and overthrowing the Government there. The Foreign
Minister thought that communists might be included among these
opposition elements. I asked whether Peron was supposed already to
be in southern Brazil and the Foreign Minister said he did not know
from the telegram. With regard to Samuel Moreno Diaz, Rojas Pinilla’s
son-­in-­law, he had arrived in Cuidad Trujillo. He had been met at the
airport by protocol officers and taken to the Hotel Paz, which was a
second-­class hotel owned by the Government. There he had received
many telephone calls.
The Foreign Minister then said [text not declassified] that there had
been a great deal of arms smuggling recently to furnish weapons to
dissident elements in various parts of the country. He said that he had
looked into it, and was convinced that the actual smuggling was purely
commercial but that didn’t alter the fact than the arms were getting
into the hands of disgruntled elements. I said that we, too, had reports
of arms smuggling, particularly from Panama, and that we had been
looking into this matter to see if there were anything we could do to
cooperate in stopping it. He said that they also knew that arms were
coming in from Panama.
The Foreign Minister then said that he thought it would be an effec-
tive discouragement to any military men who were considering a coup
if we should announce that we were sending a special mission to the
Lleras inauguration. In making the announcement, he suggested that
we underscore that we were sending the mission in order to express
our great satisfaction at the return of Colombia to democratic govern-
ment, and say anything else which would indicate that we would take
it decidedly amiss if Colombia were not returned to democratic gov-
ernment. I said that the idea of a statement seemed to me a good one.
On previous occasions I had indicated to key military men that in the
event of a military coup Colombia could expect no further help from
the United States. He enthusiastically agreed that this was a wise move
on my part since American aid was obviously essential to Colombia
5 The referenced telegrams were not further identified.

in the present circumstances. He suggested that the military might be
further impressed if a military figure were included in the special mis-
sion. I said that I saw the point of sending a special mission, but it was
slightly embarrassing for me; I had discussed this matter with several
of my colleagues, and since I understood that Lleras had not wished
special missions to be sent to the inauguration, I had indicated that we
were somewhat adverse to sending one unless we found that every-
body else was planning to do so. The Foreign Minister said that it was
a reversal of his position also. However, he felt that the circumstances
warranted it.
The Foreign Minister then said that since we were talking so
frankly he wanted to tell me about his experiences on the morning of
May 2nd. He had gotten away from his apartment at 5 A.M. with Jorge
Mejia (Minister of Agriculture) before the military police had picked
him up, as they had other high government officials. They had been
stopped by a patrol (he did not specify whether it was a military or
police patrol), and that at that moment they saw the car of General Paris
(he said “not the Junta member, but his brother”), and Santamaria had
said to Mejia in English, “Let’s get into this military car”. They had thus
safely reached the barracks at Usaquen. Santamaria and Mejia agreed
that if they found the military had also risen they would simply get
arrested a few hours before they would be in any case. They found
a scene of wild confusion at Usaquen, since no one knew what was
going on. Apparently “some 45 officers” were undecided what to do.
He had hastily harangued them, pointing out that if Colonel Forero
thought he could run the country in the face of popular opposition and
the inability of Colombia to get “one dollar to finance imports”, he was
greatly mistaken. The officers appeared impressed with this argument
and eventually he was taken to General Gomez Arenas, who was by
that time organizing the counter-­attack of the loyal forces.
I then said that since we were talking so intimately I wanted to ask
him a direct question: why had the Government done nothing about
the other officers who were known to be implicated in the May 2nd
uprising? (I mentioned no names). The Foreign Minister smiled faintly
and said he didn’t know; the Junta had simply not done anything about
them. [text not declassified]
The Foreign Minister said that he was seriously concerned at the
problem of communism in Venezuela. He had heard from various
Venezuelan friends that a very dangerous trend had developed in this
direction. He particularly mentioned that “Mendoza”, obviously the
former member of the Junta, had told him how disturbed he was.
The Foreign Minister then let me read a long draft Note which he
was preparing to send to the OAS with regard to a meeting of Foreign

Colombia  337
Ministers.6 The date of the meeting was, as the Foreign Minister pointed
out, purposely left very vague. The purpose would be to discuss the
whole question of economic cooperation in the Hemisphere. I did not
like the general tone of the Note and mentioned to the Foreign Minister
that I didn’t think we would be altogether in agreement with him, but
that he of course had the right to express his own views. I particularly
took exception to a paragraph suggesting that cooperation has not been
as close and ample as it should have been. The Foreign Minister imme-
diately said that he had not intended this as a criticism of the United
States but rather as a statement of the undeniable fact that the Latin
American republics have not cooperated among themselves. He would
re-­draft this paragraph and make this clear.
I said there were several things which I would like to take up with
him. I first asked whether he had ascertained whether Lleras intended
definitely to decline the President’s invitation to visit Washington in
November. The Foreign Minister said he had unfortunately failed to
ask Lleras this the one time he had seen him, but he would telephone
me and let me know.
I then referred to the fact that the Banco de la Republica was
letting us have only [illegible in the original] pesos to the dollar on
money which we are drawing against payments for agricultural sur-
pluses. Under the present exchange system this seemed to be in clear
contravention of the terms of our agreement, and I hoped that instruc-
tions would be issued to the Banco de la Republica to pay us in accor-
dance with these terms; i.e., certificate rate plus 10%. The Foreign
Minister said that the 10% matter was being handled in Washington
and I agreed to this. I noted that the Colombian Government was now
collecting the 10% from purchases of surplus products. He agreed to
take this matter up.
I then said that I did not wish to discuss the entire religious ques-
tion but there was one aspect of it which did seriously concern me.
The Catholic Church was apparently putting on a systematic campaign
against the Embassy and the Consulate at Cali in connection with this
question. I said that I was accustomed to attacks and they didn’t worry
me, and that it was of course the privilege of the Catholic clergy to say
what it wanted. However, it seemed to me extremely injudicious under
the present circumstances to wash all of this dirty linen in public. The
attacks completely misrepresented the position of the Embassy and the
Consulate. They alleged that we were trying to Protestantize the coun-
try by distributing food, whereas the fact was that we were distribut-
ing the food through the Catholic clergy. Bishop Alvarez Restrepo had
6 No copy of the draft note described here was found in Department of State files.

been particularly active, evidently as a means of getting one Protestant
missionary out of the town of Supiá. I would think that the Catholics
should realize that the only people who could profit from a quarrel of
this kind were the Communists. I, on my part, had repeatedly urged
moderation on the Protestants and their statements, and I feared that
if the Catholic attacks continued the Protestants would join in the fray.
That would be no atmosphere in which to get anything done in the
religious question.
The Foreign Minister said that he knew that Bishop Alvarez
Restrepo had been deeply offended by his conversation with the Consol
in Cali. (Why, I can’t imagine - one of the two consular officers who
spoke with him is a Catholic, and according to their account Alvarez
Restrepo completely misrepresented the conversation). He thought that
he might speak to the Nuncio and suggested I do the same. I agreed
that this might be helpful.
The whole conversation lasted an hour and a half.
John M. Cabot
American Ambassador
CO–13.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to
the Department of State1
Embassy believes considerable of Avianca opposition to bilat-
eral air agreement stems from bitterness over failure of CAB to take
action connection permanent permit Miami/New York route. If ques-
tion Avianca permit could be settled rapidly, this complicating factor
in Colombian Congress consideration of pact would be eliminated. If
CAB decision favorable to Avianca we could expect less opposition
for bilateral from this influential airline which presently may fear U.S.
withholding adverse action until ratification achieved. Inasmuch as it
the situation in commercial aviation between the United States and Colombia should the
pending bilateral air agreement fail ratification in the Colombian Congress. (Department
of State microfilm telegram reels)

Colombia  339
appears bilateral will receive tough-­sledding at best in Congress, fail-
ure CAB clarify this point creates unnecessary complication in congres-
sional consideration and the impression CAB “heckling” Avianca. Even
in unlikely event CAB decision adverse, and therefore ratification fails,
would serve to remove any ground for subsequent contention U.S.
reserved this surprise until after Congressional action. If Colombian
Congress rejects agreement, after permit granted they could not allege
we were responsible because CAB had not granted Avianca permit. On
other hand, if permit granted and agreement then rejected, we under-
stand (DEPTEL 107) that permit would automatically be cancelled.
Therefore urged Department attempt to bring CAB decision to
head soonest to obtain final resolution Avianca permanent permit
question.3
Cabot
attributed delay in the Avianca case to Avianca’s reluctance to submit necessary infor-
mation, and that he also stated CAB review was “delayed by personnel shortages and
other pressing matters.” The telegram further stated the following: “Important note pres-
ent Avianca tactics re Congressional approval bilateral [air agreement] similar to those
employed to destroy 1951 tentative agreement. Grant permit at that time failed remove
Avianca opposition and doubtful present application would achieve desired objective.
Nevertheless, decision Avianca application not being deliberately delayed pending rati-
CO–14.
Letter from the Vice Chairman of the Civil Aeronautics
Board (Gurney) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 14, 1958.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
Reference is made to a letter dated November 4, 1958 from
Mr. H. Gardner Ainsworth requesting that, in view of the facts set
forth therein, the Board expedite consideration of the pending appli-
cation of AVIANCA for a foreign air carrier permit.2
2 A copy of the referenced letter is attached to Department of State instruction

The Board is convinced that the concern of the Colombian Congress
regarding this case is due to a misunderstanding of the nature of the
action being taken, and that such misunderstanding has been fostered
by AVIANCA. A full explanation of the Board’s position was set forth in
an instruction to the Embassy early this year (No. A-139 dated February
erate to the Colombians the points made therein.
The Board has done its utmost to expedite this case. The prehear-
ing conference on AVIANCA’s application was held on August 8, 1957,
at which time counsel for AVIANCA requested deferral of further pro-
ceedings to enable AVIANCA to obtain from the Department of State
a legal interpretation of Article 4 of the United States-Colombia Air
Transport Agreement.4 Thereafter, notes were exchanged between the
United States and Colombia relating to the Board’s action in the light
of the provisions of Article 4 and the commitments made during the
negotiation of the Agreement. In February 1958 upon the representa-
tions of Ambassador Bonsal, it was agreed that, in order to expedite the
case, the Board would dispense with the usual hearing on the applica-
tion and would enter into a stipulation with AVIANCA with respect
to the facts which would have been covered in the hearing. The Board
staff made repeated efforts to obtain from AVIANCA counsel an agree-
ment to discuss the nature of the evidence to be submitted but the latter
appeared most reluctant to cooperate. However, the matters on which
information was to be furnished by AVIANCA were finally agreed and
in May 1958 a list of the questions to be answered was forwarded to
AVIANCA counsel. Two months later, on July 9, 1958, AVIANCA sub-
mitted documents purporting to be responsive to this questionnaire.
Shortly thereafter, the Bureau Counsel who had been handling this case
resigned from the Board and a new Bureau Counsel had to be assigned.
Due to shortage of personnel, the vacation period, and press of other
matters, the new Bureau Counsel was not able to review the AVIANCA
submission until October. On October 27, 1958, AVIANCA counsel was
notified that the AVIANCA submission did not respond adequately to
the questionnaire and he was requested to file the necessary additional
information at the earliest possible date. As of November 13 AVIANCA
had still not supplied this information.
You may be assured that the Board has no intention of delaying
completion of this case until the Colombian Congress has ratified the
Agreement. As soon as AVIANCA submits the information necessary
3 Not found.
4 Apparent reference to the Air Transport Agreement and related exchanges of notes,

Colombia  341
for the Board to reach a decision on the application, the processing of
such data within the Board will be expedited.
Sincerely Yours,
Gurney
Vice Chairman
CO–15.
Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow) to the Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1
Washington, December 1, 1958.
SUBJECT
Disquieting rumors of revolutionary plotting in Colombia.
Facts:
General Gustavo ROJAS Pinilla was overthrown as dictator-­
president of Colombia on May 11, 1957. For a year he was in exile in
the Canary Islands. On October 12, 1958, despite warnings from the
Colombian Government he returned to Bogotá, avowedly to “vindi-
cate his honor”. His presence in Colombia has occasioned considerable
plotting, some of it overt but most of it covert. Rojas himself has been
defiant and contemptuous toward the Government, which is planning
to bring him to trial on December 15 on a series of charges ranging from
violation of the Constitution and Laws to “indignities”. The Senate has
been conducting hearings on these charges for some time, and has its
case against him ready to present.
Current Situation:
Our Embassy has from the moment of Rojas’ return expressed con-
cern at the course events were taking and the danger of a violent over-
throw of the democratic National Union Government headed by Dr.
Alberto LLERAS Camargo. The Embassy has based this concern on the
testimony of sources close to Rojas, but Rojas himself has not been hesi-
tant about declaring openly his expectation that there will be an uprising
in his favor. One source claims that 70% of the Armed forces, including
Drafted by Gerberich.

the Commander General of the Armed Forces and the Commander of
the Air Force, are inclined toward Rojas. Sources of our confidential
agency deny this, as do officers of the local Embassy. However the most
recent messages from Bogotá [text not declassified] are quite alarming, as
they indicate Rojas wants a showdown, that his supporters are “ready”
in six or seven of the fourteen states of Colombia, and that morale is
disintegrating in the Army. It should also be noted that certain Embassy
sources that formerly discounted the possibility of violence have now
revised their opinion.
Evaluation:
The next two weeks may be critical in Colombia. If the Armed
Forces are loyal, there is no danger. If the Embassy’s sources are truth-
ful, and not just propagandists and alarmists, it may be difficult, if not
impossible, to bring Rojas to trial and convict him (which would doubt-
less mean expelling him from the country). His own recent statements
in private to the Secretary of the Senate—­that rivers of blood will flow
and that there will not be enough lampposts in Bogatá for all these des-
ignated for hanging—­show plainly enough that his own intentions are
evil. We shall have to expect a continuance of disquieting information
until the crisis is passed, on or about December 15.2
2 A notation on the source text, initialled by Murphy, read as follows:
“Does ARA feel there is anythings we shd do?”
CO–16.
Letter from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Bogotá, December 12, 1958.
Dear Dick:
I am writing to pass on to you a couple of items which I think you
may find of interest.
The first is that exactly a week before President Lleras announced
the Government’s drastic measures to forestall a coup, I had privately

Colombia  343
warned Foreign Minister Turbay of what we knew from several sources
was impending. Two nights ago Turbay told me that our information
had been very useful. You will recall that I did the same thing with
Santamaria in the case of the May 2nd coup but, unfortunately, they
did not pay adequate attention to what I told them. I suppose that this
is interference in their internal affairs, but my impression is that both
Santamaria and Turbay were very appreciative. In any case, it would
have been a major disaster for Colombia and for our relations with
Colombia if either coup had succeeded, so I feel that it was wise to pass
the information along. I believe that you agreed with this thought in
the first instance.
The other matter which I wish to mention is that we are begin-
ning to move very quietly again on the religious front. I have just sug-
gested to Lazear of the Presbyterian Colegio Americano, Executive
Secretary of the Evangelical Confederation of Colombia, that, in my
opinion, it would be a good move to send one of the Colombian
Protestant leaders to see Amaya Ramíres, Minister of Government,
and find out whether the present Government would be willing to
relax further the restrictions on Protestant activities in Colombia. My
reasons for feeling that the time to move has come are: (1) violence
is very much diminished, thereby striking out the pretext which has
been given heretofore for doing nothing; (2) while the state of siege
has temporarily been restored, I think it will be raised within a few
days; (3) with all of the talk about human freedoms in Colombia,
it is certainly an anomaly that freedom of worship should still be
restrictioned; and (4) the Government has removed restrictions
against Communists, and it is therefore strange that they should be
maintained against Protestants. Moreover, we have intimations that
both the Liberals and Laureanistas view the Protestant situation as
anomalous, and that there may be a more or less spontaneous protest
against the maintenance of restrictions against Protestants. If we can
possibly get the Government to move on a basis of pressure from
Colombians, I think we shall be very much better off than if we bring
the pressure ourselves, so I want to see what this will produce. We
may of course find the water icy, and would then have to decide
what, if anything, we should do further; but then again the water
may turn out to be tepid to warm. We shall of course let you know if
anything develops.
With all good wishes of the Season,
Very sincerely yours,
John M. Cabot

CO–17.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador
in Colombia (Cabot)1
Washington, December 22, 1958.
Dear Jack:
I have received and read with interest your letter of December 122
and I agree with you that the overthrow of the new National Union
government would have had serious consequences not only for
Colombia but for our relations with their country as well. We are, as
you know, hopeful that this effort to restore democracy in Colombia
will have every chance for success. We were, therefore, concerned
when Rojas was permitted to return and were relieved when Lleras
acted firmly and decisively. The action you took, which apparently-­
contributed to this good end, was of course a delicate one. I am sure
you weighed all the possibilities and will do so in any future situa-
tions of this kind.
You are in close touch with the religious situation, and I am con-
fident you will decide what might best be indicated. I certainly agree
that the initiative should come from the Protestants, as you have sug-
gested. From here it looks as though the religious situation greatly
improved during 1958. We rarely get any complaints now regarding
this problem.
You will be interested to know that recently we were told confi-
dentially that the National Council of Churches plans to accept the
offer of the Roman Catholic press and is going to appoint Dr. Stewart
Herman of the Lutheran World Council as its member of a fact-­finding
mission to Colombia to report on the situation as it now exists. We tried
to discourage this by pointing out the religious situation is relatively
quiescent for the first time in ten years, and it seemed risky to disturb
it by any inquiry now. Nevertheless, we were told that the Protestants
feel obligated to go ahead with these plans, since in the past they have
criticized the Catholics for failing to carry out their promise to do just
what is now contemplated. If these plans go through, Mr. Seamons of
Secret; Official-Informal. Co-­drafted by Ernest V. Siracusa, Director of the Office of West
Coast Affairs, and Gerberich on December 19. The source text is a carbon copy bearing
Rubottom’s typed name.
2 Document CO–16.

Colombia  345
SEV (our liaison man with religious organizations), will know of it,
and we will inform you, we hope with sufficient anticipation.3
In closing I should like to express to you and Mrs. Cabot our best
wishes for the holiday season.
Sincerely,
R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
by Ricardo Samper, Secretary of Information in the Presidential Palace, to a reporter con-
cerning the question of reopening Protestant churches in Colombia. According to the des-
patch, Samper indicated that the Colombian Government did not intend to alter the status
quo regarding restrictions against Protestants in Colombia, or to rescind orders issued
under the Rojas regime which resulted in the closing of Protestant churches and schools in
Mission Territories, because it did not want to exacerbate difficulties with opposition groups
or incur the antagonism of the Catholic Church. A portion of the despatch read as follows:
“When asked how long he thought it would be before some move [by the Government]
were made, particularly in the Mission Territory situation, he guessed it might be a year
learned “that a number of additional Protestant Churches have been able to reopen
in Mission Territories with the permission or acquiescence of the local authorities and
CO–18.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Bogotá, February 13, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
Colombian President Lleras Camargo
Colombian Foreign Minister Turbay Ayala
R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
DATE
February 1959
PLACE
Bogotá, Colombia
While visiting Colombia I had separate conversations with
President Lleras Camargo and Foreign Minister Turbay Ayala.2 I cov-
ered the following principal points with them:
briefing papers prepared for his visit are in ARA/WST Files, Lot 63 D 20; additional doc-
umentation is in decimal file 721.00(W).

Coffee—I told them that the U.S. is following the coffee problem
with continuing and sympathetic interest. I recognized the importance
of coffee to Colombia and the other countries of Latin America and had
hesitated to accept their invitation to visit Colombia because I did not
want to be drawn into public comment about coffee due to the impact
on the market which anything said by a public official would have. The
coffee producing countries should not pass the responsibility to the U.S.
to bring some order to the coffee market through import quotas. They
could achieve the same end by applying export quotas. Nevertheless,
several officials in the Department of State are undertaking to explain
the serious nature of the instability of the market to others in the gov-
ernment and to some members of the Congress. I referred to my discus-
sion with Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson3 and to the intention of Mr.
Mann and myself to contact several individual members of the inter-
ested committees in the Senate as well as the House of Representatives.
Meanwhile, I said, Colombia would have to use all of its influence
on Brazil especially and on the other coffee producing countries to
maintain the present pact if chaos was to be avoided. This they seemed
to recognize was the case, and they said that they were spending prac-
tically full time on Brazil.
Caribbean Political Situation—I expressed the concern which the U.S.
holds for the emerging political situation in the Caribbean area, follow-
ing the victorious revolution in Cuba. I said that the principle of non-­
intervention had come under fire and that yet it seemed to the U.S. that
this principle, perhaps more than any other, was at the root of the demo-
cratic growth in Latin America. To this they agreed. I urged them to use
all of the influence which Colombia has, and it is outstanding I said, to
persuade their sister republics not to throw over the very foundations of
the Inter-American system which we had all fought for, for so long.
The Foreign Minister told me that the Cuban Government had sent
a special emissary to talk to Colombian officials and mentioned that
they had made their views regarding non-­intervention quite clear to
him. They had expressed firm disapproval of the executions in Cuba
and of the public statements regarding Cuban support of efforts to
overthrow other governments in the area. They had told him that if
intervention under democratic regimes was to be tolerated, it would
also take place under less attractive regimes.
President Lleras Camargo mentioned the call of the Cuban emis-
sary on him but did not tell me in as much detail of their discussion as
did the Foreign Minister.
Colombian Political Situation—I complimented the President and
the Foreign Minister on the way in which Colombia had managed
3 No memorandum of the referenced discussion was identified.

Colombia  347
its affairs through the past difficult months. They said that the peo-
ple had responded whole-­heartedly to the austerity program and had
cooperated with the national front. They feel, however, that the politi-
cal situation will deteriorate rapidly if coffee prices drop much further
and if economic prospects do not improve. Colombia had undergone
quite a challenge with the return of Rojas Pinilla. People had not really
expected him to return but the legal processes were being carried out
now that he had. The trial will probably last another two or three weeks
in the Senate and then he will be turned over to the Courts. Violence
has abated in the worst areas of a year or so ago, but it has cropped up
again in Caldas and northern Boyaca. Squatters are moving in on prop-
erties and are creating quite a serious problem.
I stressed the role that Colombia has played traditionally in the
OAS and in the UN and the great satisfaction which I took from seeing
Colombia return to its outstanding position of the past.
Diplomatic Asylum—The Foreign Minister said that Colombia is
preparing to submit certain amendments to the convention on asy-
lum for consideration at the Quito conference next year. They are
in a difficult situation with Guatemala and Nicaragua, the embas-
sies of both of these countries having given asylum to common
criminals. They feel that the traditional rules of asylum should be
respected and that the asylum-­granting country should determine
when asylum may properly be granted, but the abuse must stop if
the principle of asylum is to continue. One thing they have in mind
recommending is that asylum should not be granted to military offi-
cers on active duty.
CO–19.
Memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Office of
West Coast Affairs (Silberstein) to the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1
Washington, March 19, 1959.
SUBJECT
Political Situation in Colombia; “Alternation” issue.
Gerberich.

As you have seen, the trial of Rojas before the Senate has ended
with his conviction on two charges, violation of the Constitution and
conduct unbecoming a president. After the Senate has sentenced him
he will presumably be tried before the Supreme Court on criminal
charges. The most the Senate can do is deprive him of political rights
and pension.2 If convicted on criminal charges the Supreme Court can
theoretically jail him or exile him.
The inglorious showing made by Rojas at his trial and the pub-
lic apathy with the proceedings have already gone far toward remov-
ing him as a serious threat to the stability of the National Union
Government, whose enemies hoped the trial would discredit it beyond
redemption. A more serious issue remains to be resolved, the matter of
“alternation” of the presidency, coupled with increasing opposition to
Lleras amongst leftist Liberals.
At the time of the plebiscite in December 1957, to amend the
Constitution to provide for parity between the two parties in the
Government, the joint candidate was Guillermo León Valencia, a
Conservative. It was subsequently demonstrated that Valencia did not
enjoy the support of a majority of his party, and as a result Lleras, the
liberal, became the candidate by agreement between the Liberal and
Conservative directorates, and Valencia voluntarily withdrew. This
necessitated the introduction of a new legislative act to succeed the
legislation already in force, so as to provide for alternation of the pres-
idency, beginning with a Liberal instead of a Conservative. It was also
agreed between the two party directorates that the act would provide
that the alternation provision should run for 16 years, instead of 12, as
originally approved by the plebiscite.
The new Act provides the following:
(1) The Presidency shall alternate between the two parties from
Liberal again, and finally a Conservative from 1970 to 1974.
(2) The person who shall replace the President in office (the desig-
nado or other official as provided by the Constitution) shall be of the
same party as the President.
(3) Parity in legislative bodies as provided in Article 2 of the
Constitutional Reform of December 1, 1957 plebiscite shall be extended
to 1974.
According to the Constitution, an Amendment must be passed in
two consecutive sessions of Congress and be published in the Diario
March 17 Senate verdict finding ex-President Rojas Pinilla guilty, Senate last night
declared Rojas ‘unworthy’ and sentenced him to permanent loss political rights, pension

Colombia  349
Oficial promptly in order to be effective. In the August, 1958, session,
to 0 in the Senate) and was published in the Diario Official on August 30.
It must now come up again after Congress convenes in July. After it has
passed both houses and has been signed by the president it becomes
law.
Opposition has arisen to the alternation provision in the Liberal
Party. The so-­called leftist group, especially former followers of Gaitán,
want the Liberals to keep control of the Government, since the Party
demonstrated in the last election that it controls many more votes than
the Conservatives. Moreover they do not trust Laureano Gómez and
his followers and fear the Conservatives will perpetuate themselves in
office if they get in again. Lleras cannot permit his party to take a stand
against alternation; to do so would be to deny his own handiwork as
co-­founder of National Union.
A National Liberal Convention has been called to fight this issue
out, and it has been in session since March 16. Alfonsito López just
returned from semi-­exile in Mexico, who is said to be supported by
his father, ex President López, is leading the fight against alternation.
Carlos Lleras Restrepo has resigned as sole chief of the Liberal Party,
feeling that his leadership is not being supported. Alfonsito López is
said to have described him as an “oligarch” and “autocrat” and wants
him replaced by a man from his own faction. Ex-President Santos has
come strongly to the defense of Lleras and his determination to stand
by the National Front and demands that he be urged to reconsider his
resignation. This seems to align Santos and López, the two ex-Presi-
dents against each other.
President Lleras has also been having some trouble within his cabi-
net, for which the factionalism within both parties is partly responsible,
and also differences of opinion as to how to deal with transportation,
labor and the recent demonstrations against raised bus fares and prices
of food-­stuffs. All his cabinet officers and governors have now resigned
to give him an opportunity to appoint men he can rely upon.
The bitter feuding between followers of Conservative ex-Presidents
Gómez and Ospina has already been a serious problem for President
Lleras to handle. It will be a worse headache if he has to cope with a
feud between the two ex-Presidents of his own party and their support-
ers. Meanwhile there are rumors of Rojistas and Communists getting
together to oppose the National Union in every way possible. Lleras
has a stormy situation confronting him, but predictions are that he will
ride it out. His recent threat to resign office if the alternation provision
is defeated will cause his opponents, as well as “neutral” Liberals, to
pause before forcing him to this decision.

CO–20.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to
the Department of State1
40. President today pointed fact two years since overthrow dic-
tatorship had been ones of austerity and economic pressures on pop-
ulace. Colombia inherited many burdens from dictatorship but has
nevertheless met its obligations and repaid all it could on outstanding
indebtedness. Serious danger exists that if austerity too long continued
Colombian people will lose faith in democracy. Under these circum-
stances President asked what I thought prospects were that Colombia could
secure large development credit (he mentioned $200 million) for economically
justified projects. He mentioned one difficulty this connection which is
Colombia’s inability within budget to provide pesos for Colombian
share of projects, and he naturally does not want to print them. He said
government is now drawing up broad plan to present in Washington if
atmosphere favorable.
I said I knew high prestige Colombia enjoyed in Washington due
excellent financial record post-­dictatorship government. Under circum-
stances I thought possibilities getting development loan fairly prom-
ising provided Colombian representations convinced loan agencies
Washington that plan is economically sound and loan can be serviced. I
suggested that when plan elaborated in sufficient detail it be informally
discussed in Washington.
Cabot

Colombia  351
CO–21.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Colombia1
46.
Embtel 40.2 In view economic record GOC, Department and
Eximbank sympathetic problem raised reftel re development credits.
If you believe further response by Embassy is necessary, or if question
again raised by President or other officials, you should take sympa-
thetic and cautiously encouraging line, being careful not to arouse
exaggerated hopes.
Specifically, following points should be made in any further dis-
cussion this subject with GOC:
(1) Re “broad plan” mentioned by President, U.S. agencies appre-
ciate value of sensible overall program but do not, repeat not, make
practice of underwriting such programs or fixed percentage thereof.
Long established policy is rather to consider development credits on
project by project basis.
FYI. In any case $200 million is overly ambitious in terms of avail-
able resources of U.S. lending agencies and current economic position
of Colombia.
End FYI.
(2) Sound high priority projects within Colombia’s debt-­servicing
capacity will receive careful consideration on evidence of maximum
self-­help effort.
FYI. Eximbank has taken this position in contacts with Colombian
officials for several months. End FYI.
(3) Re local currency requirements, Colombia must look to own
resources, possibly supplemented by PL 480, Title I proceeds. Policy of
DLF is to finance local costs “only if it is clearly demonstrated that there
are no other ways to finance such local costs without seriously jeopar-
dizing the economy’s financial stability” and to require dollar repay-
ment when, in opinion of DLF, borrower’s situation warrants.
and signed by Alexander M. Rosenson of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic
Affairs; cleared with the Office of West Coast Affairs, the Economic Development Division
in the Bureau of Economic Affairs, Treasury Department, Export-Import Bank, and in
substance with the Development Loan Fund.
2 Document CO–20.

(4) Stress no commitment can be made pending receipt and thor-
ough study specific projects.
Dillon
Acting
CO–22.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Colombia1
123.
Copete2 and Franco3 presented Eximbank detailed estimate
$118 million balance of payments deficit July 1959 through December
1960. In general tentative terms Copete broached possibility following
treatment: $20 million by use of IMF resources; $25 million from U.S.
commercial banks; $23 millions by rescheduling 1960 payments due
Eximbank; $20 million new Eximbank credit for trucks, buses, taxis;
$30 million by use of Colombia’s own foreign exchange reserves.
In addition to above, considering possible new $15 million standby
arrangement with IMF.
Eximbank has expressed willingness discuss problem further with
Colombians but has pointed out its reluctance continue engage in bal-
ance payment operations. Bank has advised Copete he should first
work out IMF drawings and standby.
DILLON (Acting)
drafted by Richard A. Poale of the Office of West Coast Affairs and Charles J. Shoban of
the Export-Import Bank; signed by Silverstein.
2 Ignacio Copete Lizarralde, Manager of the Colombian Central Bank.
3 Jorge Franco Helguin, Chief of the National Planning Department in the Colombian
Government.

Colombia  353
CO–23.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Colombian Affairs (Gerberich)1
Washington, September 23, 1959.
SUBJECT
Bilateral Air Agreement with Colombia
PARTICIPANTS
Julio César Turbay, Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs
José Gutiérrez Gómez, Colombian Ambassador
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Mr. Silberstein, WST
Mr. Gerberich, WST/CO
Dr. Turbay said that, as we were aware, the Colombian Congress
has not yet ratified the Bilateral Aviation Agreement, signed in 1956,
which entered provisionally into force in January, 1957. He said that he
has encountered opposition to it for the following reasons: (1) it was
negotiated and signed by the Rojas Government; (2) it provides that the
Agreement enters into force provisionally from the date of signature,
whereas under Colombian law all agreements enter into force from the
date of ratification; (3) there have been some questions raised regarding
flight frequencies. On this last point Dr. Turbay was not at all precise.
Mr. Rubottom said that we have been concerned with the failure
of the Colombians to ratify the Agreement. We have believed all along
that the negotiations were carried through to a successful conclusion
after all legal and constitutional provisions had been carefully consid-
ered and observed. We have been at great pains to satisfy the Colombians
when they have raised any questions in connection with the Agreement,
the most recent of these being our activity in urging that approval of
Avianca’s landing permit be expedited. He urged that the Foreign
Minister take whatever steps he appropriately could to urge ratification
by the Colombian Congress.
With regard to the specific questions raised by the Foreign Minister
Mr. Rubottom offered to arrange for a meeting between the Colombians
and our aviation technicians before Dr. Turbay returned to Colombia.
It was accordingly decided that Department officers would meet with
Drafted by Gerberich on September 29; initialled by Rubottom.

the Foreign Minister and the Colombian Ambassador at the Embassy
2 On September 25, a group of Department of State officers, including Henry T.
Snowdon, Chief of the Aviation Division, Silberstein, and Gerberich, met with Foreign
Minister Turbay and Ambassador Gómez to discuss further the pending bilateral avi-
ation agreement. During the discussion, Turbay elaborated the points he made to
Rubottom two days earlier. The memorandum of the conversation held on the 25th, pre-
pared by Gerald W. Russell of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs on
September 29, records the outcome as follows:
“The Foreign Minister then said that he wanted to be in as good a position as pos-
sible to answer his Congress when presenting the Agreement and requested an official
memorandum
(a) Pointing out that the agreement is similar to 52 others
(b) Explaining the spirit of Article 4
(c) Outlining how the U.S. would view investments and loans, in so far as owner-
ship and control are concerned; and
(d) The U.S. view on frequencies.
It was agreed that such a memorandum would be made available to the Colombians
CO–24.
Editorial Note
entered into force on the latter date, the United States agreed to transfer
to Colombia on a five year loan basis, renewable for an additional five
year period, one destroyer pursuant to the provisions of Public Law
85–532, an act authorizing the transfer of naval vessels to friendly for-
The destroyer loan agreement between the United States and
Colombia was amended by an exchange of notes signed at Bogotá, July
25, 1960, and entered into force on the same date. For text of the notes

Colombia  355
CO–25.
Memorandum from the Director of the International
Cooperation Administration (Riddleberger) and the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1
Washington, March 25, 1960.
SUBJECT
Proposed Program for Assistance to Colombia’s Agrarian Reform Program
Problem:
When Colombian President Lleras Camargo makes his official visit
to Washington, April 5–8,2 he is expected to inform us of his strong
interest in obtaining U.S. Government assistance for Colombia’s land
reform program. We believe we should respond very sympathetically
looking toward the possibility of subsequently extending a loan or
loans to assist Colombia in its land reform program—more specifically
in programs of land development and settlement.
Discussion:
1. In Colombia, as in other under-­developed Latin American coun-
tries, the basic economic problem in which progress is essential to the
achievement of U.S. objectives is two-­fold: (a) How to increase the
national income; (b) how to achieve its more equitable distribution.
2. The bulk of our economic aid—­grants, loans, technical assis-
tance—­is devoted primarily to problem (a), to increasing the national
income. However, a greater peril to our objectives may lie in problem
(b),—­in the potential popular reaction against the inequitable distribu-
tion of income and in the popular identification of the United States
with the wealthy. No matter how much progress governmental and
private capital may make in raising the national income, that very
progress and our basic objectives will remain in grave danger if gross
disparities persist in income distribution. While continuing our efforts
to promote economic growth, we need to devise ways through which
our aid may be more effective in achieving progress toward a more
Wymberley D. Coerr of the Office of West Coast Affairs on March 23; revised by William
V. Turnage, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs,
and Dennis A. Fitzgerald, Deputy Director for Operations, International Cooperation
Administration. The memorandum was concurred in by Turnage, John O. Bell, Special
Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination, and Charles R. Harley, Chief of the Latin
American Division, Office of International Finance, Treasury Department.
2 See the Editorial Note, Document CO–27.

equitable distribution of income and in identifying the United States
with legitimate popular economic aspirations.
3. Need for Program:
a. Colombia’s urgent need. On one hand, Colombia has much ara-
ble land not in economic use—­governmental lands that are under-­
developed and generally difficult of access, and private lands that
are under very light use or completely in disuse. On the other hand,
Colombia has hundreds of thousands of small farmers working tiny
infertile plots or dispossessed from their lands by guerilla violence
and idle in huge festering urban shanty-­towns. Our Embassy reports,
and we agree, that the “fundamental question facing Colombia and,
therefore, the Lleras Administration is whether social and economic
betterment for the large underprivileged majority of the Colombian
population can be achieved sufficiently rapidly in an evolutionary
manner to avoid an attempt to achieve the same ends by revolutionary
means,” and “ . . . a major front . . . is . . . land reform.” Colombia needs
agrarian reform both politically, to decrease the risk of insurrection, and
economically, to increase agricultural production.
b. President Lleras wants assistance. President Lleras has told our
Embassy: a) The question of providing land to the millions of poverty-­
stricken peasants in Colombia was a crucial and urgent one; b) the
danger of Communist exploitation of this situation was great and
imminent; c) the Colombian Government’s financial sources for mount-
ing such a program were very limited; d) U.S. assistance in an agrarian
reform program in Latin America would make a tremendous impact
throughout the continent, and the United States should pick some
country for an example (ensayo); e) such assistance would insure the
moderate evolution of agrarian reform and avoid the extremist solution
from exploding as in Cuba.
c. Evolutionary progress in agrarian reform is urgently required in U.S.
interests. Castro agents and Cuban Communists are working with
their Colombian fellows among the peasants, selling the Cuban type
agrarian reform which, in effect, invites land “reform” by violent take-
over. Their activities could precipitate insurrection that would lead to
unsound Colombian land reform and to a political defeat for the United
States. USOM/Bogotá reports Communism is “capitalizing on the fact
that many peasants have nowhere to go while large tracts of land are
held by city people for purely speculative purposes.” President Lleras
ate government’s intentions and ability effectively to tackle Colombia’s
basic problems. It is essential that we effectively help him to deny to the
Communists the monopoly of hope.
d. Support for agrarian reform is in accord with U.S. policy. Speaking
to the Tenth Session of the FAO Conference in Rome in November

Colombia  357
1959,3 Mr. Horace Henderson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
International Organization Affairs, reaffirmed our recommendation
“that same land reform or agrarian reform is in some countries essen-
tial to economic and social development. We reaffirm our support for
the concepts of land reform as embodied in resolutions of the General
Assembly of the UN, the Economic and Social Council and the FAO
Conference.” With regard to Congressional opinion, two Senators who
recently visited Latin America have reported as follows: “. . . we should
be entirely sympathetic when a South American Government which
has formulated a just and equitable land reform program needs capital
to provide compensation for the land” (Senator Morse); “. . . the United
States should adopt a more realistic lending policy . . . in regard to loans
for social reform or welfare projects, as . . . land redistribution” (Senator
Aiken).
e. Colombia already is attempting a sound approach to agrarian
reform. President Lleras Camargo, internationally respected leader of
Colombia’s governing alliance between liberals and conservatives,
both of which are economically conservative and regarded in Colombia
as “the oligarchy,” is pushing land reform efforts on several fronts. By
tax inducement he is attempting to stimulate the greater utilization
of private lands. By legal provisions making available some deposits
of commercial banks and savings funds for agricultural credit, he is
attempting to increase production under existing ownership. Through
the Caja de Credito Agrario (Agrarian Credit Institute), he is attempt-
ing a program of resettling landless peasants on governmental lands.
Through the application of a seldom-­used law of 1936 providing for
the expropriation of private lands that are not being and have not been
used for over ten years, the Caja has expropriated (with compensation)
some few private holdings. ICA has been assisting the Caja with tech-
nical assistance and PL 480 funds. However, the efforts so far have only
begun to scratch the surface of the problem and there is considerable
need for additional assistance.
4. Proposal for U.S. Aid
Meaningful agrarian reform involves much more than providing
the landless with land. Almost invariably it involves agricultural credit,
and it may involve the development of adequate land classification,
land title procedures, rural facilities such as roads and schools, and
even markets. Last but not least, it requires an unusual degree of gov-
ernmental administrative capacity. Thus, it is first necessary to work
3 The referenced session of the Food and Agriculture Organization of The United
Secretary Henderson’s statement, see the Department of State Bulletin, December 14,

out detailed plans for agrarian reform. Perhaps a high priority project
would be the preparation of farm sites and the settlement of landless
peasants on selected areas, including the construction of roads and the
provision of credits to facilitate crop cultivation. At this time Colombia
needs assistance in the preparation of such plans and it is proposed
that the U.S. Government offer to provide through increased technical
assistance about $100,000 to help undertake the studies and develop
the plans needed. It should be recognized that such studies will prob-
ably result in requests for financial aid to assist in implementing proj-
ects which might be proposed. The U.S. Government should indicate
to President Lleras Camargo that a sound projects so proposed could
be considered for financial assistance either by U.S. Government financ-
ing agencies or by international institutions provided such projects
met appropriate criteria of these agencies or institutions. The President
should also be informed that external aid can only supplement internal
efforts in a small way in successful programs of agrarian reform. The
bulk of the resources required must be provided from internal sources,
in order not to burden unduly the debt-carrying capacity of the country
to the prejudice of other forms of economic development which will
require the import of Equipment.
Recommendation:
That President Lleras, when he comes here, be informed that the
United States, (1) is keenly aware of the urgency of Colombia’s need
for improving the lot of Colombia’s rural population, (2) views with
great sympathy and interest the efforts he is making in that direction,
(3) would be prepared to consider a request to participate with the
Government of Colombia in carrying out studies which might develop
specific and constructive projects to that end, (4) would be prepared
subsequently to have sound projects considered for financial assis-
tance either by U.S. Government financing agencies or by international
institutions, provided such projects met appropriate criteria of these
agencies or institutions, (5) to the extent that the national currency of
Colombia might be accumulated through PL 480 programs or in other
ways, the United States would be prepared to consider requests from
Colombia that this national currency be used in connection with the
agrarian reform program. Where the requirement is for foreign cur-
rency, loan requests would be considered on their merits.4
Approved: __________5
Disapproved: __________
4 A position paper concerning President Lleras’ interest in obtaining assistance for

Colombia  359
CO–26.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Colombia (McIntosh)
to the Department of State1
439.
DEPTEL 4422
Following arrival Valeriano,3 I contacted Alberto Gonzalez Secretary
General presidency requested permission bring Valeriano with me in my
farewell call upon President today. President sent word due lack time
unable receive Valeriano but would be glad have me present preliminary
report4 which I did today during half hour private talk. President lis-
tened attentively to my exposition but made no significant comments on
substance of report or on question GOC ability and willingness to finance
recommended programs; nor did he comment on offer of helio-­courier
plane. He stated he would read report soonest and possibly would be
in position to give me some comments upon arrival in Miami April 4.
I stressed our desire for his early reaction indicating that both Colonel
Valeriano and Chargé Wells would be available at anytime before his
departure for further discussions. (Obviously, Lleras preoccupied with
post-­election problems and preparations for U.S. visit). In circumstances
Embassy will not attempt to press him further for reaction before his
departure.
As for Embassy reaction I consider preliminary report good staff
study violence problem for internal U.S. consideration of basic ques-
tion whether we willing take political decision provide GOC with
MAP assistance on grant basis for internal security. Embassy has
always understood primary mission survey team was facilitate our
determination this policy issue. Therefore, we less than enthusiastic
at presentation this preliminary document President Lleras before we
had reached this policy decision, especially in hurried circumstances
unlikely permit adequate discussions with Lleras re significance and
scope recommendation.
Limit Distribution. This telegram was transmitted in two sections.
3 Colonel Napoleon Valeriano.
4 Apparent reference to an earlier version of the “Report of the Colombia Survey
Team,” dated April 1960, concerning violence in Colombia and possible methods for
dealing with the problem. The report covers the period October–December 1959; a copy

This connection I point out first, report start on inaccurate premise
that Lleras requested U.S. expert assistance when actually he asked for
certain MAP equipment and material re grant basis, and accepted our
offer survey team with some hesitance (see Embassy despatch 1 July 1,
19595 and previous.6) Secondly, as report itself states, reveals nothing
new as regards problem nor any new methods not already being consid-
ered raised to some extent by Colombians themselves. Thirdly, recom-
mendations seem imply package assistance deal with heavy emphasis
on assistance in form U.S. advisory personnel with little attention to
initial Colombian request for MAP material. Acceptance by Lleras of
large number U.S. advisory personnel may present him with tough
political problem. Fourthly, as regards financing program, should be
recalled that basis for Lleras original request was alleged inability GOC
budget handle cost military equipment needed. We therefore appear in
odd position asking him now whether GOC can afford costs program
we recommend. Do we contemplate defraying entire costs advisory
groups?
As to intrinsic merits of report, while it generally accurate I have
impression that it missed some nuances and sensitivity to Colombian
picture. For example recommendations three and four imply assump-
tion army political. While army not now in politics and demonstrating
no present inclination enter in, it is still potentially capable political
action and is largely conservative in orientation. Hence entirely pos-
sible that neither Lleras nor liberal party would wish beef up army’s
political potential through psychological warfare or civic action pro-
grams, however intrinsically logical this may seem from pure violence
problem viewpoint.
Second impression is that recommendations would heavily
involve us in internal operations, as for example having civil affairs
advisor “take active part in planning and implementing regional rural
civic action type programs”. I note also that we would be perilously
close intervention insensitive sectors judging from Annex page VIII of
working paper. While I appreciate merits of utilizing Colombian insti-
tutions as suggested in Annex I page VIII of working paper, careful
thought must be given long range developments and political wis-
dom this course. We will be closely identifying ourselves with inter-
nal Colombian policy without really knowing what will happen in two

Colombia  361
years or how long friendly or sympathetic elements will continue in
government. Such internal involvement could come back to haunt us.
This connection, Department should realize that Colombia on eve
of adaption to new political balance as result elections and this situ-
ation will undoubtedly cause President take more time in assessing
recommended program in relation domestic situation. Working paper
could not of course reflect subtle shifts now taking place, and in fact
probably not possible assess these for few weeks yet.
Am surprised and disturbed that working paper dated February
1st7 which was available in Department since early February was not
sent to Embassy for comment.
McIntosh
7 The referenced working paper was not further identified, and no copy of a docu-
ment matching the description here was found in Department of State files.
CO–27.
Editorial Note
President Alberto Lleras Camargo of Colombia made an official
in Washington participating in official discussions with President
Eisenhower and other United States officials. Thereafter, he traveled
through parts of the United States, ending the official phase of his
visit on April 14. After spending three days in Miami Beach, Florida,
he departed for Colombia on April 17. Documentation relating to
preparations for President Lleras Camargo’s visit, including brief-
ing materials and position papers, are in Department of State deci-
mal file 721.11, and the following Department of State lot files: ARA/
For additional documentation, see Department of State Bulletin,

CO–28.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, April 6, 1960.
SUBJECT
Secretary’s Call on President Lleras Camargo of Colombia
PARTICIPANTS
President Lleras Camargo of Colombia
The Secretary
Ambassador Carlos Sanz de Santamaria
Ambassador Dempster McIntosh
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
The Secretary asked the President whether it would be worthwhile
from his standpoint for a joint communiqué to be issued at the end
of his stay in Washington. The President thanked the Secretary and
expressed approval of the idea. It was agreed that the Department
would work with Ambassador Sanz de Santamaria on a draft which
could be presented to the two Presidents for consideration. (Later
President Lleras expressed the hope that the draft could be ready by
Thursday afternoon.)2
The Secretary expressed concern about the deteriorating situa-
tion in Cuba. Mr. Rubottom referred to the direction that the Cuban
revolution was taking, offering only a short term, emotional panacea
to the problems of the people rather than constructive sound solu-
tions which would give a firm foundation to the Cuban economy.
He also stressed the interventionist role of Cuba throughout the
Hemisphere, citing incitation to revolution by Prensa Latina, the role
of some of the Cuban Embassies where a number of officials have
been declared persona non grata in various countries, and of certain
Cuban “tourists”.
by the offices of the Secretary of State on April 13.
2 Statements by Presidents Eisenhower and Lleras were issued following their dis-

Colombia  363
President Lleras said that he had been disturbed by the apparent
renunciation of the Rio Treaty3 by Fidel Castro.4 The Secretary said that
we also had been shocked at this turn. He added that we were not sure
whether Castro had meant the Rio Treaty or the Caracas Resolution,5
although the principal was the same. He recalled that the Cuban revolu-
tionary government had announced its intension to carry out country’s
obligations to such treaties prior to recognition by the United States and
other countries of the Hemisphere last year.
President Lleras said that he had sent an instruction to all of the
Colombian Embassies asking the Ambassadors to consult with the
host governments on the question of the Castro statement regarding
the Rio Treaty, but there had not been time to hear from the Embassies
prior to his departure for the United States. He said that it would be
appropriate to have this question raised in the OAS, thus focusing
attention on the political and juridical problem represented by an irre-
sponsible Cuba, rather than on her disregard for property rights and
other similar problems bearing down most heavily on her relations
with the United States, even though these subjects would have to be
treated eventually.
The Secretary expressed complete agreement with this approach
through the OAS.
At this point the group left the President’s Guest House for the
White house.
3 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for sig-
nature at Rio de Janeiro, September 2, 1947, and entered into force for the United States,
4 Reference is to a statement by Castro in a televised speech in Cuba on April 5.
5 Apparent reference to Resolution 93, “Declaration of Solidarity for the
Preservation of the Political Integrity on the American States Against the Intervention
of International Communism,” adopted at the Tenth Inter-American Conference,
United States of America with Related Documents (Department of State Publications 5692,

CO–29.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, April 6, 1960.
SUBJECT
Call on the President by President Lleras Camargo
PARTICIPANTS
The President
President Lleras Camargo of Colombia
The Secretary Ambassador Carlos Sanz de Santamaría
Ambassador Dempster McIntosh
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
President Lleras Camargo greeted the President and thanked him
for the pleasant occasion of the dinner and musical program the night
before. The President thought that Bernstein’s music had been very
good, especially his rendition of Gershwin’s Rhapsody in Blue, a favor-
ite of the President’s entire family.
The President said that he had just been talking to the Secretary
of Commerce and members of the latter’s staff about certain problems
connected with the enormously expensive public highway construction
program in the United States. He referred to certain misunderstand-
ings on the part of the Congress regarding that portion of the cost to be
borne by the municipalities through which the highways will pass. He
made joking reference to the problems of the Executive’s relationships
with the Congress “in any real democracy.” President Lleras agreed
and added that he had the same problems with the additional factor of
having to obtain a two-­thirds majority for his programs, in a Congress
which under the “parity” plan was fifty percent Liberal and fifty percent
conservative. Ambassador McIntosh referred to the great prestige of
President Lleras as being the principal reason why the “parity” plan
was functioning. President Lleras seemed to doubt that the plan would
last the full 16 years foreseen in its inception since the country may
insist on returning sooner to the rule of the majority.
The President recalled his philosophical discussions with Secretary
Dulles on how our own system of government might be changed con-
structively, incorporating some of the best in the parliamentary system.
They had finally decided that they would have to start fresh, it being
very difficult to graft on any changes to our system. President Lleras
thought that the universities should fill the role of philosophical review
of the function of government, except that nobody listens to their
Confidential; Limit Distribution. Approved at the White House on April 19.

Colombia  365
views. The President thought that another experiment in Utopia might
be worthwhile carrying out, under controlled conditions, of course.
President Lleras mentioned that Colombian Cabinet Ministers could
go to the floor of Congress and engage in debates. The President said that
he had come to the conclusion that the U.S. House of Representatives
should be elected for the same term of office as the President, four years.
He also said that the President should have the item veto. President
Lleras said that he had that power which could be overruled only by
two-­thirds votes of the Congress.
To the President’s query about the size of the Colombian budget.
President Lleras said that it was approximately two billion pesos ($300
million). Again responding to the President’s question, he said that
defense items consumed about 20 percent of the above amount, but
this included countrywide police.
With respect to the loyalty of the senior military officers, President
Lleras expressed no concern, adding that he felt that military coup
d’etats were usually the fault of political leaders seeking intervention
by the military rather than the ambition of the latter. He recalled that
General Rojas Pinilla, who became the bane of Colombia, had been
openly welcomed by most Colombians when he seized power in 1953.
President Lleras said that the United States, quite different from the
Latin American countries, had had long experience in self-­government
prior to its revolution and that this had been a tremendous advantage.
The President inquired about Colombia’s program of social and eco-
nomic reform. President Lleras said that he had instituted a good pro-
gram and that it was of tremendous importance in view of the wide public
appeal of the Castro-­type program. The President declared that agrarian
reform had to be carried out with proper land utilization and sound
planning, rather than by mere seizure of lands already under cultivation.
President Lleras agreed. He said that Colombia had state lands where
effective re-­settlement could be carried out. Their principal problem is
that of dealing with the many tiny, inefficient parcels of land (minifundia)
as well as how to provide the necessary credit for the small farmer. They
have a good agrarian credit bank, already thirty years old, but they need
additional resources. He estimated that 80 percent of the motive power in
Colombian agriculture was provided by animals. The President referred
to the need to train personnel to use modern tractors and farm machinery.
Responding to the President’s question about Colombia’s financial
reserves, President Lleras said that they now totaled about $220 ­million
but they could not use this money freely yet. All bankers say that
Colombia is “sound” from an economic standpoint but her problems
are still “grave”, said President Lleras. Ambassador McIntosh referred
to the good financial record of Colombia and to the excellent borrow-
ing record which Colombia has with all of the financial institutions;
he said that most of the exporter credit loans with the Export-Import

Bank were 5 to 10 years, while some of the project loans with the World
Bank, totaling about $130 million, ran up to 20 years. President Leras
discussed Colombia’s needs in the field of education, especially more
elementary schools. It is hard to maintain a functioning democracy
without improving the social and cultural level of the people.
With respect to Cuba, President Lleras said that the problems
regarding that country should be handled in the OAS, and not by
the United States alone. He told the President what he had told the
Secretary earlier about his instructions to Colombian Embassies around
the Hemisphere to inquire of the host governments as to their reac-
tion to the Castro renunciation of the Rio Treaty. He believed that Cuba
should be asked about this in the OAS Council.
The President expressed agreement. He added that the OAS should
be given all possible opportunity to build up not only its respect in the
Hemisphere but to add to its authority and area of responsibility. “If
the OAS is to be a living reality, it must take on additional responsibili-
ties.” It is not inhibited by the hostile action of certain countries, like the
United Nations. The President stressed the juridical and moral equality
of the nations of America. He thoroughly approved of the “political
approach” to the Cuban problem suggested by President Lleras.
CO–30.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1
Washington, April 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: Coffee.
PARTICIPANTS
Approved in the Office of the Secretary on April 13.
President Alberto Lleras Camargo
Ambassador Sanz de Santamaría of
Colombia
Secretary Herter
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Mr. Mann, E
Ambassador McIntosh
Mr. Bell, U/MSC
Mr. Mau, S/S–RO
Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST

Colombia  367
Declaring that his Government was most grateful for the support
of the United States in the development of the Coffee Study Group,2
Ambassador Sanz said it was now time to start again the preparations
for continuing the study group beyond its first year of life, due to expire
in September 1960. He said that Brazil’s heavy surplus of coffee creates
a most serious problem. Mr. Mann agreed, pointing out that the surplus
is being augmented in Brazil both by price supports and by the fact
that the world price is 36 cents per pound, whereas Santos growers can
make money at 11 cents per pound.
2 Documentation on U.S. participation in the Coffee Study Group is in the compila-
tion on regional economic policy.
CO–31.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1
Washington, April 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: Agrarian
Reform.
PARTICIPANTS
in the office of the Secretary of State on April 13.
President Alberto Lleras Camargo
Ambassador Sanz de Santamaria of
Colombia
Secretary Herter
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Ambassador McIntosh
Mr. Mann, E
Mr. Bell, U/MSC
Mr. Mau, S/S-RO
Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST
President Lleras declared that land reform is not only a specific
and pressing need in Colombia but is also of profound general con-
cern to the United States. The United States needs to identify itself
strongly with land reform so that the landless and underprivileged
peasants (sic) of Latin America will recognize the United States as their
friend to a decree far greater than the United States has achieved by

other programs, such as investments in power projects, that benefit
them less obviously. The peasants, 65 percent of the population, are
in a state of “turbulent unrest” (see Memorandum, same conversation,
“Role of the Military”), aggravated by Communists, priests and agri-
cultural and nutritional technicians who are telling them, “You don’t
have enough food”. The peasants feel the government has deliberately
abandoned and left them in misery. Their growing susceptibility to the
appeal of Castro’s land “reform” heightens the urgent need for effective
Colombian action with U.S. help in sound land reform.
President Lleras said Colombia is attempting land reform of two
types: (1) Colonization of Government lands, as in the Magdalena
Valley; (2) “parcelization” (purchase and redistribution) and resettle-
ment of private lands that are both rich and idle in areas “where the
minifundio (small holding) problem is terrible”. In such areas par-
celization is “politically indispensable”. In contrast to Castro’s pro-
gram, Colombia’s is sensible and responsible and is implemented by a
well established and reputable agrarian bank (state entity). For any pri-
vate lands that it purchases, Colombia makes prompt and fair payment.
President Lleras emphasized two difficulties that are impeding
Colombia’s development of sound land reform projects: (1) Projects are
complex, (2) They are costly. It is not enough merely to move peasants
onto vacant land. They must have credit for tools, seeds, fertilizer, and
community facilities such as roads and schools. Colombia has plans for
but does not yet have under way a single pilot project.
The Secretary said he fully concurred in the desirability of
Colombia’s land reform, as described by President Lleras, and the
question was to determine how the United States could most effectively
help in it. Mr. Rubottom declared the United States would be glad to
study ways in which it could assist with maximum economic and polit-
ical effect, and Ambassador McIntosh said that if President Lleras were
to desire it the United States could make available experts to help in
preparing a sound pilot project.
Mr. Mann observed that, in view of the population explosion,
the United States possibly had been placing too much emphasis on
industrialization and should shift some of this emphasis to increas-
ing employment opportunities on the land. President Lleras heartily
agreed, pointing out that Colombia annually has at least 120,000
newly employable persons seeking jobs in the cities, that industrial-
ization has not and cannot provide enough work, and that Colombia
must provide more inducements and opportunities for productive
work on the land.

Colombia  369
CO–32.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1
Washington, April 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: The Domin-
ican Republic.
PARTICIPANTS
in the Office of the Secretary of State on April 13.
2 Documentation on this subject is in the compilation on the sixth and seventh
meetings of consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of American States, held at San
American Republics.
President Alberto Lleras Camargo
Ambassador Sanz de Santamaria of
Colombia
Secretary Herter
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Mr. Mann, E
Ambassador McIntosh
Mr. Bell, U/MSC
Mr. Mau, S/S–RO
Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST
Mr. Rubottom, recalling that he and President Lleras had con-
versed about Cuba, said he thought it would be helpful also to dis-
cuss the Dominican Republic. Mr. Rubottom said there are many signs
that change is imminent in the Dominican Republic, and that Trujillo is
groping for a way out. It is possible that change will come peaceably, but
this will be most difficult to achieve, because Castro is poised to inter-
vene. The Dominicans should have the chance to achieve an orderly
transition without outside intervention. At the moment Dominican dis-
sidents are discouraged by the attitude not only of the United States
but also of the Organization of American States. Trujillo is engaging
in severe repressive tactics, as evidenced by reports currently before
the Inter-American Peace Committee.2 Mr. Rubottom suggested that
while in Washington President Lleras might like to inform himself on
the current situation. Ambassador Sanz said (without elaboration) that
the OAS should take a strong position immediately, and the President
of Colombia voiced agreement.

CO–33.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1
Washington, April 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: Role of the
Military.
PARTICIPANTS
in the Office of the Secretary of State on April 13.
President Alberto Lleras Camargo
Ambassador Sanz de Santamaría of
Colombia
Secretary Herter
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Mr. Mann, E
Ambassador McIntosh
Mr. Bell, U/MSC
Mr. Mau, S/S-RO
Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST
President Lleras said that the Cuban revolution was fanning
Colombian peasants “turbulent unrest”, not only by the allure of its
land reform but also by its defeat of the Batista uniformed forces.
The Colombian people know that after ten years of civil war the
Colombian uniformed forces put down the guerillas, but that in Cuba
the guerillas won quickly. The next ten years, he predicted, would see
a “widespread flourishing of guerrilla forces in Colombia among the
peasants—65 percent of the population—­who have nothing to lose”.
President Lleras said it was imperative that the United States re-­
orient its military missions in Latin America by instructing them to teach
the Latin American military to concentrate on the new internal danger
of guerrillas, rather than on the outdated external danger of aggression.
The United States with its missiles will defend Latin American coun-
tries against extra-­continental attack. The Latin American countries’
internal security is in far greater danger than their territorial integrity,
but the Latin American military, inspired by the United States military,
are “so classic”. Ambassador Sanz commented that Latin American
officers find it repugnant to think of their role as anything but interna-
tional war and are reluctant to think of themselves as policemen.
Mr. Rubottom agreed in the desirability of adjusting the United
States military program in Latin America to give priority to internal
security. He pointed out, however, that such an adjustment would pos-
sibly encounter opposition within the United States defense establish-
ment and very probably in Congress.

Colombia  371
President Lleras added that Latin American naval depart-
ments are able to pressure the civilian officials to purchase ships,
by alleging that the United States naval missions say the ships are
necessary for hemispheric defense. It was pointed out to President
Lleras that we do consider that Latin American navies have roles
in hemispheric defense, such as anti-submarine warfare, but that
many Latin American nations have ships far in excess of these needs.
Mr.  Rubottom confessed he had been set back a little by President
Lleras’ remark on the previous evening, to Senator Fulbright at the
White House, that President Lleras had had no personal knowledge
that Colombia was about to receive a ship loan destroyer from the
United States, especially since interest in the ship had been expressed
several times by the President’s regime.
Mr. Rubottom observed that in Congress the idea is strong that
the Latin American military serves primarily to support dictatorships.
He said he thought it important that there be more recognition of the
important role of the military in supporting, with proper guidance, con-
stitutional governments and in making possible the orderly transition
from dictatorship to democracy. Ambassador Sanz said that Colombia
furnished an example of the military’s playing such a role.
CO–34.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1
Washington, April 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: Guerilla
Problem and Survey Team.
PARTICIPANTS
Office of the Secretary of State on April 13.
President Alberto Lleras Camargo
Ambassador Sanz de Santamaría of
Colombia
Secretary Herter
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Ambassador McIntosh
Mr. Mann, E
Mr. Bell, U/MSC
Mr. Mau, S/S-RO
Mr. Coerr, MRA/WST

President Lleras said he had been trying to modernize the Colombian
army to deal with the dangerous guerilla problem (see Memorandum,
same conversation, “Role of the Military”),2 and that he had thought of
creating two or three special battalions, but that his military officers were
arch-­conservative in their outlook and methods.
He said the United States had sent a survey mission that had, in its
preliminary report,3 “recommended some conventional methods that
I don’t think will solve the problem”. He said he would be glad to see
the final report.
President Lleras emphasized the Colombian military’s need for
rapid transport. To be effective, anti-­guerilla forces must arrive at
the scene of danger or violence rapidly, not “two days later to pick
up the dead”. He had thought of helicopters. Mr. Rubottom said he
understood that helio-­couriers, with short take-­off and heavy carrying
capacity, were less vulnerable than helicopters and more suited to the
work in Colombia, apart from being far cheaper. He said one had been
offered to the Colombian Government on loan, and was waiting orders
at Brownsville.
President Lleras agreed with the preliminary report’s emphasis
on the need for improving the Colombian Government’s intelligence.
He suggested that Colombia might send up some men for training,
and he was assured this could be arranged. After another mention
by Mr. Rubottom of the availability of the helio-­courier plane, the
President indicated willingness to have his Government receive it for
trial.
[text not declassified]
2 Document CO–33.

Colombia  373
CO–35.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Colombia (McIntosh)1
Bogotá, September 8, 1960.
PARTICIPANTS
President Alberto Lleras Camargo of Colombia, Under Secretary C. Douglas Dillon,
Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann, and Ambassador Dempster McIntosh
President Lleras welcomed Under Secretary Dillon and Assistant
Secretary Mann to Colombia.2 President Lleras then expressed optimism
regarding results from the current meeting of the Committee of 21.
The current economic situation in Colombia was then discussed
and both President Lleras and Under Secretary Dillon emphasized the
necessity for carrying out social programs in addition to strictly eco-
nomic development. President Lleras in this connection referred to
the necessity of financing projects which would have an impact upon
the mass of people.
Assistant Secretary Mann referred to the present situation in
Cuba and commented that, although Fidel Castro is probably not an
actual Communist, the present government in Cuba is definitely under
Communist control and direction, that the Communist Party is pres-
ently the only legal party in Cuba, and that Cuban Government spokes-
men are required to follow the Communist Party line in any statements
they may make. President Lleras said he did not doubt that this was a
correct analysis and mentioned that the Colombian Foreign Minister,
Dr. Turbay, during the early part of the meetings at San José, Costa Rica,
had a discussion with Cuban Foreign Minister Roa, during which Roa
indicated a very reasonable attitude in connection with relations with
other Latin American countries. The following day nine additional
Cubans arrived by air from Havana, (President Lleras commented, pre-
sumably carrying guns) and apparently talked to Roa, with the result
that when Turbay later had another discussion with him the attitude of
orandum was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 156 front
was apparently drafted by Ambassador McIntosh.
part the following:
“Glad to learn EXIM DLF prepared take prompt action on loans to Colombia. We
feel extremely important announce some tangible economic aid soonest possible because
political situation here clouded by increasing political party bickering and pressures from
social-­economic problems with consequent greater difficulties managing national front.
Therefore, announcement of aid would be of great help to President Lleras. Also would

the Cuban Foreign Minister had changed completely. This indicated to
President Lleras that even the activities of the Cuban Foreign Minister
are directed by and are under the control of the Communists in Cuba
and that no Cuban Government official can remain in office unless he
follows the Communist Party line.
Ambassador McIntosh mentioned to President Lleras that he had
read the statement in the Bogotá press that the Government of Colombia
had requested the recall of the Cuban Ambassador and asked if this were
correct. President Lleras stated that what had happened was that Foreign
Minister Turbine at San José had told the Cuban Foreign Minister that
Colombia did not like the present Cuban Ambassador at Bogotá, Adolfo
Rodríguez de la Vega, that he was very rude, and that the Colombians
would be pleased if he were to be replaced by another, more suitable rep-
resentative. Roa told Turbay that the Cuban Ambassador would shortly
leave for Havana and Roa would see that he did not return to Colombia.
However, it developed that the Cuban Ambassador made a very short
stay in Havana and actually returned to Bogotá prior to the return of
Roa to Havana. Upon his return to Bogotá, the Cuban Ambassador took
exception to remarks made by the Colombian Minister of Labor and
wrote a note to the Colombian Foreign Ministry which the Colombian
Government considered highly objectionable. In addition, the Cuban
Ambassador wrote an objectionable letter to one of the Bogotá newspa-
pers, and, furthermore, released the text of his note to the Colombian
Foreign Office shortly after its dispatch without awaiting a reply from
the Foreign Office. Following this, the Cuban Government recalled their
Ambassador to Colombia without awaiting any official demand for his
recall by the Colombian Government.
President Lleras asked Secretary Dillon for his comments regard-
ing the current situation between the Soviet and Red China, referring
particularly to the newspaper articles indicating considerable friction.
Secretary Dillon said that he thought the differences between the Soviet
and Red China at this time were not serious and possibly had been
exaggerated in the press, but that, nevertheless, the differences could
become much more serious in the future.
President Lleras referred to the present political and economic situ-
ation in the Argentine and said the situation appeared to be highly unfa-
vorable and quite critical. Some comments were exchanged regarding
the difficult situation faced by President Frondizi.
President Lleras expressed his appreciation of the assistance being
given to Colombia by the United States in the form of the total credit
of $70 million just announced by the Export-Import Bank and the
Development Loan Fund. Secretary Dillon told President Lleras that
we were very glad to cooperate with and help Colombia and that the
United States admired the manner in which the Colombian Government
was attacking its problems.

Colombia  375
CO–36.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Bogotá, September 16, 1960.
[Enclosure]
Letter from the Ambassador in Colombia (McIntosh) to the
Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs
(Devine)2
Bogotá, September 15, 1960.
Dear Mr. Devine:
I refer to your letter of August 313 enclosing copies of draft papers
[text not declassified] proposing ways and means of responding to
President Lleras’ request for assistance in combatting the violence and
banditry problem. Your letter and these papers have been most helpful
to me and to other members of the Country Team in understanding the
problem confronted by the Department [text not declassified].
I heartily agree that the ideal solution would be to come up with
an agreed upon and mutually accepted program on the basis of which
Presidential determination for use of the necessary funds could be
sought. However, [text not declassified] it appears that the Department
must take the responsibility of proposing an assistance program which,
on the one hand, will be responsive to President Lleras’ request and, on
the other hand, will form the basis for requesting Presidential determi-
nation on the use of MAP.
Urgency is of the essence. The Colombian Government officially
requested our decision some 15 months ago. Our only answer to date
has been to send a Survey Team to Colombia for the dual purpose
of ascertaining whether the violence situation justified our seeking a
Presidential determination for the use of Mutual Security Act assistance
and to come up with possible recommendations for eventual use by the
Colombian Government in the anti-­guerrilla campaign. While the GOC
cooperated fully and whole-­heartedly with the Team, and the team con-
cluded its field survey last December, we as yet have not submitted to
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. Secret; Official-Informal. 2 pages not
declassified.
2 The source text is a carbon copy bearing Ambassador McIntosh’s typed name.
3 Not found in Department of State files.

President Lleras for the GOC’s possible guidance and recommendation
pursuant to the Survey team study. Therefore, I believe it is urgent that
we now take a decision one way or another and so inform President
Lleras. Whether the recommended program will produce the desired
results within his term of office is of secondary consideration. His gov-
ernment, in any case, would receive political credit for any successful
program launched under his administration. Also, I consider it urgent
that we fulfill our commitment to give President Lleras a report of the
Survey Team findings—­that is, general observations and recommen-
dations for the GOC’s consideration – ­apart from the question of assis-
tance from us in the form of training and material.
I think it is desirable at this point to review the history and nature
of Lleras’ request for assistance. For this purpose I refer you to the
the letter which transmitted the GOC’s request for certain material.
Earlier President Lleras had urged that we provide helicopters. His
request was essentially of two parts: (1) a request for specific material
and equipment; and (2) a request that we review our policy of mili-
tary assistance to Latin America (not making Colombia an exemption)
with the idea of removing restrictions on the use of MAP for internal
security purposes. President Lleras expressed to us on several occa-
sions, both here and during his official visit to Washington, his belief
that our present policy of military assistance for purposes of hemi-
sphere defense only is outmoded—­that it would be a better policy to
reorientate training of Latin American military establishments toward
internal security and counter-­guerrilla warfare to cope with move-
ments such as that which took place in Cuba—­the sort of thing most
likely to threaten the stability of Latin American governments in the
future. It might be added that idea is growing in Colombian military
With the foregoing history in mind, the Country Team and I [text
not declassified] are of the [text not declassified] opinion that, as between
the two proposed programs, the Defense Department paper should be
adopted as the basis for a program of assistance to Colombia to combat
the violence situation. [text not declassified]
4 Despatch 864, not printed, conveyed background information relating to
President Lleras Camargo’s interest in securing MAP assistance from the United States
for the purpose of maintaining internal security against guerilla warfare in Colombia.
6 Despatch 624, not printed, transmitted a memorandum reporting a conservation
between Lt. Col. Howard C. Parker, Army Attaché to the Embassy in Colombia, and Brig.
Gen. Alberto Rueda Teran, Secretary to the Colombian Minister of War, concerning the

Colombia  377
This Country Team recommendation is based on our considered
view that the violence problem is essentially a national problem which
has developed to the extent that a military action by the armed forces
is required. Thus, this is a military rather than a police problem; and
suppression of violence is primarily a military task in which police
action should be the secondary role of maintaining order in pacified
areas and of participating in direct anti-­guerrilla action only where
bandit activity is sporadic. Another consideration is that the Defense
Department proposal is more responsive to President Lleras’ request,
both as regards equipment and as regards reorientation of our military
assistance program in general. In none of the numerous conferences
between President Lleras and U.S. officials was it ever suggested that
he had in mind the use of the National Police in connection with the
requested assistance. On the contrary, he initiated the formal request
by calling in the chiefs of our three military missions, at which meeting
Colombian military personnel were present but not representatives of
many subsequent meetings on the subject, President Lleras has spoken
only of military assistance and the need for removing the restrictions
on the use of MAP for internal security. Not once has the question of
utilizing the National Police as the primary medium for anti-­violence
operations been raised.
The Embassy always has thought that any assistance should be
handled through our established military missions and that a separate
anti-­guerrilla mission would be questionable from a political as well as
a practical standpoint. A police mission would identify us directly with
the issue of internal order, whereas our efforts to the same end would
be less obvious is undertaken through our present military assistance
programs. Our MAP is being reoriented along the lines suggested by
President Lleras with more emphasis being placed on anti-­guerrilla
training and material. The armed forces, while being used to solve the
violence problem, are, at the same time, being better prepared for their
hemisphere defense mission by reason of their training and use in direct
anti-­guerrilla action, which contributs to hemispheric defense.
The Country Team also sees other possible objections to the use
of the National Police as the chosen medium. The political wisdom
of assigning U.S. personnel to the National Police on a specific proj-
ect of violence suppression is very questionable, regardless of whether
the National Police remains under military control or is transferred to
civilian control. Another complicating, although not overriding, factor
is the presence of a Chilean police mission which has been employed
as an advisory group for a number of years. Also, the prestige of the
National Police is relatively low; conversely, the military reputation in
the eyes of the public is better and the military establishment by and

large is recognized as non-­political. This position would not preclude
the assignment of individual U.S. advisors [text not declassified] nor the
provision of training, material and equipment to the National Police as
steps to strengthen the police capability to support the over-­all program.
The Country Team concurs in the observations contained in both
papers that improve intelligence would be of great help in the solution
of the problem. This applies equally to the National Police, DAS, and
the military services. I believe that as a part of our program we should
offer the services of any advisers the GOC may desire to strengthen
the intelligence activity and coordination of these agencies. In fact, the
GOC already has requested, through NAAC channels, that our Army
mission be augmented by two intelligence officers.
The objectives stated in both papers are very similar. The objectives
as stated [text not declassified] (a) “immediate suppression and liquida-
tion of bandits,” and (c) “long-­range maintenance of internal security”
are similar and are directly responsive to President Lleras’ request. Those
objectives address themselves to the problem raised by the GOC appeal
for assistance. [text not declassified] I question whether we, with U.S. per-
sonnel, should become involved in a special project of rehabilitation as
part of an anti-­violence program. Rather, I think our efforts should be
channeled through existing and contemplated ICA, DLF, and EXIM Bank,
social development fund, and international financial agency programs in
the fields of colonization, land reform, housing, penetration roads, and
other types of financial and technical assistance to Colombia in its
attempts to deal with its economic and social program. We are now actu-
ally engaged in such an aid program, witness our ICA technical assis-
tance, the $70 million in credits recently approved by the EXIM Bank and
the DLF and the continuing flow of credits from the IBRD and DLF. And
we have every reason to think, in the light of the position taken by the U.S.
Delegation at the Committee of 21 Meeting here, that this type if aid will
continue and increase in the future. [text not declassified]
[text not declassified] However, from all information available to the
Embassy, including the opinions of our Military Mission and Armed
Service personnel, light aircraft are of doubtful usefulness in anti-­
bandit operations and certainly are not considered to be adequate by
the Colombian military. In fact, the only support I have encountered
for the use of light aircraft came from certain members of the Survey
Team. Admittedly, the cost factor is of import. However, would it not
be a waste of money to provide aircraft that would not do the job? The
question of exactly what military material and equipment are needed
is also a technical one. It is significant, I think, that the equipment listed
in the Survey Team report and the material originally requested by the

Colombia  379
All who have studied the problem agree that what is needed most
is transportation, communication and possibly other specialized mate-
rial. A few small obsolete helicopters now in the Colombian Air Force
have been used successfully in a number of anti-­bandit operations, and
no doubt if they were available in sufficient numbers and with suffi-
cient lead and altitude capability the Colombian military would have
the mobility badly needed to meet violence when and where it occurs,
regardless of terrain.
Both papers recognize the need of a public relations program to
help civilian understanding and support in violence areas. Such a pro-
gram would supplement the work of the Equipoz Polivalentes. We
agree in principle on the need for a coordinated public relations effort
in the anti-­violence campaign. However, President Lleras has indicated
a personal aversion to government propaganda (perhaps because gov-
ernment propaganda has so frequently been discredited in the past)
and I have reasonable doubts that he would accept the proposal for
a public relations adviser per se—­especially if the latter were to be a
foreign national. Also, I think it would be politically objectionable for
the U.S. to be directly and overtly involved in this activity. I think any
advise we give on public relations as related to the anti-­violence pro-
gram, should be confirmed to such recommendations as can be given
in a report to the President and to such ad hoc guidance as can be given
through our established U.S. missions to Colombia.
I agree with your personal reaction that neither of the two papers
seems to represent a very comprehensive presentation. For your infor-
mation the military Advisory Group to Colombia at the direction of
the Commander in Chief Caribbean (stemming from a DOD request)
is preparing recommendations for equipment and training under the
MAP program for FY 1961 to combat this banditry problem. These rec-
ommendations are being coordinated with a Colombian Armed Forces
plan to combat banditry. In making these recommendations every effort
is being made to insure that the whole Colombian Government, espe-
cially the Army and Air Force, will coordinate in using the equipment
against banditry in an organized and coordinated manner. These rec-
ommendations will be cleared with me before going forward through
military channels. It is expected that these recommendations will form
the basis for a specific DOD proposal on how to help Colombia and
that they will be appropriately coordinated with the State Department
in Washington.
I apologize for the length of the letter. Nevertheless, the history
and background of the problem is such that I think the above comments
at this may be helpful to you and to those in the Department directly
concerned.

In recapitulation, I recommend that the Defense Department paper
be taken as a basis for a proposed program which may be submitted
promptly to President Eisenhower for his determination on the use
of necessary funds; [text not declassified] and that recommendations
for public relations, intelligence, and civil action supplementing the
program be included in a report of the Survey Team for delivery to
President Lleras, independent of what action we take on the GOC
request for assistance in the form of material and training.
Sincerely yours,
Dempster McIntosh
CO–37.
Memorandum from the Office in Charge of Colombian
Affairs (Gerberich) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Barall)1
Washington, October 23, 1960.
SUBJECT
Colombian Excess Sugar.2
Mr. Rourk, Mrs. Mulliken and I have about exhausted all possibil-
ities for helping the Colombians to dispose of the 40,000 tons of excess
sugar in the United States. We have investigated the following:
1. Purchase under the Sugar Act.3 (Colombia has never joined the
International Sugar Agreement.)4
2. DLF financing.
3. ICA purchase.
Official Use Only. This memorandum was sent through Samuel O. Lane, Deputy Director
of the Office of West Coast Affairs.
in Colombia, stated in part the following:
“Over the last week we have received two or three Memoranda of Conversation in
regard to Ambassador Sanz de Santamaria’s efforts to seal the Department on the idea
that unless we buy Colombian surplus sugar social chaos will result. This is an extremely
exaggerated idea. In any case, I am sure the matter is being given deliberate, rather than
3 Reference is to the Sugar Act of 1948, as amended and extended, particularly the
4 For text of the International Sugar Agreement, opened for signature at London,

Colombia  381
4. Purchase for stockpile.
5. Purchase under Defense Production Act.5
The results of these investigations have resulted in the conclusion
that there is no legal way in which we can buy this sugar in 1960.
There remain, apparently, only two alternatives:
1. Colombia to finance its excess stocks until next spring, mean-
while taking steps to join the ISA. Although there is a strong possibil-
ity that we can buy Colombian sugar under the Sugar Act, when it is
renewed on March 31, it is impossible to guarantee this.
2. Colombia to sell the sugar at world market prices.
It is recommended that Mr. Mann tell this to Ambassador Santamaria, if
he has not already done so.6
6 The following notation by Deputy Assistant Secretary Barall appears on the source
text: “Mr. Mann agreed to call Amb. S. He will say no on above but indicate Col. may be
able to sell sugar to U.S. next year if ISA members (quota countries) unable meet needs
of U.S.”
CO–38.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Colombia1
361. FOR AMBASSADOR FROM MANN
Embtel 2682
Not yet possible furnish any official assurances GOC re U.S. assis-
tance anti-­violence program.
FYI Dept has been actively pushing this matter and necessary
Presidential Determination now ready in draft and distributed other
Frank J. Devine, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, and signed by Mann.
“There is increasing irritation here at highest government levels at lack U.S. assis-
tance combat violence as requested by President Lleras year and half ago. Important in
our interests make immediate decision regarding aid program and implement it quickly.”

agencies. Dept hopes receive all comments and necessary clearances
and be in position request White House approval during coming week.
Once latter obtained you will be notified soonest.
END FYI
Dillon
ACTING
CO–39.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs (Merchant) to the President1
Washington, December 31, 1960.
SUBJECT
1954,2 as amended, permitting the furnishing of military assistance to Colombia
The purpose of this memorandum is to recommend that you make
Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended (hereinafter referred to as
“the Act”), to permit the furnishing of military assistance to Colombia.
The proposed military assistance is needed primarily to enable
the Colombian Government to expand its campaign against organized
bandits and guerrillas. For the past decade, these bandits and guerril-
las have caused an appalling loss of life and destruction of property,
and the capabilities of the Colombian Government to maintain internal
security and to resist external aggression progressively have been weak-
ened. Communist influence reportedly is increasing in the areas infested
by bandits, and agents of the Castro Government in Cuba are known
to be active among anti-­government groups. In these circumstances,
it is considered to be important to the security of the United States to
promote stability in the Caribbean area by furnishing military assis-
tance to Colombia for its internal security upon a determination under
Section 105(b)(4) of the Act that internal security requirements may be
the basis of this program and, pursuant to Section 451(a) of the Act, with-
out regard to the requirement of the first sentence of Section 105(b)(4) of
Joseph B. Kyle of the Office of the Deputy Coordinator for Mutual Security.

Colombia  383
the Act that such assistance in the form of equipment and materials be
furnished only in furtherance of western Hemisphere defense missions.
Enclosed is a detailed statement of the background and justifi-
cation of this program, the implementation of which is estimated to
require the expenditure of up to $1,750,000 of funds available under the
Act for military assistance, of which up to $1,500,000 may be used to
furnish equipment and materials. A small amount of excess equipment
and materials may be included.
It is considered that the furnishing of the proposed assistance in
the form of equipment and materials and the use of funds available
thereafter under the Act are in furtherance of the purposes of the Act
and are important to the security of the United States.
IT IS, ACCORDINGLY, RECOMMENDED that you sign the
enclosed memorandum which contains the determinations required by
the Act in order to carry out such military assistance to Colombia.3
Livingston T. Merchant
Enclosure
Military Assistance for Colombia Requiring Determinations,
Under the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended
The assistance proposed for Colombia includes initial equipment
and related services and specialized training for the Colombian Military
establishment at an estimated total cost of $1,750,000. Equipment to be
furnished would include vehicles, communications equipment, and air
transport equipment. It is expected that the equipment and materials
portion of the proposed assistance will cost up to $1,500,000. There
will be a continuing modest annual requirement for maintenance and
spares, but it is expected that the Colombian Government will be able
to finance this continuing cost itself. A small amount of the initial equip-
ment and materials may come from excess stocks.
Training, at an estimated cost of $250,000, would be provided
by United States training advisors or at selected United States instal-
lations in such subjects as counter-­guerrilla warfare, intelligence and
3 The referenced memorandum containing the necessary Presidential Determinations,
designated No. 61-14, recommended by Dillon and conurred in by John N. Irwin, II,
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, on Decenber 21, and
Maurice H. Stans, Director of the Bureau of the Budget, on December 29, is not printed.
The following typed note appears on the source text: “Approved by the White House; see
the initials are indecipherable.

counter-­intelligence, civil affairs, psychological warfare, public and
troop information, and criminal investigation.
In 1948, following the assassination of Jorge Eliécer Caitán,
leader of the Liberal Party, the Liberals attempted to overthrow the
Conservative government. Failing in this effort, Liberal leaders and
many of their followers fled to the almost inaccessible rural areas of
Colombia. They subsequently were joined by other Liberals persecuted
by the Conservatives in that party’s attempt to extirpate the Liberals as
a major political force, by criminal elements desirous of reaping per-
sonal advantage from the political chaos attending the civil warfare that
ensued, and by subversive elements interested in promoting the cause
of international Communism. Well organized and well equipped gangs
of bandits and guerrillas preyed upon isolated peasants and small vil-
lages, disrupted communications facilities, and laid waste extensive
areas of Colombia’s agricultural land. Between 1948 and 1958, it is esti-
mated that over 200,000 persons lost their lives as a direct result of ban-
ditry and guerrilla warfare and property damage totaled hundreds of
millions of dollars.
In 1956, with Colombia’s status as a viable political entity in doubt,
Liberal and Conservative leaders agreed to merge their differences
in the interests of national unity. President Gustavo Rojas Pinilla was
deposed in May 1957. Following an interim government presided over
by a military junta, the Liberals-Conservative coalition implemented
an unusual—­although so far workable—­formula for governing the
nation. Under the guidance of Alberto Lleras Camargo, now President
of Colombia, the Liberals and Conservatives agreed that for a period
of 16 years they would collaborate in a bi-­partisan parity government
called the National Front.
The Liberal-Conservative rapprochement has not meant an end of
organized banditry or guerrilla activities. Gangs of bandits and guer-
rillas still roam throughout much of rural Colombia. In five provinces
martial law is still in effect. In recent months, bandit activity has spread
to three provinces hitherto untouched. Most of the gangs are comprised
of criminal elements for whom banditry has become a way of life. There
is increasing evidence, however, that Communist and pro-Castro ele-
ments have penetrated many of the gangs and, in some cases, the gangs
are acting under direct Communist leadership.
The Colombian armed forces have been unable to eradicate the
bandits. They have devoted their main effort to restricting them to
the mountainous regions in which they are strongest. While incidents
of violence have diminished considerably during the two years that
Lleras Camargo has been President, the problem actually has grown
more acute. The fear of residents of bandit-­infested areas that they will
be killed if they cooperate with the forces of law and order restrains a
large segment of the population from cooperating with the government

Colombia  385
in its efforts to solve the problem. Refugees from bandit-­infested rural
areas have flocked to the cities where they create a serious social prob-
lem. They are easy prey for Communist and pro-Castro agitators.
Lleras Camargo is of the opinion, which is supported by United States
Government representatives in Colombia, that his government’s efforts
to resolve some of Colombia’s basic social and economic problems
within a democratic framework are doomed to failure unless the bandit
problem is resolved.
The Colombian military establishment has excellent personal. Its
professionals have excellent training in military theory but limited
practical training in field operations, particularly counter-­guerrilla
activities. It lacks field equipment, both individual and organization,
and it is short of transportation and communication equipment. In
June 1959 President Lleras Camargo asked the United States to con-
sider assisting him in attacking the bandit and guerrilla problem. In
November-December 1959 this government sent to Colombia a team
of anti-­guerrilla warfare experts to survey the problem. The team’s rec-
ommendations were mainly for steps the Colombians themselves could
take, with United States technical assistance, e.g., to develop specially
trained anti-­guerrilla forces, to establish effective intelligence and infor-
mation services, and to undertake a program to install confidence in
the armed forces. The team also recommended that special material be
provided to enable the Colombian armed forces to combat the guer-
rillas in the field. The team’s recommendations have been accepted in
principle by the responsible United States Government representatives
in Colombia.
Upon receipt of assurance from the Colombian Government that
it is in agreement with certain courses of action which are to be sub-
mitted to it for consideration by the United States Government, and on
receipt of a formal request for United States assistance, the Department
of State and the Department of Defense recommend that United States
be prepared to offer grant military assistance in the form of equipment,
materials, related services, and training.
It is considered to be in the United States interest to provide
Colombia with the military equipment, materials, and services
described above using up to $1,500,000 of funds available for military
assistance in fiscal year 1961. The furnishing of military assistance on a
grant basis to any Latin American nation is subject to several conditions.
First, under Section 105(a) and 143 of the Act, the President must deter-
mine that the increased ability of the nation to defend itself is import-
ant to the security of the United States, and that the furnishing of such
assistance will strengthen the security of the United States and promote
world peace. Second, Section 105(b)(4) of the Act provides that military
equipment and materials may be furnished to a Latin American nation
only in furtherance of missions directly relating to the common defense
of the western hemisphere and that, unless the President determines

otherwise, internal security requirements shall not be the basis for mili-
tary assistance programs to American Republics. Third, pursuant to the
Sections 141 and 142(a) of the Act, prior to the furnishing of equipment
or materials, the recipient nation must have agreed to the undertakings
which are specified by Section 142(a) of the Act and normally included
in the conventional military assistance agreement. Fourth, under
Section 511(c) of the Act, any nation receiving military equipment or
materials on a grant basis must make arrangements for the return to
the United States of any such equipment and materials when no longer
required for the purposes for which furnished.
The first condition has been satisfied. In the President’s message on
the Mutual Security program of February 19. 1958,4 the necessary find-
ings were confirmed as to the countries for which military assistance
was then proposed or had been furnished, Colombia being among such
countries.
The second condition requires a Presidential determination under
The military assistance proposed to be furnished would be without ref-
erence assistance to Western Hemisphere defense missions and would
strengthen the internal security capability of the Colombian armed
forces and be used for internal security purposes. Therefore, it is con-
sidered necessary as to the equipment and the materials element of
the proposed assistance only to request that the President waive the
first of the two above-mentioned requirements of Section 105(b)(4) of
the Act and make the determination required by the third sentence of
to assistance in the form of training or other services, and, as to train-
ing, the function of making the determination required by the third sen-
tence of Section 105(b)(4) has been delegated to the Secretary of State.
The third and fourth conditions have been satisfied also by a mili-
tary assistance agreement effected by an exchange of notes on April 17,
1952.5 However, this military assistance agreement does not apply
to the assistance herein proposed, namely, the furnishing of military
equipment, materials and services to assist Colombia to maintain its
internal security without reference to Western hemisphere defense mis-
sions. Therefore, a further agreement will be sought with Colombia to
satisfy the conditions required by Sections 141 (second sentence), 142(a)
and 511(c) of the Act with respect to the assistance program herein
proposed.
4 For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958 (Washington:

Costa Rica: U.S. Relations with Costa Rica
CR–1.
Editorial Note
Costa Rica held general elections on February 2, 1958. Mario
Echandi Jiménez, candidate of the National Union Party (PUN), won
229,543 votes, defeating Francisco Orlich, National Liberation Party
(PLN) candidate, and Jorge Rossi Chavarría, Independent Party (IND)
candidate. The Embassy at San José found the “elections remarkably
free from violence and bitterness despite frenzied activity to round up
voters;” and it said about Echandi that “we can safely assume he is
fundamentally friendly to U.S. and free world policies and certainly
oriented toward stability business and investment.” (Telegram 159,
CR–2.
Editorial Note
President-­elect Echandi of Costa Rica made an informal visit to
in his honor with President Eisenhower at the White House. Under
cover of a memorandum of March 26, Secretary Dulles sent President
Eisenhower a briefing memorandum on talking points for his luncheon
with President-­elect Echandi. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File,
International File) Echandi also met with Dan Throop Smith, Deputy
to the Secretary of the Treasury, and Assistant Secretary Rubottom.
Memoranda of his conversations with Smith and Rubottom are printed
herein. He met briefly with Vice President Nixon and also with C. Allan
Stewart, Deputy Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs,
on March 28. Memoranda of these conversations are filed under
Minister-­designate of Economy and Finance, Alfredo Hernández Volio,
and Minister-­designate of Agriculture and Industries, Jorge Borbón

Castro, who accompanied Echandi, met with World Bank directors;
and Echandi met with Export-Import Bank officials. Documentation on
these meetings was not found in Department of State files.
Echandi left Washington for New York on March 29. He also vis-
ited Boston, where he met with United Fruit Company officials; and
Texas, where he arranged a cattle sale to Costa Ricans. No documenta-
tion on these meetings was found in Department of State files. Echandi
returned to San José on April 16. He had a news conference on his trip
at San José, April 19, which the Embassy reported in despatch 592,
Echandi’s visit, see the Department of State Bulletin, April 14, 1958,
page 614.
CR–3.
Briefing Paper for Visit of Costa Rican President-Elect
Echandi1
Washington, undated.
Anticipated Subjects That President-­elect Echandi May Discuss:
(1) The Costa Rican Financial Situation
Costa Rica’s international reserves have declined from $22 million
occasioned by a substantial deficit in the 1956 balance of payments aris-
ing from a decrease in agricultural production for both export and the
domestic market, a rise in monetary income chiefly from expansion in
domestic credit and a continued high rate of imports. Although 1957
foreign exchange receipts were high, imports and other payments con-
tinued their upward trend, and 1957 ended with no appreciable increase
in the country’s reserves. In a recent report made by the International
Monetary Fund, it was concluded that Costa Rica is not prepared to
withstand major downward fluctuations in the international prices
of its main export commodities (coffee and bananas) nor to cope with
adverse developments in export crop production with the present level
of exchange reserves.
was attached to a memorandum from Henry L. Taylor of the Office of Middle American
Affairs to Assistant Secretary Rubottom, March 25, 1958.

Costa Rica  389
Within the country the government has experienced difficulties
with its budget and there is a likelihood of a sizeable fiscal deficit for
1957. Up to 1954 the fiscal policy offset the expansion of credit to the
private sector, but since that time the government has competed with
the private sector for available bank credit. If the excess of current gov-
ernment expenditures over revenues continues to increase, and if bank
credit to the private sector expands at the rate of the recent past, the loss
of exchange reserves will pose some very serious problems.
Indications are that Echandi is very much concerned over the
future financial condition of his country. In a recent press conference
(March 5) he said, “our country is facing an economic situation which
can be serious, above all if coffee prices continue to drop”. He has indi-
cated that he will try to improve existing financial practices and future
government revenue. In this connection he has announced that foreign
capital could come to Costa Rica and work on even terms with Costa
Rican capital.
(2) Coffee
The Costa Ricans are very much concerned over the possibility of
an additional future drop in world market coffee prices. During 1957
coffee export prices dropped from an average of $0.70 per pound to a
low of $0.50 per pound. The decline in coffee prices induced Costa Rica
to become a very active proponent and signatory of the Mexico City
coffee pact last October,2 which called for withholding a portion of their
1957–58 coffee crop in an effort to stabilize coffee prices. Mr. Echandi
has already stated that coffee prices constitute a vital problem for Costa
Rica, as unfortunately the economy depends fundamentally on the
price of coffee. He has announced that he is in favor of the Mexican
agreement and believes that if the coffee producing countries do not
defend themselves against the trend towards low prices, the conse-
quences to Costa Rica’s economy will be disastrous.
The 1957–58 Costa Rican coffee crop is expected to be a record-­
breaking crop and the withholding from the export market of a size-
able portion of this crop (the excess over 80 percent of the average of
the volume of the previous two crop years available for export) could
prove to be an overwhelming financial burden for Costa Rica’s lim-
ited resources. Our Embassy estimates that approximately $35 million
1957–58 hold-­over surplus.
is enclosed with Foreign Agriculture Service Report 27 from Mexico City, October 28,

Possible Question:
In view of (1) and (2) above, Mr. Echandi may ask what assis-
tance his country might be given from the United States in the event
of a depletion of foreign exchange reserves stemming primarily from a
decrease in world market prices of coffee.
Suggested Reply:
If this subject is raised, Mr. Echandi could be informed that sym-
pathetic and careful consideration would be given to Costa Rica and
that every effort to give assistance commensurate with the then exist-
ing financial problem would be made, provided that the Costa Rican
Government had taken or given evidence of a resolve to take all mea-
sures within its power to cope with and reduce the scope of this prob-
lem. In this connection, it could be pointed out that Costa Rican imports
have been at a relatively high level; that these have been stimulated by
domestic credit policy and government deficits, both of which may be
further curbed; that the need for action in the field of credit and fiscal
policy is accentuated by unfavorable prospects for earnings from cof-
fee exports; and that in the event such measures proved unsuccessful
in stemming loss of reserves Costa Rica enter into consultation with
the International Monetary Fund. In regard to our position on coffee
it is suggested that Mr. Echandi be informed the United States is pre-
pared to participate in discussions and studies with coffee producing
and consuming countries on problems of coffee trade. We have been
pleased to note the initiative taken by the Latin American countries in
organizing at Rio a Conference3 at which the United States was repre-
sented by an observer to discuss and formulate an active program in an
effort to resolve coffee trade problems.
(3) Establishment of Branches of Private Banks:
The nationalization of banks took place in 1948 and a Central
Bank was established, endowed with typical central bank functions.
The nationalization decree as it now stands permits the setting up of
private banks with permission of the Government but prohibits them
from accepting deposits, as it stipulates only the state may “mobilize
deposits of the public”.
Mr. Echandi has expressed an interest in inviting American bank-
ing and insurance companies to open branches in Costa Rica. He has
said it is not his intention to propose measures which might destroy the
national banking system, but that he thinks the existence of a private
bank operating with its own funds will help solve the growing lack

Costa Rica  391
of facilities to increase loans to farmers and industrialists. He has also
recently expressed his firm belief in the necessity of extending security
and support to private initiative, limiting the intervention of the State
in the field of economic activities to the absolutely indispensable.
Suggested Position:
That Mr. Echandi be encouraged in his desire to further economic
development through increased private investment. It could be pointed
out that an increase in private institutions would not only bring new
capital into the country’s money market but also capital investment in
industry and agriculture, and would also add to the government’s rev-
enue in the form of taxes, without the necessity of the Government to
be financially obligated for development and maintenance.
It could be suggested that Mr. Echandi, while in New York, get in
touch with various banks concerning his desire to permit private banks
to operate in Costa Rica.
(4) Costa Rican Armed Forces:
Mr. Echandi has announced to the press that Costa Rica will abolish
the Army and sell its armaments to buy farm implements and medicines.
He does plan to keep the Guardia Civil for safety and police service. In this
connection he may express interest in having United States assistance in
establishing an engineering construction unit, the same as is now being
established in Honduras. Our Embassy has recommended that such a
battalion be established.
Suggested Reply:
If this subject is raised, it is suggested that Mr. Echandi be informed
that we are very much interested in any disarmament proposals for
Latin America, as well as plans any individual country has for reducing
its arms; and that a reduction in a country’s expenditure for armaments
leaves more money available for expenditures on constructive eco-
nomic developments. With regard to an engineering unit, Mr. Echandi
could be told that careful consideration will be given to his request. FYI:
In this connection much depends upon available funds, and compara-
tive priority needs of other Latin American countries in relation to our
overall policy objectives. End FYI.
(5) Loan Projects:
World Bank: In January 1957 Costa Rica negotiated a loan with
the IBRD for $3 million designed to finance the importation of capi-
tal goods for agricultural and light industry development. The Central
Bank of Costa Rica now has a second loan request for its capital goods
importation program in the amount of $5 million with the IBRD. This
application is now under consideration.

The Costa Rican Institute of Electricity (ICE) has a preliminary
loan application with the IBRD, the amount as yet undetermined, to
finance the Rio Macho hydroelectric project. This projected develop-
ment would have a generating capacity of 24,000 KW and the cost is
estimated at $4.1 million. Whereas this was to be an autonomous gov-
ernment agency project, it may be that Mr. Echandi, in line with his
thought concerning private investment, may have an interest in try-
ing to have the American and Foreign Power Company develop this
project.
Development Loan Fund: The Government of Costa Rica has
expressed interest in obtaining a million loan from the DLF for aug-
menting the capital available to the rural credit boards for promoting
agricultural development. Preliminary discussions have taken place
between officers of the Department and Costa Rican officials, but as yet
no formal application has been made.
Suggested Position:
If this subject is raised, Mr. Echandi can be informed that the DLF
is considering each loan request on its own merits, and that he can be
assured that when a formal application is submitted, it will be given
every possible consideration.
Increasing Proportion of United Fruit Company Profits Subject to Costa
Rican Taxation.
Mr. Echandi has informed Ambassador Woodward that this is
one of the subjects he wishes to discuss while in Washington. He is
interested in obtaining a larger amount of taxes from the United Fruit
Company. He has in mind eventually working out an arrangement
(principally with the Treasury Department) by which a larger pro-
portion of the profits of the banana producing and selling operations,
which pertain to Costa Rica, would be allocated by Treasury to the
operations of the producing subsidiary in Costa Rica in order that the
larger proportion of the profits would be taxable by the Costa Rican
Government.
There is now in effect a formula established by Treasury by which
approximately one-­half of all the profits made by the United Fruit
Company and all its subsidiaries are taxed as profits made by the
home company and therefore taxable only in the United States at the
regular rate for corporate profits of 52 percent. The remaining half of
the total profits are considered to be profits made by the subsidiary
producing companies in the various countries where the country pro-
duces its product. This half of the profits divided among the opera-
tions in all producing countries is taxable in each producing country
now at 30 percent.

Costa Rica  393
Mr. Echandi has informed our Embassy that he is authorized to
discuss this method of increasing revenue on behalf of the Presidents of
Guatemala and Honduras.4
Suggested Reply:
It is suggested that Mr. Echandi be told the Executive in the United
States does not have the authority sometimes found in other countries
to modify tax liabilities of taxpayers. Taxpayers have well settled rights
under United States laws and the regulations that are issued to imple-
ment those laws. Consequently, we cannot give an opinion as to whether
the method for allocating the income of the United Fruit Company can
be changed. However, to the extent that the present method may not
adequately reflect the regulations and the law, the Treasury would be
prepared to discuss the question with the United Fruit Company.
It could be suggested that this matter be worked out between the
United Fruit Company and the Treasury. Treasury has informed us that
there would have to be a detailed study before any decisions could be
made on this proposal.
Suggested Subjects You May Wish to Discuss With Mr. Echandi:
(1) Inter-American Highway:
It is suggested that you point out to Mr. Echandi the importance
of the Inter-American Highway to Central America. In this connec-
tion Mr. Echandi’s attention could be drawn to the expected increase
in United States automobile traffic to Central America, with resulting
additional revenue for the Central American countries and a closer
tie between the people of the United States and the people of Central
America.
On March 17 the Legislative Assembly authorized the Costa Rican
Government to negotiate an increase of $4 million from the EXIM Bank
for completion of the highway in Costa Rica.
(2) Elections
You may wish to comment on the orderly, honest, democratic
Presidential and Congressional elections which took place last February
second. The Costa Ricans have taken great pride in these elections as
they were intent upon showing other Latin American countries how
free democratic elections should be conducted. As President Figueres’
party will have a plurality in the new Legislative Assembly, any com-
ments Mr. Echandi has concerning how he expects to get his program
through the Legislative Assembly will be of interest.
4 Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes and Ramón Villeda Morales, respectively.

(3) Exiles Residing in Costa Rica:
Since President Figueres has been noted for his leniency with
regard to permitting entry of political exiles into Costa Rica, and since
Costa Rica has been considered by President Somoza as a sanctuary for
Nicaraguan exiles plotting to overthrow his government, it would be of
interest to sound out Mr. Echandi as to what his policies will be regard-
ing admission and activities of political exiles. It is understood that
Echandi, on his recent visit to Nicaragua (March 10), assured President
Somoza that he would control the activities of Nicaraguan exiles in
Costa Rica. It could be indicated that strict control of exile activities
would tend to create harmony and political stability among the Central
American countries.
(4) Communism:
Mr. Echandi has indicated to our Embassy that he will express an
interest in hearing any suggestions the United States has for combat-
ting Communism. It could be pointed out that Communists are permit-
ted to travel freely in and out of Costa Rica and suggested that more
control exercised over their freedom of movement would be effective in
reducing their activities. The effectiveness of Communist propaganda
could also be counteracted by anti-Communist propaganda forthcom-
ing from leading business groups, teachers and the clergy.
Effective implementation of the provisions of the Caracas
Resolution,5 particularly those concerning the exchange of information
on Communist travel and activities, would be one of the best means
of combatting Communism. The presidents of other Central American
countries have recently indicated their desire for increased cooperation
in controlling Communism. Emphasis should be placed on each coun-
try getting its own house in order and establishing effective internal
controls.
Communism in Labor Unions:
The Pacific banana zone, the largest concentration of workers in
any one enterprise in Costa Rica, presents the continuing problem
of a Communist-­dominated labor union (Federación Obrera Bananero
y Anexos—FOBA); enjoying the strongest position, with a member-
ship of about 3,500 members, among the farm workers of the United
Fruit Company. Another union (Federación de Trabajadores Bananeros y
Anexos—FETRAPA) with about 1,050 members among the Company’s
5 Reference is to Resolution XCIII adopted by the Tenth Inter-American Conference,
March 28, 1954; for text, see U.S., Department of State, Tenth Inter-American Conference,
with Related Documents, p. 156.

Costa Rica  395
railroad and shop workers, has been known to be non-Communist but
has entered into a cooperative working relationship with FOBA during
the past half year. A third, minor organization, the Rerum Novarum, has
about 100 members in the Company’s facilities at Golfito.
None of the three unions supported Echandi in the recent election.
Rerum Novarum very definitely supported the National Liberation Party
and both FOBA and FETRABA, according to the Embassy, overwhelm-
ingly demonstrated they were in the Calderonista-Communist camp.
Problem:
How will the Echandi administration handle the problem?
Harassment for nonsupport of Echandi can strengthen the Communist
position. Indifference, if it is felt to be an area not worth courting,
could do likewise. Perhaps an ORIT-ICFTU campaign, now being
contemplated, could be permitted to operate provided it is carried
out on a strictly trade union, non-­political basis designed to diminish
Communist influence.
Additional Subjects President-Elect Echandi May Discuss
(1) Change of Authority in Awarding Contracts for the Inter-American
Highway:
It is understood that President-­elect Echandi is interested in having
the Government of Costa Rica take over the awarding of the contracts
for the remaining work for completion of the Inter-American Highway
in Costa Rica.
Our Position:
In view of the advanced stage of construction of the Inter-American
Highway in Costa Rica it appears to be a poor time to change the pro-
cedure for the operation and final construction of this highway. In
addition the United States is not aware that the Government of Costa
Rica presently has in being a highway department which could ade-
quately handle the letting and awarding of contracts on the highway.
The United States does not believe that it would be advantageous for
Costa Rica to build up a highway department to handle this project as
the Inter-American Highway is a much larger project than any future
foreseeable projects in Costa Rica. Therefore, it would seem to be to
the benefit of the rapid completion of this project not to undertake to
change the methods of operations at this time.
The United States through the Bureau of Public Roads is willing
to cooperate with and assist the Government of Costa Rica to build up
and train a highway organization capable of carrying on and maintain-
ing the highway after its completion and the Bureau of Public Roads

engineers leave Costa Rica. (Prepared by Mr. Russell in REA and cleared
with Bureau of Public Roads)
(2) Desire to Sell or Give Away Excess Armaments:
Our Embassy has informed us that Mr. Echandi wants to keep only
sufficient armaments in the country to meet the needs of the Guardia
Civil for police purposes. He has expressed a desire to discuss the sale
of Costa Rican excess armaments to the United States, and in the event
the United States cannot purchase them he proposes to give them to
this country.
Suggested Reply:
The Defense Department states that it would not be able to pur-
chase any excess armaments from Costa Rica nor would it be able to
accept them as a gift. It could be suggested that Echandi through his
country’s Embassy in Washington make arrangements to sell the arma-
ments to private entities such as INTERARMCO. It might be well to
point out that we would not like to see Costa Rica sell any of its arma-
ments to countries which would be prone to use them for other than
defense purposes. In this connection we certainly would not want to
see them go to Cuba. FYI: In 1954 Echandi vigorously opposed the pur-
chase of a relatively sizable quantity of arms. His desire to dispose of
excess armaments may be due in part to vindicate the position he took
regarding their purchase in 1954. End FYI.
CR–4.
Memorandum from the Chief of the International Tax
Staff, Department of the Treasury (Gordon) to the Officer
in Charge of Costa Rican-Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1
Washington, March 28, 1958.
SUBJECT
Meeting between President Echandi of Costa Rica and Dan Throop Smith, Deputy
to the Secretary of the Treasury, March 27, 1958
The President, after preliminary greetings, expressed his intention
to devote his country’s resources to economic development to the maxi-
mum possible extent. He pointed out that taxes from banana companies

Costa Rica  397
constitute an important potential source of revenue. Three banana com-
panies are or will be trading in Costa Rica: United Fruit, Standard, and a
local company (possibly Bananaria). Only United Fruit, however, does
not pay tax on its total income, he stated. Moreover, its income alone is
not susceptible of determination by Costa Rica. Prices for the export of
meat, which is being promoted, are set by a production council. Coffee
contracts and the prices are registered with the government. Sugar has
a world price and profits of Costa Rican companies can be based upon
that world price. The same is true of cocoa. Only in the case of bananas
has it not been possible to obtain an “independent” determination of
profits. Rather than act arbitrarily, the President would prefer to come
to some amicable agreement in the matter.
Mr. Smith indicated briefly how the fifty-­fifty arrangement came
into being and the fact that there is no independent banana price makes
it necessary to resort to a formula. The formula, he emphasized, was
utilized not only in the United Fruit case but in other situations—­where
an America company sells to its distributing subsidiary abroad and no
independent price exists. The formula used for imports is also used for
exports.
After some discussion, Mr. Smith indicated that the Treasury
would be very glad to give its attention to this problem promptly.
In passing, the President expressed an interest in having an
American tax expert go to Costa Rica for a month or two to assist in
improving their tax system. However, no comment on this request was
made by Treasury.
Mr. Smith suggested that Costa Rica may want to give consider-
ation to the possibility of reaching an agreement on a tax convention
between our two countries. The Costa Ricans expressed an interest and
requested copies of recent tax treaties. Two sets of copies of the U.S.
convention with Honduras, Japan and Germany2 are being forwarded
to President Echandi.
Present for Treasury were: Mr. Dan Throop Smith; Mr. David
Lindsay, Assistant to the Secretary; Mr. Nathan Gordon, Chief,
International Tax Staff.
2 For text of the Tax Convention with Honduras, signed at Washington, June 25,

CR–5.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Costa Rican-Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1
SUBJECT
COSTA RICA: Visit of President-Elect
Mario ECHANDI Jimenez
PARTICIPANTS
Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary
William A. Wieland, Director Middle American Affairs
C. Allan Stewart, Deputy Director Middle American Affairs
Ambassador Whiting Willauer
Ambassador Robert F. Woodward
Herbert B. Leggett, Officer in Charge, Central America and Panama Affairs
Henry L. Taylor, Costa Rica Desk Officer
Mario ECHANDI Jimenez, President-­elect of Costa Rica
Jorge Hazera, Minister Counselor of Embassy of Costa Rica
MEMBERS OF ECHANDI OFFICIAL PARTY
Sr. Alfredo Hernandez Volio
Sr. Jorge Borbon Castro
Sr. Joaquin Vargas Gené
Sr. Tomás Federico Guardia Herrero
Mr. Rubottom extended a warm welcome to Mr. Echandi and the
members of his official group. He congratulated Mr. Echandi on win-
ning the Presidential elections and commended Costa Rica for the dem-
ocratic manner in which the Presidential and Congressional elections
were held last February 2. Mr. Echandi replied that he was honored
and pleased to be in Washington and expressed his appreciation for the
magnificent attention he and the members of his group were receiving.
The visit lasted one and one-­half hours, during which time the follow-
ing subjects were discussed.
Economic Conditions
Mr. Rubottom said it appeared in general that Costa Rica’s economy
was in fairly good condition. He said, however, he realized a reduction
in world market coffee prices—Costa Rica’s principal source of foreign
exchange—­could cause severe economic repercussions to the country’s
economy. Mr. Echandi said this was correct and that he was concerned
over the possible drop in coffee prices. Mr. Echandi expressed the
Costa Rica, 1958.” Confidential.
2 This memorandum of conversation was prepared on March 31.

Costa Rica  399
need for his country to diversify its production, increase its produc-
tion of basic food crops, and reduce wherever possible expenditures for
imports. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that we are aware of the difficulties
that a drop in coffee prices would cause to Costa Rica and other coffee-­
producing countries. He said that we were looking into what could be
done to help increase the consumption of coffee, and that there were at
present several ways that a country could obtain aid if necessary. In this
connection he pointed out that such institutions as the World Bank, the
EXIM Bank, and the International Monetary Fund are available for giv-
ing objective advice and assistance upon request. He also stressed that
a country should make efforts on its own behalf to take necessary steps
to put its economy in good order, even if this involved some sacrifice
on the part of the people.
Armaments
Mr. Echandi said that in keeping with Article 12 of the Costa Rican
Constitution he desired to get rid of all excess armaments. According to
him, he wants to keep only those arms necessary for use of the Guardia
Civil for police purposes. He said that he would like to sell the arms
to the United States and use the funds derived therefrom to buy trac-
tors and other agricultural equipment. Mr. Echandi stressed that he had
no personal reason for wishing to be rid of the excess armaments but
since Costa Rica did not have any real Army of its own, and did not
desire one, he could see no reason for keeping any excess armaments.
Mr. Rubottom said he did not know how the United States Government
could purchase the armaments but that the matter would be looked
into. Mr. Echandi stated that he had no intention of selling the arma-
ments to any country which would be likely to utilize them for causing
trouble either within its own country or that of another. Ambassador
Willauer stated that he in the past had had a great deal of experience
with arms and that he had some ideas regarding the sale of the excess
armaments which he would pursue when he took over his post in Costa
Rica. Mr. Echandi also emphasized that his country was not an aggres-
sive one and in keeping with Article 12 of its Constitution did not need
arms for any other purposes than policing.
Inter-American Highway
Mr. Echandi said he wondered if a section near the Inter-American
Highway, between El Coco Airport and San Ramón, covering approxi-
mately 40 kilometers could be included in the Inter-American Highway
project. Mr. Rubottom informed him that at the present time it seemed
best to concentrate on completing that part of the Inter-American
Highway running through Costa Rica rather than attempting to
reconstruct an additional road as part of this project. He pointed out
to Mr. Echandi the difficulties of obtaining sufficient funds from our
Congress in order to carry on the Inter-American Highway project

without attempting to obtain more funds for the construction of another
road not really a part of this project. Mr. Echandi did not press this
request but said he wondered if a change could be effected in the pres-
ent agreement for constructing the Inter-American Highway. He stated
that it would be desirable for Costa Rica to control the awarding of the
contracts for completing the unfinished parts of the road rather than
to continue letting the Bureau of Public Roads control the awarding of
these contracts. Mr. Rubottom pointed out to Mr. Echandi that when
construction of the Inter-American Highway was first begun Costa Rica,
owing to lack of an adequate Road Department, had requested that the
Bureau of Public Roads assume the function of awarding the contracts.
Mr. Rubottom indicated that it would be a poor time to change now as
the final stages of construction are being entered into. He said that of
course the United States, through the Bureau of Public Roads, is willing
to give technical assistance to training Costa Rican road technicians.
Communism
President-­elect Echandi said that he was concerned with communism
in Central America, and on his recent trip through the Central American
countries had discussed ways and means of combatting communist
activities. He said that these countries desired to form a united front to
combat communism and were willing to cooperate with an exchange of
information regarding movements and activities of known communists.
Mr. Rubottom indicated that the common efforts of the Central American
countries to eradicate communism had merit, but stressed that the first
thing to do in this connection was for each country to concentrate on
taking care of its own internal situation and establishing its own inter-
nal controls against communism. He said that the United States would
be willing to exchange information on movements of communists and
indicated that we would give assistance in combatting communism com-
patible with our foreign policy. He said that it was well known that we
do not follow a policy of intervening in the affairs of other countries nor
do we approve of other countries so doing. He then asked Mr. Echandi
about communism in Costa Rican labor unions. Mr. Echandi said that
there were some communists in the labor unions as well as a number of
leftists, Mr. Rubottom then asked him whether there was much commu-
nism in the banana unions. Mr. Echandi replied that there was commu-
nist infiltration in the Federación Obrera Bananera y Anexos (FOBA) and
indicated that it was something that had to be dealt with. Mr. Rubottom
then said thought could be given to the role that ORIT could play in com-
batting communism in the labor unions.
Political Exiles
Mr. Echandi stated that he would follow a policy whereby politi-
cal exiles could continue to reside within the country in keeping with

Costa Rica  401
Costa Rica’s democratic principles, but would not tolerate their engag-
ing in subversive activities within or outside the country. He stated
that political exiles could continue to find a place to live in Costa Rica
and provided they lived there peacefully as law-­abiding citizens they
would not be molested.
Political and Economic Philosophy
Mr. Echandi stated that he was a strong believer in democratic
principles and private initiative. He stated that it was his desire now to
unite the various political parties within the country in looking towards
the best interests of the country. He said he was making an effort to
have his Cabinet composed of representatives of the various parties
and in this respect he had offered Rossi (the Independent Party candi-
date for President) a Cabinet post. He said that it was not his intention
to change any of the government autonomous entities already func-
tioning, but that he hoped additional economic development would
be carried out through private enterprise by both foreign and domestic
capital.
Banks
President-­elect Echandi said it was his desire to see private banks
established in the country. He said that he hoped while in the United
States to talk to some bankers with the idea of interesting them in setting
up branches in Costa Rica. He thought that private banks within the
country would help provide needed loans for the agriculturists, such as
the coffee growers, and for small industrial enterprises. Mr. Rubottom
asked him if it would be necessary to change the law of 1948 under
which the banks were nationalized before private banks could function
within the country. Mr. Echandi said changes in this law would have
to be effected.
Larger Share in Taxes of the United Fruit Company
Mr. Echandi said that he had talked with Treasury officials this
morning in regard to his desire to obtain an increase in the portion of
United Fruit Company profits subject to Costa Rican taxation. He spoke
appreciatively of the way he had been received by the Treasury officials
and seemed pleased to know that his request would be given every
possible consideration in accordance with United States tax laws. He
indicated that the United Fruit Company would endeavor to work out
this matter with the Treasury.
Conditions in Other Central American Countries
Mr. Rubottom asked Mr. Echandi if he had any comments he
would like to make concerning observations of the Central American
countries he had so recently visited. Mr. Echandi said that in El

Salvador the situation looked fine to him and that the government
was well in control of political conditions and definitely appeared to
be stable. With regard to Honduras he believed that Villeda Morales
[illegible in the original]. He said that there were two governments in
existence—Villeda’s and the Army. He also remarked that as far as he
could determine subversive activities were being carried on by political
exiles and that apparently Villeda was not able to control them to the
extent he should. In connection with Nicaragua, he said everybody was
aware of the situation there, that the government was stable and anti-­
communist. He appeared to believe that Nicaragua offered no politi-
cal problem. In regard to Guatemala he said that Ydígoras was getting
his government well organized, that he appeared to have things under
control, and was very much aware of the leftists within the country.
In connection with the latter, he said Ydígoras had already expressed
himself against communism and believed he would in the near future
take appropriate action to curtail communist activities. With the excep-
tion of Honduras he apparently felt the Central American countries had
stable governments.
Attitude Towards Development of Electrical Power
Mr. Echandi said that he favored the development of electric power
by Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad (I.C.E.), leaving the distribu-
tion to private companies such as the American and Foreign Power’s
Subsidiary.
CR–6.
Memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Office
of Middle American Affairs (Stewart) to the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, May 30, 1958.
SUBJECT
Tax Benefit for Countries in which United Fruit Company Operates.
In a conversation with President Echandi of Costa Rica on May 11,2
he stated that the Costa Rican Government’s possibility of balancing
2 Stewart left Washington, May 5, to attend Echandi’s Inauguration at San José on
May 8.

Costa Rica  403
its budget for the coming fiscal year depended on an increase in reve-
nue from taxes on the United Fruit Company operations in his country.
It will be recalled that Echandi appealed to the Treasury Department
during his visit to the United States for a greater share of the tax returns
from the United Fruit Company. At present the taxes collected by the
United States are based on an arbitrary division of fifty-­fifty which is
President Echandi told me that if Dr. Milton Eisenhower could inform
him during his visit to San José that the Treasury Department had mod-
ified its determination in favor of the banana producing countries he
would score, as he put it, a home run. Echandi claims to have obtained
approval from the Governments of the other Central American coun-
tries where United Fruit operates to undertake to obtain increased
tax returns from the Company. Whatever benefit Costa Rica received
would, naturally, extend to Honduras, Guatemala and Panama among
the countries that Dr. Eisenhower plans to visit.
Sam Baggett, Vice President and General Counsel of United Fruit
Company, was a guest of Echandi at the inauguration ceremonies in
San José. I had two talks with Baggett and he informed me that Mr. Dan
Throop Smith, of the Treasury Department, who would be the person
responsible for recommending a change in the tax system, appeared
to be favorable toward Echandi’s request. I was present when Echandi
talked with Smith in Washington and I was impressed by the Costa
Rican’s reasoned arguments. Baggett told me that Smith also was favor-
ably impressed at that time. Since then, Baggett informs me that he has
talked with Smith and found him receptive to the idea of giving Costa
Rica, and per se, the other banana countries, a better share of the tax
returns. Since my return from Central America I have been told that
the Echandi proposal is now under study by the Bureau of Internal
Revenue.
I asked Mr. Baggett to send me a memorandum outlining in detail
the Treasury Department’s system of assessing taxes on the United
Fruit Company and he promised to do so after a brief vacation that
he is taking in Costa Rica. However, we have correspondence from
Ambassador Woodward on the whole matter and it is rather complete.
Mr. Baggett says that he does not believe that the basic principle
used by the Treasury in assessing taxes on all foreign business done by
American companies would be affected by a decision to change the
percentage in so far as the United Fruit Company division of taxes
3 It reported that a Treasury Department determination in 1950 allowed the produc-
ing country to tax half the company’s profits. Willauer believed that the increased cost of
capital equipment raised the producer’s share in the value of the marketed fruit, possibly

is concerned. For this reason, he does not think that the Treasury
Department would be setting precedent that would necessitate a revi-
sion of the whole 1950 arrangement. This has since been confirmed by
Mr. Gordon, Legal Adviser in Treasury. However, if you concur, I should
like to talk with Mr. Smith of Treasury to get his ideas on the matter.
Although President Echandi has made the request of the Treasury
Department, I think a decision to grant the countries in which bananas
are produced a greater share of the United Fruit Company’s taxes would
be considered a voluntary gesture on our part if done around the time
Dr. Eisenhower visits Central America. Actually, Costa Rica is the only
country that has made the request. According to Mr. Baggett, the Costa
Rican Government may anticipate a greater tax increase from the United
Fruit Company than the Treasury is willing to give, and this might cause
some disappointment to President Echandi. However, our taking the
initiative in this action might prevent long, painful and unsatisfactory
negotiations between the Governments. President Echandi indicated to
Mr. Smith in his conversations in Washington that he preferred to dis-
cuss the matter with the Treasury Department and arrive at a mutual
understanding rather than have the Costa Rican Government arbitrarily
set a price on bananas delivered alongside ship at Costa Rican ports
which would be the basis for taxing the Company. A move of this kind,
I understand, might put United Fruit Company in the middle of a dis-
agreeable tax situation.
An announcement of Treasury’s willingness to allow the banana
producing countries to receive more of the tax revenues from United
Fruit Company would undoubtedly assist in making Dr. Eisenhower’s
visit to the Central American countries more successful if we decided
to publicize the gesture.4
Recommendation:
That the Department favor the revision of the tax arrangement
that will provide the countries in which United Fruit Company grows
bananas to receive more tax returns, this revision to be made by Treasury
through United Fruit Company and if necessary through consultation
with the Costa Rican Government.5
4 For documentation on Milton Eisenhower’s trip to Central America July 12–
PM–3; PA–7.
5 There is no indication on the source text of Rubottom’s action on the recommenda-
tion, but see his letter of June 19, printed as Document CR–7.

Costa Rica  405
CR–7.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of the
Treasury’s Deputy (Smith)1
Washington, June 19, 1958.
Dear Mr. Smith:
While Mario Echandi, then President-­elect of Costa Rica, was in
Washington he called upon you and other Treasury officials on March 28
to discuss a revision in the U. S. tax regulations whereby 50 percent
of the profits of United Fruit Company and its Costa Rican subsidi-
ary are taxable in the United States and the other 50 percent taxable in
Costa Rica. Mr. Echandi expressed at that time a desire to work out an
arrangement whereby a larger percentage of the profits would be allo-
cated to the producing subsidiary company in Costa Rica. This would
be done, he stated, without hardship to the United Fruit Company, by
increasing the base for taxation of the firm’s profits in Costa Rica.
President Echandi, who was inaugurated on May 8, has reiterated
to our Ambassador in San Jose, a continuing interest in this matter,
and the Department has been informed that other Central American
countries in which United Fruit has subsidiaries also share his view.
The Department recognizes, of course, that questions relating to allo-
cation of income for tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code,
involving as they do the fair and equitable administration of United
States text laws, are within the province of the Treasury Department.
Furthermore, the Department is not in a position, and has no desire, to
become involved in the particular tax problems of individual American
companies under the U.S. Revenue Laws.
The recent drop in commodity prices has resulted in a reduction
of income to Costa Rica as well as other Central American countries.
For this, as well as other reasons, the Department of State considers
that, generally, feasible measures which will improve the economic
position of such countries will be beneficial in furthering our foreign
policy interests. To the extent that such measures may be taken within
the ambit of a fair and equitable administration of the tax laws, the
Department considers that they would be in the national interest.
Sincerely,
R.R. Rubottom, Jr.
Drafted by Stewart and Taylor, and delivered to Smith by Stewart on June 19. At that
meeting Stewart told Smith that Echandi wanted a 75–25 split for taxes on UFCO profits.
Smith said that presented no problem to the Treasury Department. (Memorandum from
noted on Stewart’s memorandum that this was “very good news.”

CR–8.
Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury’s Deputy (Smith)
to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, July 11, 1958.
Dear Mr. Rubottom:
In your letter of June 19, 1958 you indicated the importance that the
State Department attaches to a modification in the present allocation of
income of the United Fruit Company and its subsidiary corporations
so that a larger proportion of such income would be attributed to the
operations of the company in Costa Rica and other Central American
countries in which it is engaged in business.
As you know, President Echandi discussed this matter with us here
in the Treasury on the occasion of his pre-­inaugural visit to the United
States. At that time we indicated that sympathetic consideration would
be given to his request. In the intervening period, a thorough canvass
was made of the law and the regulations governing the allocation of
income where goods are produced in one country and sold in another.
Despite our anxiety to reach a result which, as you indicated, would be
in the national interest, this analysis led to the conclusion that there is
no authority for modifying the present allocation of income.
Conceivably, the regulations could be changed so that other fac-
tors, in addition to the location of assets and the place where sales
occur, would be taken into account in making income allocations and
thus a larger proportion of the profits of the United Fruit Company
would be attributed to Costa Rica. However, this is a time-­consuming
procedure, and could not be achieved within the necessary time limits.
Moreover, this approach is complicated by the fact that the present reg-
ulations apply not only where goods are produced abroad and sold in
the United States, but also in the converse situation, where goods are
produced in the United States and sold abroad. A modification in the
present regulations which would operate to advantage so far as United
Fruit’s activities in Costa Rica are concerned might, by the same token,
operate to the disadvantage of American firms selling American-­made
products in other countries.
In the light of all the factors involved, it is our conclusion that
the most feasible approach to a solution of the problem with respect
to Costa Rica, as well as other Latin American countries, would be
to enter into bilateral income tax conventions in which, among other

Costa Rica  407
provisions, there would be an agreed-­upon distribution of profits
between the other signatory countries and the United States. Such a
convention would have the advantage of producing a definitive solu-
tion to the problem and would presumably establish other desirable
conditions with respect to international trade and investment between
the signatory countries and the United States. Accordingly, it is sug-
gested that this approach be suggested in the course of the forthcoming
discussions between Costa Rica and the United States on the occasion
of Mr. Milton Eisenhower’s trip there.
If we can be of any further assistance in this matter, please let me
know.
Sincerely yours,
Dan Troop Smith
CR–9.
Summary of Discussions in Costa Rica during Milton
Eisenhower’s Visit1
Discussions in Costa Rica were held with the President,2 mem-
bers of his Cabinet, representatives of other political groups, and
Dr.  Eisenhower also spoke before the National Assembly. Likewise
other members of Dr. Eisenhower’s party met with various Costa Rican
officials. The President, Dr. Echandi, spoke with emotion of the national
unity achieved by the United States in times of crisis. He mentioned
the support given by Mr. Truman and Mr. Stevenson to the President’s
recent action in the Middle East. He mentioned also that Costa Rica
was a free country in which the full exercise of all democratic freedoms
was guaranteed to all citizens and said that he had arranged for the
“Eisenhower, Milton; Costa Rica, 1958.” President Milton S. Eisenhower of Johns
Personal Representative of the President, to Panama, Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua,
El Salvador, and Guatemala. He was accompanied by Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs; Tom B. Coughran, Assistant Secretary of
the Treasury; Dempster McIntosh, Manager, Development Loan Fund; and Samuel C.
Waugh, President, Export-Import Bank. A report on his visit to Costa Rica is in despatch
see Document CR–6, footnote 4 in this chapter.
Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 533, “Dr. Eisenhower’s Central American Trip.”

Communist leader Mora Valverde to speak over the radio, thus avoid-
ing the Communist attempt to pose as martyrs who could not enjoy
freedom of expression.
It was pointed out by the Costa Ricans that the economy of Costa
Rica is largely based on its foreign trade. The principal item of export
is coffee which in 1957 produced 49% of the foreign exchange. It was
further emphasized that the economic development and improvement
in social welfare in Costa Rica were closely bound to the price of ­coffee.
In Costa Rica a very large percentage of the population are directly
connected with the production of coffee where small plantations are
the rule rather than large landholdings as in other countries of Central
America. Thus a rise or drop in the price of coffee directly affects a
very large number of Costa Ricans. The President pointed out that the
recent drop in the price of coffee had now begun to seriously affect
the economic and social stability of Costa Rica. Unemployment had
begun to appear precisely at a time when the Government’s revenue
had dropped. The Government and people of Costa Rica hoped that
the United States Government would do what it could to stabilize cof-
fee prices as a further drop would seriously affect the living standards
of the masses and might present a fruitful field for the development of
extremist ideas with consequent danger to an Administration which
firmly supports the development of private initiative.
The President said that he had developed a plan, the implementa-
tion of which would require the conversion of the internal debt to an
external debt, but that the possibility of doing this was directly related
to reaching an agreement with the U.S. Treasury concerning the pay-
ment of taxes by the United Fruit Company. At the present time 50% of
the taxes on UFCO profits were paid to the United States and 50% to
Costa Rica. If an agreement could be reached whereby the Costa Rican
share could be increased this would be a very useful form of assistance
for them. They felt that Costa Rica was entitled to a greater share than
it was presently receiving. At the present time the revenue from this
source for Costa Rica amounts to some $3 million.
Costa Rica had an internal debt of $30 million. If they were able
to obtain this agreement they intended to devote the revenue from the
banana tax to the servicing of a loan from foreign sources, government
or private. 27,000 coffee plantation owners had been affected by the
present drop in coffee prices. They had reduced their labor cost by lay-
ing off workers and the Government was currently not able to under-
take projects giving work to these unemployed. If Costa Rica were able
to obtain this $30 million loan they were prepared to assign the revenue
from the UFCO tax to service this debt and furthermore the National
Bank was prepared to guarantee it. The Costa Ricans felt that if this
project could be carried out it would make a very great contribution

Costa Rica  409
to diversifying their production and placing the national economy
on a more solid basis. Furthermore, this would make available the
amounts which the Government now devotes to servicing the national
debt for a broad program of road construction which they are working
on at the present time with the World Bank. If the loan were secured
the Government would then feed this amount into the National Bank
system to be loaned out to small rural credit agencies for direct loans
to the small planter and farmer. 20% of the loan would be used for
diversifying agriculture, developing cattle breeding and improvement
of the breeds; 20% would go to stabilize the coffee industry and the
remaining 10% would be devoted to housing. The President pointed
out that not one cent of this money would be taken by the Government
for any public works. For the first time in Costa Rica’s history the total
amount of the loan would be turned over to the Development Bank
for strengthening the economy and developing private initiative. The
recent election had been fought largely on an issue of private initiative
against “stateism.”
The President and members of the Cabinet expressed the hope that
this loan could be secured from Governmental or private sources in the
United States as it was essential for the implementation of their plan.
All members of the Government including the President were warm in
their expressions of friendship for the United States and understanding
of the immensity of the burden borne by the American people. They
seemed proud of the high standard of living in Costa Rica. Reception
of Dr. Eisenhower’s party was everywhere friendly and warm and
while attending the funeral of the Minister of Health who died during
Dr. Eisenhower’s stay in Costa Rica,3 Dr. Eisenhower walked several
miles in the funeral procession, receiving the warmest demonstrations
of friendliness from Costa Ricans of all classes. The matter of alleged
United States support for dictators was not brought up by anyone on
the Governmental side, although it was brought up forcefully by oppo-
sition leader Jose Figueres4 during a breakfast at the Embassy which he
had with Dr. Eisenhower. Both former Presidents Figueres and Calderon
Guardia5 expressed the friendliest feelings for the United States, the
latter expressing his desire to help President Echandi in the measure
in which he were allowed to do so. Figueres stated his belief that the
United States had in some measure given the impression of favoring
dictatorships and Calderon Guardia expressed his feeling that the
4 José Figueres Ferrer, President of the Founding Junta of the Second Republic, May 8,

United States had perhaps been a little harsh with Trujillo and Somoza
who were after all staunch supporters of the United States.
Costa Ricans of all walks of life expressed support for the idea of
closer economic integration of Central America and moves towards a
common market for the countries of that area.
The projects presented by the Costa Ricans were as follows:
Increase in Capital for Rural Farm Credit Agencies of the National Bank of
Costa Rica:
The Costa Rican Government had requested a loan of $5 million
from the Development Loan Fund for the purpose of increasing the
capital of those rural credit agencies so that they could make low inter-
est loans over reasonable periods of time to small farmers who are per-
haps the principal support of the economic and social stability of the
country. The United States Embassy was carrying out a study on this.
The Costa Ricans hoped for favorable action on the part of United States
on this application which would favor a broad sector of the population
of Costa Rica and at the same time fulfill the aims which inspired the
creation of the Development Loan Fund.
Inter-American Highway:
The Costa Rican Government intends to finish the Inter-American
Highway before the end of the present Administration. This would
include the stretch between San Ramon and Cartago. They feel that
this stretch is vital as it crosses the most heavily populated area of the
country. They would like to see the same standard applied here as else-
where on the highway, that is to say, the United States contributing
two-­thirds and Costa Rica one-­third. They would hope to obtain their
third through an Export-Import Bank loan. This work would not only
favor the economic development of the country but would also in some
measure palliate the growing unemployment problem due to the drop
in coffee prices.
Children’s Hospital:
Through ICA the Costa Rican Government obtained a $2 million
loan to take care of the major part of the cost of construction of the
Children’s Hospital. Additional funds have been obtained within Costa
Rica through gifts from private individuals and other sources but they
are experiencing difficulty in obtaining the final amount to complete
the work. If the loan could be increased by some $950,000 they could be
sure of concluding the hospital and of being able to carry on its work.
Sanitary Improvement of the Metropolitan Area:
22% of the population of Costa Rica reside in the metropolitan
area of San Jose. The city is growing with extraordinary speed, giving

Costa Rica  411
rise to the serious problem of supplying drinking water and adequate
sewerage. They have drawn up a plan to repair the old water system,
undertake new construction and install water meters and believe that
this plan would satisfy all foreseeable needs for 20 years. Plans are
already drawn up and work could be undertaken if they could obtain
the approximately $3 million necessary to undertake this project.
Sewerage:
An effective sewerage system is planned and is under slow con-
struction. If further financing could be obtained this work could be car-
ried out quickly and effectively. The cooperative Inter-American Public
Health Service had rendered valuable cooperation in this work.
Water Supply:
Valuable cooperation has been received from the Point Four pro-
gram in studying the supply of drinking water to the whole metro­
politan area but its resources are inadequate for the size of the problem,
and the Government would be very desirous of obtaining a loan which
would enable them to go forward swiftly with this project.
German Taxes on Coffee:
The Costa Ricans pointed out that Germany had two taxes on cof-
fee that caused the price of this commodity to be extremely high in
Germany. They felt that if the United States could in some way use its
influence on the Federal Republic to have these taxes removed or low-
ered that this might increase German Coffee consumption by as much
as 2 million bags yearly.
Desire of the Costa Rican Government to Exchange Surplus Military
Equipment for Transportation and Communication Equipment:
The United States Country Team did not feel that the Echandi
administration had the firm capability of maintaining internal security
and the greatest weakness of the Public Forces was due to the lack of
adequate transportation and communication. Recently the desire was
expressed by a representative of the present Administration to trade
items such as machine guns, rifles and obsolete aircraft for sedans,
trucks, radios and two aircraft of the liaison type. They would like to
trade in some $200,000 worth of the former items for some $253,000
worth of communications and transportation equipment. This would
strengthen the internal security of the country and the exchange of
weapons for vehicles would create a good impression for the United
States in Costa Rica in the opinion of the Country Team.

Costa Rican Intentions and Hopes:
The Costa Ricans indicated that the Government intends to go for-
ward with a plan to improve the living conditions of the people of Costa
Rica while at the same time developing their economy to increase the
national revenue and provide a more equitable distribution of wealth.
The educational and cultural level of the people is such that they would
be able to use effectively any economic assistance which might be ren-
dered and fully discharge any obligations undertaken by accepting such
assistance. An improvement in living standards is the best guarantee of
the continued social stability of the country which have continued to
improve through orderly evolution in contrast to the violence which has
shaken neighboring countries. The Costa Ricans expressed the hope that
the United States, bearing in mind the economic and social organization
of Costa Rica, the cultural level of the people and their devotion to the
democratic way of life, will make available the assistance necessary to
develop the nation and its economy.
There appeared to be in Costa Rica a better understanding of the
operations by the various lending organizations in the United States
as well as a more coordinated plan than had been the case in some of
the other nations visited. There would appear to be some misconcep-
tion, however, as to the ability of the United States Government to fix
coffee prices and perhaps insufficient understanding of the importance
of diversifying the country’s agriculture. The President spoke of his
intention to develop cattle for the export of meat as they saw in this a
promising and stable market. Tie President and his Ministers paid great
tribute to the work of the agricultural experimental station at Turrialba
which was visited by Dr. Eisenhower.
Conclusions:
The Government has developed a plan which is totally dependent
upon the obtaining of (1) an agreement with the United States Treasury
regarding a more favorably arrangement for Costa Rica in the collec-
tion of taxes from United Fruit Company, and (2) the obtaining of a
$30 ­million loan to convert the internal debt into an external debt. The
Costa Ricans have requested this loan as well as $5 million for develop-
ment of rural credit agencies and an unspecified amount for road build-
ing, an additional million dollars for the Children’s Hospital, $3 million
for water supply of San Jose, and an unspecified amount for sewerage
and further development of the water supply.
Despite the fact that considerable thought had been given to this
plan, it appears that the following would seem to be needed for effec-
tive planning: (1) An inventory of the nation’s assets in both human
and natural resources; (2) a study to determine the feasibility of agricul-
tural diversification and perhaps the establishment of new industries;

Costa Rica  413
(3) a study of the domestic and foreign markets, including revenue
from tourism; (4) a reexamination of government organization, financ-
ing, taxes and trade policies, with the purpose of seeing whether they
could not be more effective in developing the economy of the country
and supporting and regulating private investment.
The contacts of the Fact-Finding Mission were uniformly friendly
with people from all walks of Costa Rican life and while there may have
been occasional misinterpretation of U.S. motives, no feeling of hostility
toward the United States was at any time apparent. The President and
his Cabinet gave evidence of their whole-­hearted support for the United
States on the international scene and understanding of the problems of
the United States. President Echandi stated specifically that there was
too much of a tendency in Latin American countries to believe that the
United States could solve all of their economic problems for them.
CR–10.
Despatch from the Chargé in Costa Rica (Godfrey) to the
Department of State1
San José, July 30, 1958.
No. 42.
SUBJECT
Analysis of United States and Other Assistance Programs in Costa Rica
In conformity with the Department’s Circular Telegram of May 5,
1958,2 there is provided the following overall analysis of United States
objectives and the role of various United States and non-United States
programs in Costa Rica for fiscal year 1960. Since Ambassador Willauer
was suddenly called to Washington3 it was impossible for him to review
this despatch. However, the substance of the message was reviewed
with him and the points included in the “special objectives” section were
­dictated by him.
2 Circular telegram 1043 to San José and certain other U.S. diplomatic missions
called for an analysis by the Chief of Mission of the foreign assistance programs in the
Washington on reallocation of UFCO’s taxes. He returned to San José on August 15.

Summary
United States assistance in Costa Rica under the Mutual Security
Program, in both its military and civilian phases, is primarily directed
toward technical assistance. There is no grant aid program. There is at
present only one loan project, which was provided under the “Smathers
Amendment” appropriation. Most of the technical assistance is given
under the auspices of the International Cooperation Administration
and is civilian in nature, which is entirely in keeping with both our
own objectives in Costa Rica as well as coinciding with Costa Rica’s
own traditional boast of being a country “with more school teachers
than soldiers”.
Our civilian and military assistance programs are especially
directed toward the U.S. objectives of (1) encouraging the growth of
a healthy progressive economy based on the free enterprise system
and (2) contributing to the maintenance of internal security and stabil-
ity. The achievement of those objectives will, we believe, best serve to
assure a close friendship and cooperation between our two countries in
meeting and resolving the economic and political problems facing the
United States in this Hemisphere and in the rest of the World.
Special Objectives in Costa Rica
Ambassador Willauer wishes to emphasize the following special
aspects of our objectives in Costa Rica, which while of special signifi-
cance in an evaluation of our MSA program in this country, still fall well
within the general U.S. policy objectives.
1. Costa Rica: A “Pilot” Operation. Because of its demonstrated
adherence to democratic principles and practices and because of the
relatively high educational and cultural standards of its people, Costa
Rica enjoys a prestige in Latin America out of all proportion to its
diminutive size. What happens in Costa Rica has a special exemplary
significance to other Latin American peoples who are striving toward a
more democratic social and political system.
Therefore, Costa Rica offers an excellent opportunity as the stage
of a “pilot operation” which could well serve as the example and inspi-
ration for a much broader scale application elsewhere in Latin America.
Furthermore, its small size makes it possible for experimental and
demonstration work to be done in Costa Rica at much less cost than in
larger countries.
Thus, our objective in Costa Rica goes much beyond the actual
contribution we may make just to Costa Rica. The implications of our
successes - or our failures - on this small stage will be immediately
observed by a much larger audience in this Hemisphere who have their
eyes trained on this little country. It should be our purpose to make the

Costa Rica  415
most of this special opportunity to demonstrate our willingness and
our ability to help Latin America evolve toward a sound economic sys-
tem based on democratic principles.
2. The Issue: Private Enterprise Versus Socialist Tendencies. After
the five years of the Figueres Administration (1953–58), with its ever
increasing inclination toward socialism, there was inaugurated in May
of this year the Administration of Mario Echandi, who had campaigned
on a program to reinstate private enterprise as the primary motivating
force in the economy of the country. Since a primary U.S. objective is to
prove that faith and reliance on the free enterprise system is justified,
it follows that a major U.S. objective in Costa Rica is to help Echandi
fulfill his campaign pledge.
Last week President Echandi stated his position to Ambassador
Willauer along the following lines: “Since I have championed the
cause of private enterprise, the overall success of my Administration
in improving economic conditions in Costa Rica will either aid or hurt
the concept of private enterprise throughout this Hemisphere. Quite
apart from any definite accomplishment I may achieve in my own
country in improving economic conditions will be the repercussion my
success will have elsewhere in Latin America. My success or my fail-
ure will be noticed and will help tip the scales one way or the other.
Specific projects may or may not succeed, but the general result of my
Administration must be favorable. If it is not successful, the fact that a
man campaigned for private enterprise and failed will be used as an
argument throughout Latin America for more socialism.”
The basic need for positive results and their urgency was high-
lighted in an intimate meeting held a few days ago to discuss the possi-
bility of holding a Central American Investment Conference in San José
in February 1959,4 with President Echandi, Ambassador Willauer, and
some prominent Costa Rican and American businessmen present. It
was frankly stated that the investment climate still prevailing in Costa
Rica is hardly propitious for holding such a conference with positive
results, at least so far as Costa Rica is concerned, and the outcome of
such a meeting would hinge on the change in the general economic
climate which could be achieved in the meantime.
President Echandi faces serious immediate obstacles in accom-
plishing his frequently reiterated objective of strengthening private
enterprise. He is essentially a minority president having been elected
with less than a plurality of the votes. The Legislature is controlled by
the only well-­organized political party which is devoted to the semi-­
socialistic policies of former President Figueres. Echandi must depend
4 No record of the proposed conference was found in Department of State files.

for anything resembling a significant bloc in Congress upon the votes
of deputies led by former President Calderón Guardia, who initiated
social reform in Costa Rica. A number of the important aspects of Costa
Rican economic life are in the hands of autonomous institutions created
by Figueres and manned by, at least for some time, officers sharing the
Figueres economic philosophy. Perhaps most important, the danger of
a drop in the price of coffee presents the possibility of severe economic
and psychological consequences. As an outspoken and so far fearless
spokesman for private enterprise, Echandi needs carefully planned
assistance in overcoming these obstacles and leading Costa Rica toward
a system of freer enterprise.
3. Planning: The Longer Range Need. While there is urgent need at
the moment for special help to reverse the trend toward socialism, a
major need for the long run is an economic plan for the country. Only
such a plan will assure orderly progress toward a strong free enterprise
economy as well as assure that U.S. assistance will make the most effec-
tive contribution toward that objective. Some rather haphazard plan-
ning exists within certain individual Ministries of the Government, but
there is no centralized planning and only a minimum of coordination
at the Council of Government (Cabinet) level. The need of such overall
centralized planning was pinpointed by the recent Eisenhower study
group as probably the most basic need of Costa Rica.
Therefore, Ambassador Willauer believes that a primary objective
of our technical assistance program in Costa Rica should be to arrange
within the near future for an economic advisory team to study the eco-
nomic needs and possibilities of Costa Rica and to formulate an overall
economic plan for the country. This could be done by a private organi-
zation, even preferably so, at a cost of not less than $100,000 and per-
haps twice that amount. The recommendations resulting from such
planning would be an important factor in determining our future tech-
nical assistance program. Specific projects of technical assistance might
be undertaken on a contract basis. To the extent any such contracted
projects might duplicate the present USOM program, the latter would
obviously be reduced to avoid any overlapping.
The program as now planned would continue until a plan was
finally devised, and it is quite likely that a majority of the current
projects would be included, since they are designed to help resolve
what are undoubtedly basic problems of the country. The difference
would be the assurance that our technical assistance contribution was
being used to the best advantage by Costa Rica itself in achieving its
planned goal.

Costa Rica  417
Operational Aspects of U. S. Technical Assistance5
a. Balance Between Programs, Both U.S. and Other. The overall “pro-
gram” of United States assistance and other activity in Costa Rica, in
addition to the work of the Embassy itself, is composed of the following
essential elements:
(1) The Mutual Security Program devoted to technical assistance
in agriculture, health, education, housing, public administration, the
complementary training program in these and certain other fields, a
loan of 2 million dollars for the construction of the Children’s Hospital;
international Exchange of Persons program involving a limited number
of leader grants, exchange of teachers, and training activities; (4) the
Military Mission, which comprises a program of training and assis-
tance to the public forces of Costa Rica; (5) the Inter-American Geodetic
Survey, carrying out aerial and other surveys required for an extensive
mapping project; (6) the sizable grants made available or the construc-
tion of uncompleted portions of the Inter-American highway through
Costa Rica, administered for the United States by the Bureau of Public
Roads; (7) the public information program of USIS including princi-
pally press, radio and motion pictures.
The problem of ensuring the maintenance of a proper balance
among the elements of these programs and among the programs
themselves is a continuous preoccupation of the Embassy. A system-
atic approach to the exchange of information and consultation on new
projects, particularly between the Embassy and USOM, is provided in
general meetings of agency heads with the Ambassador, and day to
day consultation between officers of the Embassy and those of other
agencies. In addition, the detailed program submissions of USOM have
been thoroughly reviewed by the Chief of the Economic Section of the
Embassy with the appropriate officers of USOM.
As a result of this continuous, and as required, special review, it
is the Embassy’s view that there are no special problems of imbalance
between the various United States programs and activities in the coun-
try. Since the activities of the Inter American Geodetic Survey (IAGS),
an agency of the Department of the Army, are in the mapping field
and therefore not primarily military, the only military program is that
carried out by the Army Mission. An underdeveloped country, Costa
Rica therefore receives the major portion of assistance from the United
States in the economic rather than the military field. Given the general
5 The following comments are made with special reference to Paragraph 2, Cirtel,
of State files.]

orientation of Costa Rica, as described above, this balance is believed to
be in harmony with United States objectives. However, there are certain
phases of assistance in the military field to which additional attention
might well be given. These will be dealt with in a separate despatch.6
Non-United States assistance activities in Costa Rica are carried
out by several international organizations including the United Nations
Technical Assistance Board, the Food and Agriculture Organization,
UNESCO, World Health Organization, UNICEF, the International
Labor Organization, and the International Rank of Reconstruction and
Development. In addition CARE has a small program in the country,
and there are small assistance efforts by certain European countries.
Through the serious and careful study of USOM, considerable
progress has been made during the year on the primary problem of
determining just what activities are carried on by these various non-
United States agencies and the extent to which they may be duplicating
or overlapping United States programs. In general there do not appear
to be any serious problems of imbalance between these and comparable
non-United States programs in the country. However, as set forth under
“e” below, it is believed that there is substantial room for improvement
in the coordination attempted by the Costa Rican Government itself
in order that the most effective use of those international organization
assistance programs can be made.
b. Capability to Utilize Assistance. A majority of U.S. assistance is
applied through the “Servicio” technique. These “Servicios,” such as
STICA for agriculture and SCISP for health, are joint U.S.-Costa Rican
administrative agencies, which make it possible to apply technical
assistance on a daily operational basis. This close operational relation-
ship of U.S. technicians with their Costa Rican counterparts greatly
facilitates achieving the ultimate goal of full administrative and opera-
tional responsibility by the Costa Ricans themselves. It assures the most
effective use of our technical assistance as well as a much larger degree
of complementary participation in the project by the host government.
c. Implementation of U. S. Policy. A careful review of the proposed U.S.
assistance program for FY1960 (especially of the ICA program, which
comprises the majority of such assistance) has been made and it is the
Embassy’s opinion that all projects have a direct relationship with U.S.
policy objectives. They are especially directed toward promoting the
growth of a dynamic, diversified economy based on the free enterprise
system. They will undoubtedly also assist in meeting the special policy
objectives outlined above. For example, during the Eisenhower study
group visit the problem of expanding rural credit for diversification of
6 The despatch under reference was not further identified.

Costa Rica  419
agriculture was emphasized as being of special importance and it is
being given a high priority by the Echandi Administration. This prob-
lem had already been appreciated by the USOM/CR and, in fact, two
days after the Eisenhower visit the head of the Rural Credit Board of
Costa Rica departed for the U. S. on a special rural credit study tour that
had been programmed long before the Eisenhower visit.
d. Minimum to Meet U.S. Objectives. While it is possible that some
rearrangement of projects, and especially of priorities, might result
from such an overall economic plan as that proposed elsewhere in this
report, the current program on the basis of current evaluations does not
exceed the minimum required to achieve U. S. objectives in Costa Rica.
In fact, such an economic plan might well result in recommendations
in an expanded or accelerated program. Certainly in view of the need
to add such a project for an economic survey justifies the observation
that the current program is less than the minimum required to achieve
U. S. objectives.
e. Coordination Between Various Assistance Programs. There is
undoubtedly a need for more coordination of the various assistance
programs in Costa Rica, especially by the Costa Rican Government
itself. It is precisely the solution to this lack of planning and coordina-
tion which has been presented here as a special objective. The various
Ministries and autonomous institutes are all busily engaged in formu-
lating plans and competing among themselves for the limited facilities
available for their execution.
There is no problem of coordination between the various U.S. pro-
grams, since the Ambassador has established procedures which assure
a constant review of U.S. projects both in the planning and execution
stage. The USOM is often effective in advising the various Government
agencies against entering into projects which would cause duplication
of effort or be misdirected in an unproductive direction. The need for
more coordination is being constantly brought to the attention of Costa
Rican officials by U.S. officials, but the machinery for such coordina-
tion, especially in the planning stage, simply does not exist.
A review has been made of all current projects being conducted by
United Nations agencies and other international organizations. While
some of them, such as the FAO, are working on projects that are closely
related to some U.S. projects, there is no current duplication of specific
projects. While reservations may be made as to their relative effective-
ness, most of these non-U.S. projects may actually be considered as
complementing our own objectives. Embassy and USOM officials are
developing a close association with the UN technical assistance director
for this area in an effort to implement further coordination.
There is a small but increasing amount of technical assistance being
given by other countries, especially France and Germany. Coordination,

if any, of these efforts lies solely within the Costa Rican Government,
but no serious problems of overlapping have been noted to date.
Special Operational Suggestion
A limiting factor in granting larger scale assistance to Costa Rica is
the fact that unlike the situation existing in many other Latin American
countries, Costa Rica does not have any funds available from PL4807
sales nor is there any prospect of obtaining such funds under the current
rules. While funds may be available to the country from international
lending institutes for defraying the foreign exchange requirements
of development projects, it is not possible to take advantage of these
available lending resources because of the inability to finance out of
current budgets the local currency cost of such development projects.
Ambassador Willauer believes it is poor Hemisphere economics to base
economic development on the accident of a special country’s ability to
create counterpart funds by the use of Public Law 480. More thought
should be given to the possibility of creating a common fund from the
counterpart funds created in various countries for use in development
projects throughout the Hemisphere. Until such time as funds for local
use are available, Costa Rica would be greatly limited in pursuing any
development program which might evolve from the overall economic
plan cited as a special U.S. objective in this country.
Conclusion
It is believed that the degree of consultation and review constantly
being carried on among U.S. officials in Costa Rica gives ample assur-
ance of an effective U.S. assistance program in Costa Rica, both in
planning and in execution. The Embassy is firmly of the opinion that
emphasis must be given toward implementation of what have been
cited as special U.S. policy objectives in Costa Rica. It is quite likely that
these will form the basis of subsequent recommendations for additional
U.S. assistance for Costa Rica. Aside from any such special program, in
the meantime, the current assistance program is undoubtedly contrib-
uting toward an eventual solution of some of the major economic and
social problems of the country.
Richard A. Godfrey
Commercial Attaché
7 Reference is to the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954,
approved July 10, 1954, which provided for disposal of agricultural surpluses. For text of
the Act, see 68 Stat. 454.

Costa Rica  421
CR–11.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs
(Stewart)1
Washington, September 30, 1958.
SUBJECT
Re-Allocation of Profits of United Fruit Company Subsidiaries for Taxation
Purposes.
PARTICIPANTS:
Department of the Treasury:
Mr. Dan Throop Smith, Deputy to the Secretary;
Mr. Nathan N. Gordon, Chief International Tax Staff;
Mr. David A. Lindsay, Head, Legal Advisory Staff;
Department of State:
Assistant Secretary Roy R. Rubottom, Jr.;
Mr. C. Allan Stewart. Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian
Affairs.
By previous appointment, Messrs. Smith, Gordon and Lindsay met
in Mr. Rubottom’s office to discuss the allocation of profits for purposes
of taxation to the Costa Rican subsidiary of the United Fruit Company.
This problem arose as the result of a request by President Mario Echandi
of Costa Rica for a greater participation by his country in the profits of
the Cfa. Bananera de Costa Rica, a subsidiary of United Fruit Company.
Mr. Smith opened the discussion by stating that the Department of
the Treasury had decided that it would be possible to undertake a study
of the allocation of profits, now made under the 50–50 formula. He said
that this could be done in one of two ways, namely, by (1) a change
in the regulations, in which event the Internal Revenue Service would
study figures presented by the United Fruit Company and determine
whether the net profits could be allocated more favorably to Costa Rica,
or (2) a change in the regulations for a different allocation conditioned
on an Executive Agreement. He said the change in regulations would
be a more simple procedure. Mr. Rubottom replied that a change in the
regulations would be the preferable procedure, particularly in view of
the time element.
Mr. Smith said that this then would be the procedure followed,
and assured Mr. Rubottom that the change in regulations would be
undertaken without delay. It might take between two weeks and a
month to put through the amendment. He cautioned that following the
1958.” Confidential. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

change some time might ensue—­possibly into the next year—­before
the Internal Revenue Service would reach a decision as to what the
new allocation of profits would be, since it would call upon United
Fruit Company to present figures justifying the change in favor of the
banana-­producing countries. Mr. Lindsay opined that the financial
statements thus far made by United Fruit were slightly evasive as they
did not reflect in their entirety profits from sales of fruit in countries
other than the United States. Internal Revenue would need this addi-
tional information before reaching a decision on the new allocation of
profits.
Mr. Rubottom inquired whether, in view of the fact that a delay
might occur in determining the new allocations, the application of
benefits would be made retroactive to January 1, 1958, and Mr. Smith
responded that he could not answer the question at this time. He said
that he and his associates would consult in the Department of the
Treasury and inform Mr. Rubottom of a decision on this point.
Mr. Smith added that it would be impossible to predict at this
time what the new allocation would be, since it would depend on the
presentation made by United Fruit. He said it might be 60–40 or even
80–20, but emphasized that no guess should be hazarded at this time. It
was pointed out that United Fruit would present a strong case favoring
the banana-­producing countries since the difference between the 50–50
formula and any new one would result in a saving to the Company
in payment of United States income taxes; any difference in allocation
favorable to Costa Rica would be taxable at the 38 per cent rate levied
under the Western Hemisphere Trading Corporation set-­up instead of
the 52 per cent assessed on United States profits. He said he was not
happy with this situation but it had to be faced. He said Treasury also
was disturbed that the Dominican Republic would benefit by the new
allocation, in view of the fact that United Fruit operates in that country.
(United Fruit, in its request to Treasury for a more favorable allo-
cation of profits to Costa Rica, has pointed out that Treasury should be
prepared to extend the benefits to other countries in which United Fruit
has operations similar to those in Costa Rica.)
Mr. Rubottom said that public announcement of the Treasury
decision should be made as soon as possible, realizing, of course, that
there would be a delay in arriving at the new allocation formula. After
a discussion it was decided that President Echandi and the United Fruit
Company would not be informed of Treasury’s decision until the pub-
lishing of the amended regulations. Mr. Smith said Treasury would
inform the Department if the benefits would be retroactive to January 1,
1958, and if this was permissible, President Echandi and the company
could also be informed, upon publication of the amended regulations,
of this fact.

Costa Rica  423
CR–12.
Editorial Note
Representatives of Costa Rica and the United States exchanged
Agreement establishing a Military Mission in Costa Rica for four years
2227. The Agreement was amended by notes exchanged at San José,
dures into conformity with United States law. For the text of the amend-
CR–13.
Editorial Note
International Cooperation Administration was prepared to initiate a
3058) The Department of State and the International Cooperation
Administration agreed to the Embassy’s suggestion, set forth in
despatch 156 from San José, September 30, that it propose a study
of internal security to the Costa Rican Government as a first step in
to President Echandi, Ambassador Willauer proposed a Costa Rican-
United States study of the situation confronting the Costa Rican Public
his proposal was found in Department of State files.
CR–14.
Editorial Note
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
authorized the following loans to Costa Rica during the years
February 11, 1959, to relend for agricultural and light industrial devel-
1960, to finance loans to industrial firms for importing capital goods.
(International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Fourteenth

1960, page 32)
The Export-Import Bank authorized a credit of $3 million to Costa
Rica on April 15, 1960 for Inter-American Highway construction, but no
funds were disbursed in 1960. For additional information, see Export-
Import Bank of Washington, Report to the Congress for the Twelve Months
CR–15.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting
Secretary of State1
Washington, May 15, 1959.
SUBJECT
COSTA RICA: Re-Allocation of Profits for Taxation of United Fruit Company
Subsidiary
I am deeply concerned over the status of the Treasury Department’s
action on United Fruit Company’s request for an increase in the allo-
cation of its profits for taxation to its subsidiary in Costa Rica. In
March of 1958 President Echandi, while in Washington, approached
U.S. treasury officials to inquire whether a revision in the allocation
of profits for taxation could be made to the Costa Rican subsidiary of
the United Fruit Company. Treasury officials informed him that sym-
pathetic consideration would be given to his proposal. He was then
informed it would be the responsibility of the United Fruit Company
to make the request for a revision in the allocation. Since then United
Fruit has been trying to obtain a favorable decision in its request to
increase the allocation. In order that Treasury might consider a higher
allocation of taxable profits to the Costa Rican subsidiary, the United
States tax regulations were amended on January 3, 1959, providing a
means whereby the present 50–50 allocation could be increased, retro-
active to January 1, 1958, provided a U.S. taxpayer presented evidence
to substantiate a change in the allocation. Immediately following the
revised regulations, United Fruit presented its case for a revision of
the profit split in favor of Costa Rica.
drafted by Godfrey, Taylor, and Stewart.

Costa Rica  425
This problem has been dragging along for more than a year and until
recently Treasury officials, without definitely committing themselves,
had given the impression such a change could probably be effected. I
have learned informally that Treasury tax experts now have completed a
review of the data presented by United Fruit and have concluded that the
present 50–50 split represents a fair, even generous, allocation of the prof-
its so far as Costa Rica is concerned. While the discussions of these find-
ings are still in the preliminary stage, it appears they will form the basis
of a final Treasury decision denying any favorable re-­allocation of United
Fruit profits.
In presenting its case, it is understood that the United Fruit
Company contended that the allocation should be increased from the
present 50% to at least 75%. An allocation of taxable profits in a pro-
portion of 75% to the United Fruit subsidiary in Costa Rica and 25% to
the United States is in keeping with the type of allocation Costa Rican
President Echandi expects. Echandi’s reason for this belief is that he
knows that Standard Fruit Company has been paying on the basis of
77% for some years without U.S. objection.
The following factors have an important bearing on the need for
favorable action by Treasury on this problem:
(1) The fact that Treasury has established an enabling regulation
permitting a change in allocation of taxable profits is considered by
Costa Rica, and the other countries concerned, as tantamount to grant-
ing the requested increase of the allocation. In this respect we are faced
with the Latin American way of jumping to conclusions and at this
juncture not to increase the allocation to the expected 75 percent will be
considered as an act of bad faith on our part.
(2) In 1950, President Echandi, then serving as Costa Rican
Minister in Washington, was successful in having the United Fruit
Company obtain an increase in the allocation of profits from 35% to
the present 50%. The United Fruit Company was able to convince the
Internal Revenue Service that on the basis of its foreign investments,
an increase in the percentage of taxable profit allocation to the Costa
Rican subsidiary would be more equitable. Echandi believes the pres-
ent allocation is still inequitable as 99% of the United Fruit Company’s
Costa Rican investment, consisting of the land and all productive facil-
ities, is actually in Costa Rica. He has expressed his intention of obtain-
ing a greater tax return one way or another. Since he was successful in
obtaining an increase in the allocation in 1950, it is difficult for him to
understand why this can’t be readily done again.
(3) Any re-­allocation of profits of United Fruit’s Costa Rican
subsidiary will apply to the other banana producing subsidiaries in
Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic
and Colombia. This fact, admitted by Treasury, has been emphasized

by President Echandi in various public pronouncements predicting a
favorable re-­allocation. This prospect of increased revenues has been
the subject of comment in these various countries and has prompted an
especially laudatory comment from President Ydígoras of Guatemala.
Ydígoras said in effect “this action takes the sting out of Communist
allegations that the U.S. is exploiting the Latin American countries”. To
reverse the expectation will cause us trouble in the Caribbean at a most
unfortunate time. We will certainly lose good will throughout the area
and will be exploited by our enemies.
(4) The tax re-­allocation has been an objective of primary impor-
tance to Echandi since he first suggested it during his visit to the United
States. He has interpreted our willingness to cooperate by revising
the pertinent Treasury regulations as an assurance that a favorable
re-­allocation will be made even though he has chafed at the delay in
reaching a final decision as to how much. In this certainty he has made
several public statements, the latest being on May 1, proclaiming his
success in obtaining the re-­allocation and commenting on the signifi-
cance the increased revenues will mean not only to Costa Rica but to
the other six countries in which United Fruit has banana producing
subsidiaries. Our failure now to follow through with the re-­allocation
to which Echandi attaches so much importance and which is of relative
insignificance for us from a loss of revenue standpoint will produce a
situation of such embarrassment to Echandi that it cannot but fail to
embitter his attitude toward us.
(5) If Echandi fails to secure additional revenue by means of a re-­
allocation of United Fruit profits he will undoubtedly resort to other
measures, such as special legislation or pressures to renegotiate the
Company’s contract. Should any of these measures result in additional
revenues to Costa Rica then such advantages would immediately be
sought by other producing countries, thus starting a chain of events
which could not fail to affect our relations and those of a U.S. firm with
seven countries.
Tab A contains a copy of my letter to Treasury setting forth the
Department’s view of the importance of reaching a favorable decision
on this tax problem.2 Attached thereto is a chronological summary of
events concerning the case.3
It will be seen from Tab B that Mr. Smith’s attitude was one of
encouragement and I had hoped that a favorable decision might be
Company: Costa Rica, 1958.”

Costa Rica  427
made by March of this year.4 However, Mr. Smith resigned and his posi-
tion was taken by Mr. Henry Wallich, who adopted a different attitude
in the matter. On March 6, 1959, Mr. Stewart, Director of the Office of
Central American and Panamanian Affairs, met with Mr. Wallich and
his advisors and it was evident that this new group was unconvinced
of the merits of United Fruit’s case (see Tab C).5 However, Mr. Wallich
indicated that the case might be settled by a 60–40 division of the prof-
its. In view of the political factors enumerated above, Mr. Wallich was
informed that the Department thought this would not be satisfactory
to the producing countries concerned.
Since that meeting the Treasury representatives with whom the
Department has maintained contact have indicated that the study
was progressing slowly and it was not until Mr. Samuel Baggett, Vice
President and General Counsel of United Fruit Company, visited Under
Secretary Scribner a few weeks ago that the matter was pushed.
In making its decision, Treasury has not called upon the United
Fruit for any information other than that made in the original presen-
tation by the company’s attorneys. This may be standard Treasury pro-
cedure but it seems to me that in a case of such obvious importance the
company should be permitted to justify its case in additional confer-
ences with the experts who have made an adverse recommendation.
Recommendation:
That you discuss this matter with Secretary Anderson in an effort
to induce Treasury to render a decision on this matter that will benefit
our relations with the Latin American countries involved.6
see Document CR–7, footnote 1.
5 At Tab C was a memorandum of conversation between Wallich and Stewart,
6 There is no indication on the source text of the Acting Secretary’s action on this
recommendation, nor any record that the discussion actually took place, but see the letter
of June 5, printed as Document CR–16.

CR–16.
Letter from the Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary
of the Treasury (Anderson)1
Washington, June 5, 1959.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
It is our understanding that the Treasury is about to make a deci-
sion on the matter of the proper allocation for tax purposes of profits
derived from the production and sale of bananas, specifically in regard
to the United Fruit Company and its Costa Rican operations.2 While it
is recognized that the determination of an equitable and sound solution
to this problem is clearly the responsibility of the Treasury, the matter
is of such importance in our relations with Costa Rica and the other
banana-­producing countries that the Department of State is very much
concerned.
As you know, President Echandi of Costa Rica discussed this
problem with the Treasury in March, 1958 and was told that sympa-
thetic consideration would be given to his view that a fair basis for
taxation required that the present system of allocating profits should be
changed to effectively provide that a larger share of the overall income
would be recognized as deriving from the banana-producing coun-
tries. Subsequently, to provide the basis for a change in allocation, the
Internal Revenue regulations were revised to permit consideration of
appropriate factors other than investment and sales in determining the
proper source of income.
President Echandi has understandably interpreted this action as
indicating that a change favorable to Costa Rica and the other banana-­
producing countries would be made in the system of allocating prof-
its. Indeed, he has gone well beyond this to publicly and repeatedly
assert that the present 50–50 division would be changed to an alloca-
tion formula of 75–25 in favor of the banana-­producing countries, or
better.
by Thomas R. Favell, Economic Development Division, Office of International Financial
and Development Affairs; and John M. Leddy, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of
State for Economic Affairs.
2 Fred C. Scribner, Jr., Under Secretary of the Treasury, informed the Department
formula was adequate and just for Costa Rica. Scribner advised the Department of State
to make representations for a more favorable division of the profits for Costa Rica with-
out delay, if it intended to do so. (Memorandum from Rubottom to Dillon, June 4, 1959;

Costa Rica  429
We do not know whether President Echandi’s claim for a 75–25
ratio is or is not soundly based. We do understand, however, that there
are special circumstances relating to the trade in bananas between Latin
America and the United States, and that because of these circumstances
the Costa Rican case for an improved ratio is valid. Accordingly, we
believe it reasonable, under the circumstances, for Costa Rice and the
other banana-­producing countries to expect a significant and favorable
change in the present allocation formula.
We understand that the present 50–50 formula is based exclu-
sively on investment and sales. However we believe that, at the least,
in any new allocation formula the factor of payroll should also be
given weight because it reflects the economic activity of the banana
companies and because, we understand, there is ample domestic
precedent. We do not believe that an allocation based on sales and
costs alone, without regard to the investment and its situs, would be
equitable. Certainly the very substantial investment of the banana
companies in the producing countries constitutes a major income pro-
ducing factor.
Should it be determined in Treasury that a 75–25 allocation formula
is equitable and sound, it would represent a substantial contribution to
good relations with Costa Rica and the other banana-­producing coun-
tries. If this is not fully consistent with Treasury’s judgment regarding an
equitable formula, then we would hope that a formula of at least 70–30
could be carefully considered. A decision to continue the 50–50 alloca-
tion, under the circumstances referred to above, would be most harm-
ful to good relations with Costa Rica and the other banana-­producing
countries of Latin America and would not only lead to higher tax rates in
these countries, but would likely result in other harmful measures.
It is, therefore, our hope that a new formula which is equitably and
soundly based and which is favorable to the banana-­producing coun-
tries will be adopted. It is also our hope that this action can be taken
promptly.
Sincerely yours,
DOUGLAS DILLON
Acting Secretary

CR–17.
Letter from President Eisenhower to President Echandi1
Washington, October 27, 1959.
Dear Mr. President:
I have received your letter of September twenty-­eighth express-
ing your desire for prompt action on the question of the readjustment
of the profits for taxation of the United Fruit Company subsidiary in
Costs Rica.2 This problem has been the object of painstaking consul-
tation and study by the officials of this Government. Your letter has
served to intensify even more our efforts to find a method of solution
of the problem which would satisfy the mutual interests of our two
countries, and you will be receiving further word through regular dip-
lomatic channels in the near future.
I take this opportunity to express my cordial best wishes for your
personal health and happiness, together with my wish for the contin-
ued peace and prosperity of the Costa Rican people.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Willauer delivered the letter on November 9, 1959. He persuaded Echandi to avoid
any publicity regarding this correspondence; and explained that part of the reason for
the further delay of a final decision was the realization within the U.S. Government
of possible ramifications of a tax windfall for the United Fruit Co. (Telegram 154 from
CR–18.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Costa Rica1
180. For Ambassador Willauer. Treasury decision United Fruit
reallocation profile for tax purposes provides 60–40 division favor
Niact. Drafted by Taylor and signed by Stewart.

Costa Rica  431
Costa Rica, effective January 1, 1958, informing Echandi this deci-
sion:2 (1) strongly recommend he accept ruling as decision made in
an equitable and fair manner after careful consideration; (2) stress
increase in allocation obtained by strong efforts on part of State and
UFCO; and (3) GOCR should deal directly with United Fruit hereafter
on this matter. Also, remind Echandi this information being given him
through diplomatic channels in accordance Pres. Eisenhower’s letter.
Copy of Decision will be forwarded Embassy as soon as available;
sent UFCO Boston yesterday.3
Herter
2 Documentation on Willauer’s informing Echandi of this decision was not found
in Department of State files.
3 A copy of the letter to Baggett from Dana Latham, Commissioner of Internal
Rica, 1959.”
CR–19.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central
American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs (Mallory)1
Washington, December 11, 1959.
SUBJECT
COSTA RICA: Request for Radio-Equipped Jeeps
Ambassador Willauer has relayed to the Department an urgent
request by President Echandi for United States assistance in the acqui-
sition of 15 new radio-­equipped jeeps. This equipment is urgently
needed by Costa Rica, primarily to implement its capability of polic-
ing its border to prevent incursions into Nicaragua by revolutionary
groups emanating from Costa Rica.
Willauer to urge the GOCR to make every possible effort to prevent
by Godfrey. The following handwritten note to Godfrey by Stewart appears on the source
text: “Let’s get cracking on this.”

such revolutionary movements. In Ambassador Willauer’s reply he
states that President Echandi has done everything possible and can-
not do more without additional physical aid, which the Ambassador
suggests the United States might provide. President Echandi wishes to
purchase the jeeps on credit but wishes to have immediate delivery by
air because of the very urgent need.
In my opinion we should give consideration to the possibility of providing
these jeeps and radios on a grant aid basis, and I offer the following reasons as
justification.
1. In the past six months the Costa Rican Guardia Civil has been
engaged in intensive police actions, such as the Punta Llorona affair,
the costs of which have far exceeded its appropriated funds, which are
extremely limited even to cover normal operations.
2. The Figueres dominated majority opposition in the Legislative
Assembly actively supports the Nicaraguan revolutionary movement
and it would be expected to oppose the appropriation of additional
funds to expend on controlling such revolutionary groups.
3. Echandi, in the face of widespread sympathy and of active sup-
port of such revolutionary activity, has acted resolutely and effectively
to the limit of the capabilities available to him to control these revolu-
tionary groups.
4. By making such equipment available the United States will be
giving effective aid in promoting peace in the Caribbean area, and spe-
cifically, the maintenance of peaceful relations between Costa Rica and
Nicaragua.
It has been determined that funds sufficient to cover the cost of this
equipment are available in ICA Special Assistance funds which could
possibly be used for this purpose.
Recommendation:
That we immediately request ICA to provide the necessary
funds for the purchase of 15 radio-­equipped jeeps to be furnished the
Government of Costa Rica for the purpose of augmenting its capability
of dealing with a situation within its own borders which threatens to
disturb the peace of the area.3
Approved_________4
Disapproved_______
3 Fifteen radio-­equipped jeeps were given to the Government of Costa in December
1959.
4 Recommendation is initialed as “Approved.”

Costa Rica  433
CR–20.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Costa Rica (Willauer)
to the Department of State1
204.
DEPARTMENT PASS SALG PANAMA, DA, FOR ACSI
Re Department telegram 194,2 phone from Stewart.
With exception request signal detachment, Department apparently
requesting airlift and naval vessel whereas only asked for information re
availability aircraft and giving warning possible need naval vessel. As to
justification request communications detachment and alert on other mat-
ters, President Echandi personally felt dangerous Communist inspired
strike imminent. This morning for first time situation appeared easier
with agreement fruit company arbitrate thirteenth month4 and state-
ments Figueres press urging moderation by labor. However, view strike
possibility depends now more on Communist tactics than intrinsic labor
dispute. I still moderately apprehensive. Am dispatching further com-
ments and recommendations re overall problem communications needs
these often recurring critical situations Costa Rica.
Willauer
2 See footnote 3.
instigated strike against the United Fruit Company in the Golfito division. He asked for a
signal detachment in civilian disguise with equipment to operate stations at Golfito, Palmar,
and San José, and authority to move about the country as needed, and also for information
on available standby C-47 aircraft for airlift from Golfito and Palmar. He also suggested
“naval vessel stand by for cruise to vicinity Golfo Dulce prepared to enter Golfito if sit-
uation warrants.” He asked “that fruit company not be contacted or informed at present
of State requested additional justification before it could accede to Willauer’s request for a
signal detachment, and denied that the situation in Costa Rica warranted Willauer’s recom-
4 Reference is to the question whether the United Fruit Company’s subsidiary,
Compañia Bananera, should pay its employees a month’s bonus in accordance with a
Costa Rican law. The Costa Rican Government paid the difference between the Company’s
offer of one week’s pay and one month’s pay, $600,000, in the strike settlement of January
1960, with the explicit intention of recovering that money through the courts. (Despatch
Cassatian, a chamber of the Costa Rican Supreme Court, upheld the Company’s position.

CR–21.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Costa Rica (Willauer)
to the Department of State1
San José, December 15, 1959.
[Extracts]
No. 288
REF
SUBJECT
Regional Operations Plan for Latin America: Costa Rica
This document consists of 2 pages,
No. 1 of 7 copies, Series A.
The reference communication requested the Chief of Mission to
forward to the Department as brief a statement as possible on:
(A) “Country Objectives”; (B) “Country Programs and Other
Implementing Operations”3 and (C) “Recommendations” (Optional),
within the framework of the Regional Operations Plan for Latin
America dated July 1, 1959. Such statement was to be focused on objec-
tives capable of being partially or wholly attained over the next two or
three years, with appropriate reference to their relation to long-­term
U.S. objectives. Attention is directed to Recommendation No. 1, under
“Recommendations.”
The statement set forth below follows the outline of the “Regional
Operations Plan for Latin America,” with specific citations to num-
bered items of the OCR plan of July 1, 1959.
RECOMMENDATIONS
NOTE: The recommendations which follow were drafted per-
sonally by me after my review of the preceding sections which I also
to this despatch included Ambassador Willauer, Roy I. Kimmel, Counselor, Alexander
A. Cohen, Second Secretary, James R. Johnston, Second Secretary, Lt. Col. Spencer P.
Edwards, Jr., Army Attaché, Doris T. Aragon, USIS Public Affairs Assistant, and Hunter
L. Estep, Second Secretary. The Department of State approved the country objectives; also
approved, subject to availability of funds, the country programs; and noted the recom-
2 The referred circular airgram transmitted to Embassies in Latin America the
Regional Operations Plan for Latin America approved by the Operations Coordinating
Board on July 1, 1959.
3 Sect. (A) “Country Objectives” and (B) “Country Programs and Other
Implementing Operations” are not printed here.

Costa Rica  435
participated in drafting. The recommendations were then reviewed by
the contributing members of the Embassy staff, who were invited to
suggest revisions or additions. This resulted in several additions, but
otherwise no alterations were made in my original draft. The Embassy
staff concurs in the opinion that the following recommendations should
be placed before the Operations Coordinating Board.
Recommendation No. 1
Overall Recommendation as to the Operation of the OCB
In a personal and confidential letter to the Secretary on November
lax in its system of implementing policy and made a recommendation
and 3 of Tab A).
I have been making similar recommendations for more than four
years, which I gathered together in another memorandum which was
presented to the Chiefs of Mission Conference in El Salvador during
April of this year. It is entitled “Policy and Performance” and is attached
as Tab B.
Recommendation No. 2
Political – Reference (15 c (1)—Enforcement and Adoption of Laws to Con-
trol Communist Activities
The entire problem of communist penetration of Latin America
stems from a lack of Latin American appreciation that communism
is imperialist intervention by Russia. In Latin America it is generally
believed that the communists are just another political party. Also, in a
sense, the communist are, at times, at the very least put up with because
of the superficial but widely accepted idea that the way to get help from
us is to appear to embrace communism.
Step No. 1, which I feel might in a year’s time cause a realization
of the degree of this communist intervention in Latin America, would
be the general adoption of a law modeled on our old Foreign Agents
Other steps might be undertaken to encourage further partici-
pation in intelligence and counter-­intelligence training programs for
armed forces, and police. Such training is available from Army sources,
and can be used to emphasize the nature of the Soviet threat to hemi-
spheric security.
4 Not printed
Stat. 631.
6 The recommendation was contained in a letter to Rubottom, not printed.

Recommendation No. 3
As previously stated, economic relations between Costa Rica and
the Soviet bloc are not as yet very significant. Nevertheless, the threat
of economic penetration by the communist is always present and can-
not be ignored. It is public knowledge that the threat elsewhere in
Latin America seems likely to become serious soon. I have suggested
to the Secretary that there be a re-­examination of my memorandum to
that we call Russia’s “bluff” by inviting her to compete on a 50-50
basis straight across the board (aid, technical assistance and trade), at
the same time stating we will not stay in the game at all in any country
on a 90-10% basis.
A couple of months ago I talked personally with the Secretary about
my memorandum of January 12, 1958 and he instructed me to discuss
it further with Assistant Secretary Mann, who in turn had called a con-
ference of himself, myself, and a representative of Mr. Terrill’s8 office
(presumably now Ambassador Bohlen’s9 office). I reiterated at the time
that my memorandum was principally devised to be provocative of
thought and I requested a counter-­memorandum which I have never
received.
Recommendation No. 4
(18 e) Visa Policy
The Intelligence Division of the Department, [text not declassified]
should send special task forces to the field to weed out improper allega-
tions of communism or other subversive activities currently cluttering
up Embassy files. The Embassies themselves (at least the smaller ones)
are not staffed nor do they have the facilities to carry out this work.
Under the policy of not keeping files for more than five years much of
the basic materials that led to these old allegations are no longer in the
Embassy and all we have is a note on some file card.
One of the most embarrassing situations in my experience as an
Ambassador arose because of this problem. The wife of the first freely
elected President of Honduras in all its history, Señora de Villeda
Morales, wanted to make a trip to New Orleans to buy her inauguration
“trousseau” and sought visas for several of her lady friends to aid her
in this project. As I recall, at least one of these ladies showed up with a
commie mark on her file card, which is quite natural since Villeda was
7 Not printed
8 Robert P. Terrill, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State.
9 Charles E. Bohlen, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

Costa Rica  437
a sworn enemy of Carías, who made it a practice for 20 years to allege
communism against most of his political enemies. We ultimately were
able, with the help of the Department, to get over this hump, but the
delay was extremely embarrassing and I can assure the OCD that this
is a frequent kind of occurrence.
Recommendation No. 5
Regional Plan 19—Labor
I understand that the basic philosophy of a free labor movement is
that management and labor in the United States and throughout the Free
World have accepted the principle that a healthy labor movement pro-
duces buying power and efficient operation of the free enterprise system,
and that enlightened capitalism aids in the well being of workers. True,
we have our rows about the details of the operation of this basic princi-
ple, but in the final analysis the principle is accepted on both sides.
So far as the policy of United States free enterprise abroad is con-
cerned, it has been my observation that the acceptance of this principle
has not generally percolated down to the level of the local managers.
Nor has it become a tenet of labor leaders in Latin America who are rep-
resenting the free labor movement. All too often in the local scene I find
that the basic philosophy on both sides remains that of Marx: “Labor
must fight capital” and vice versa.
My suggestions are:
(A) That the “head office” management of our American enter-
prises abroad be approached to see whether they believe that labor
and capital abroad in their various enterprises can and should work
together to their mutual advantage.
This is a delicate problem because conditions vary from country to
country. For instance, here in Costa Rica the laws and administration of
labor affairs are so relatively advanced that representatives of capital
feel that concessions to labor have reached the point where it is eco-
nomically impossible to make more concessions. I do not necessarily
agree with the employers here but this is how they think. Labor, on the
other hand, is so well treated in Costa Rica that there is only a slight
incentive for a free and democratic labor movement. The situation in
Honduras or in Guatemala is completely different. Without attempt-
ing to suggest what the policy of the free labor movement should be
in every country, I wish to point out that it is not sufficient to “lump”
Latin American labor in one category and to adopt one policy for all the
countries involved. Like all policies, it is highly important that a “pol-
icy board” study and evaluate the actual conditions in every country
before going into action.
(B) That in any case, where it is agreed that the policy of coopera-
tion of labor and management is correct, the local managers should be
called home for consultation and “given the word.”
(C) That in those countries where ORIT has active affiliated labor
organizations, general labor policy concerning these countries be dis-
cussed and outlined between a top representative of ORIT and the top

(home) management of U.S. companies operating in these countries
with a view of attempting to secure the issuance of appropriate instruc-
tions to the local management of such companies concerning the basic
labor policies of each individual company vis a vis ORIT as well as local
labor organizations. In addition, occasional visits by top management
to countries operating would be helpful.
Recommendation No. 6
Regional Plan 20—U.S. Business Objectives
About four years ago, when I was Ambassador to Honduras, I made
a recommendation that Embassies should talk with U.S. business execu-
tives about the concept of partnership relationships with local business-
men and I have followed that practice for a long time. I am glad to see
that this concept has now become official policy. I am not sure that all of
the Ambassadors, nor indeed many of the economic officers, have had
the personal business experience which I have had in operating a part-
nership abroad so as to be convincing on this score. For possible use in
amplifying the instructions to meet this difficulty I am appending a copy
of my speech to the Hispanic American Society of Stanford University
(Tab E)10 and particularly recommend the entire text of the Atlantic
Monthly article by Presidential Assistant Clarence Randall quoted from
in the speech.
Recommendation No. 7
Regional Plan 21—Attitude towards U.S. Personnel Overseas
It has long been my feeling that the U.S. Government now sends
too many full-­time employees abroad to do jobs which could be bet-
ter contracted for through private consulting firms or educational
institutions. I feel, for instance, that too much of our technical assis-
tance program is being handled by direct U.S. Government employ-
ees who, quite humanly, tend to try to freeze themselves in their jobs.
While in Honduras and previously while in China as Foreign Economic
Administrator for the Orient during World War II, I developed quite a
lot of usefulness from private consulting firms instead of direct govern-
ment employees. If desired I could write a whole paper on this subject
and will do so upon request. Parenthetically, I have been directly asso-
ciated with the problems of foreign aid since April of 1940.
Recommendation No. 8
Cultural—General Recommendation
I understand that the expression “cultural relations” means that
peoples of various nations basically understand each other in the sense

Costa Rica  439
that they mutually know the history, the customs, the language and the
aspirations of each other.
In our cultural relations program we send art exhibitions, ballets,
orchestras, basketball teams, etc., to Latin America, and all of these
accomplish great good in the objectives of mutual understanding.
Also we have a program of inter-­change of students through schol-
arships between Latin America and the United States and this also is a
good thing. However, the size of this student exchange program, which
is the most important one that I can think of in the realm of cultural
relations, is totally inadequate to accomplish the kind of understanding
we are attempting. It particularly fails in the quantity and quality of
students from the United States that study in Latin America. My rec-
ommendations are:
(A) At least 10,000 scholarships for Latin American students in
the United States. At an average rate of $4,000 each this would total
$40 million.
(B) At least a thousand scholarships for North Americans to study
or teach in Latin America. In this case I would allocate for each student
the sum of $10,000 (or any sum required to be competitive) for a total
cost of $10 million. I have suggested the higher allocation for North
American students and teachers because I am certain that we ought to
make it so attractive to them that they cannot refuse to go.
I would hope that the experience of the first thousand students
would prove so rewarding that the word would spread among the stu-
dent bodies of the United States that Latin America is a place to seek out.
(C) Costa Rica stands at or near the top in mass education of its
population. It also has one of the highest ratings for sympathy towards
U.S. policies and problems in the hemisphere. I submit that there is a
large element of cause and effect in this coincidence.
I submit for evaluation as to cost and feasibility a campaign aided
by the U.S. to stamp out illiteracy in the hemisphere in ten years. I think
if this goal could even be approximated it would pay us greater divi-
dends than any other course of action in other fields which we might
be contemplating.
(D) Perhaps the U.S. Armed Forces could make greater use of
the Latin American service schools. At present, to my knowledge, we
are sending only one student per year to the Uruguayan Staff College.
Several of the other countries have similar institutions, such as Chile
and Argentina. The current reason given for not sending officers to
these schools is that they are not as advanced as Leavenworth. Little
consideration is given to the idea that these officers will gain a tremen-
dous amount of knowledge from a year’s continuous and daily contact
with Latin Americans under academic conditions.
Recommendation No. 9
Public information Program—General
I am generally satisfied with what we are doing to date [text not
declassified]

(A) However, I have long been dissatisfied that we are doing
everything possible to help the U.S. press report Latin American news
correctly. I believe that the impact of the New York Times, Time, Newsweek
and Vision are much more important than what we put out ourselves,
even though not usually attributed to us.
I believe that what we knew in the Embassies about current events
in the field should be made available to the editorial writers of at least
the aforementioned influential publications. Three or four years ago I
suggested officially (recommendations to OCB from Honduras) that by
arrangement with the editors their reporters ought to check with the
Embassies for our version of the news.
I have discussed my suggestion with influential friends in the
United States press, such as Time president Roy E. Larsen. I think he
believes that something like this might be arranged. I have, however,
found that USIA director, Ambassador Allen, is skeptical. The problem
seems to boil down to a feeling that orders to reporters in the field might
be interpreted, or twisted into something against freedom of the press.
Since my suggestion is only that reporters in the field include on their
“beat” as news gatherers the information available to the Embassy, I
find it hard to accept this judgment. I am not suggesting that the United
States Government attempt to influence how the reporters report the
news. I simply say that there exists in the United States Embassies part
of “the news.”
However, if the criticism that the United States Government is
somehow or other trying to control the news cannot be overcome by
having publishers require their reporters to check with Embassies, then
I suggest a half-­way house. Could we not persuade the editors in the
U.S. to advise the Department of major up-­coming stories (not what
they are going to say, but simply the subject matter). At this point, on
a priority basis, the Department could obtain the facts known in the
Embassies and disseminate whatever material the Department thinks
proper to the editorial writers.
My classic illustration in favor of my recommendation is the 1954
general strike in Honduras just before the anti-­communist Honduran-­
based revolution against the communist-­dominated government of
Guatemala. Time, basing its story of the strike solely on field reports
from their left-­wing reporter, Harvey Rosenhouse, never mentioned
that the Guatemalan communists supplied the leaders and $800,000
for that strike. The Time story, as it appeared, spoke only of the iniq-
uities of United Fruit Company labor policies—­and indeed in that
instance some of these were not good. I am sure the Time editors would
have been interested in what I then knew about the situation. Maybe
they would not have published it, maybe the Department would not
have released it to them, but it was a part of “the news.” Also it was

Costa Rica  441
something generally known in the Honduran community, so I would
not have been revealing “secret” information.
(B) The Cuban attack on the impartiality of the United States press.
An American friend in Costa Rica close to the press points out that the
responsible press (liberal and conservative) in a dozen Latin American
countries has been at least as strong in attacking events in Cuba as the
United States press has been. He suggests that all this material should
be gathered and under appropriate auspices put out in “block-­buster”
form.
(C) Coverage of Latin American seminars: The fact that Herb
Matthews11 was able to get away with his defense of Castro in the top
billing spot of the Stanford University October seminar pains me.
Because of then existing Department of State policy I had to remain
silent at Stanford, and could not answer him officially.
In this connection I make the following suggestions:
(1) That it should be arranged that persons (preferably known lib-
erals) who know the score about communism should refute that type
of talk.
(2) That the agendas and subjects to be discussed at these influen-
tial meetings should carefully reviewed in advance by the Department.
[text not declassified]
In any event, these influential meetings should not be allowed to
“go by default.” There are too many Latin Americans who feel that
what is said in these meetings somehow expresses U.S. opinion.
In this recommendation I am not unmindful of the excellent job that
Dick Rubottom, Dr. Eisenhower and others do at these meetings. But
what we need is a “task force” to cover these conferences. And the “task
force” must also do a “follow-­up” job after the meetings are finished.
For instance whether or not we agree with Professor Tannenbaum12 on
Mexico and Cardenas,13 he made a speech at Stanford which basically
refuted Matthews’ thesis. The “follow-­up” would in this case involve
an attempt to get Tannenbaum to write a “critique” on the Matthews
speech.
(D) There are some indications that, either by design or by acci-
dent, the Roman Catholic Church in Latin America has had its attention
diverted from communism into a program of resisting the inroads of
Protestantism. Unfortunately, a propaganda link has been constructed
between “Yanquismo,” U.S. Government representation and Protestant
11 Herbert L. Matthews, editorial staff, New York Times.
12 Frank Tannenbaum, Professor of History, Columbia University.
1940.

missionary efforts, which, carried to extremes, might produce a situa-
tion in which the Roman Catholics were actually playing the commu-
nist game.
I suggest that the Roman Catholic authorities be provided with
material for conducting a sophisticated anti-­communist program—­this
to be done without the slightest hint of favoritism to any of the religious
bodies. The Protestant missionaries, which are becoming a more and
more potent force in Latin America, could also use some of this kind
of aid—­and I might point out that such a program would reach right
into the very classes of society to which the communists make their
strongest appeals.
The important point in this discussion is that of preventing a clash
between the religious bodies, and keeping them focused on a sworn
enemy of religion—­one that is dramatically opposed to Christianity in
all forms.
Recommendation No. 10
Regional Plan 24—Information on UN and OAS Accomplishments. General.
Except for those members of Embassy staffs who have done duty
with the UN or the OAS I feel that there is a considerable basic igno-
rance and appreciation of just how these organizations work and the
good which they accomplish. Everyone knows about this in general
terns but I feel a few simple expedients would greatly increase the
efficiency of the presentation by diplomats in the field of the merits of
these organizations. Specifically, I recommend:
(1) That a definite program of visits by Ambassadors and other
important Embassy personnel, while home on leave or consultation,
to the working sessions of these organizations, be arranged and bud-
geted for in terms of time and money. (Note: I was shocked to hear
from Ambassador Lodge14 in 1954 when I paid a call on him in New
York, that I was just about the first American Ambassador who had
done so.)
(2) In the field we sorely need more concise and readily usable
information as to the functions and day-­to-­day operations of the two
organizations. Particularly in the case of the OAS I have long been ask-
ing for a handbook with detailed appendices as to the operations of
that organization. Every time a crisis comes up in the field we have to
research through scattered pamphlets and even then we do not have a
proper book which shows us the precedents and other necessary mate-
rial. Besides talking about this with my friends in the Department, I
specifically made the suggestion for such a book to Ambassador Dreier
at the April meeting of Chiefs of Mission in El Salvador.15 About a
14 Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., Representative of the United States to the United Nations.
15 The Meeting of U.S. Chiefs of Mission in the Carribean Area was held at San

Costa Rica  443
month ago I made a similar recommendation to Carl Migdail of the Pan
American Union, who seemed exceedingly interested in the idea.
(3) In addition to orienting State Department personnel, service
Attachés and military mission members should also be checked out on
the functions and operations of the OAS and UN. I am told that our
War Colleges and the Strategic Intelligence School have overlooked this
particular aspect of training.
Recommendation No. 11
Economic: B–2—Inter-American Highway
I have for several years now been recommending the creation of
an Inter-American Highway authority to make possible sound main-
tenance and transportation practices on the Inter-American Highway
when it is completed. This objective has been adopted by ARA and
much successful work has been done. For reference of the OCB I attach
Tab G.16
I have informally suggested to ARA ways and means to keep up
the present impetus behind this idea.
Recommendation No. 12
Military—General Recommendation
I submit for further study and consideration a memorandum
entitled “The Place of the Military in Latin American Affairs with
Comments on the Movements towards ‘Dual Purpose’ Military Units”
(Tab H).17 The OCB may not be aware of the fact that I was one of the
first to take up the cudgels for the dual-­purpose military unit concept
while I was in Honduras. It may be useful at this time to review some
of my thinking on the place of the military and of the reasoning behind
dual-­purpose military units as expressed in the attached Tab H. To the
extent that the Board finds my ideas, or better ideas if they exist, valid,
I think they should be widely disseminated in the field.
I hope that some way of providing military assistance to “dual-­
purpose” military organizations can be developed that takes advantage
of the resources offered by both the Defense Department and ICA with-
out provoking a bureaucratic struggle at home over “empire building”
rights.
I should like to renew a previous suggestion to OCB that we get
behind and support regional military schools in the hemisphere. So
long as the military play the great part they now do in Latin American
16 At Tab G was “A Proposal for an Inter-American Highway Authority,” by
Ambassador Willauer, not printed.
17 This undated memorandum by Ambassador Willauer, is not printed.

politics, there will be a crying need to “get the officers young and teach
them right.”
Whiting Willauer
Ambassador
CR–22.
Airgram From the Embassy in Costa Rica to the
Department of State1
San José, July 1, 1960.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 1 page not declassified.
CR–23.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Costa Rica (Willauer)
to the Department of State1
San José, July 11, 1960.
No. 14.
SUBJECT
Review of Our Relations with Costa Rica with Special Reference to Echandi Gov-
ernment’s Attitude and Probable Public Position re Cuba in the Current Issues of a
Consolidated Break of Relations by Central America with Cuba and the Forthcom-
ing Meeting of Foreign Ministers
In my letter of March 30, 1960 to Assistant Secretary Rubottom
on the then-­current problem of the election of the director of the
Agricultural Institute at Turrialba,2 I reviewed the series of Echandi’s
disappointments in U.S. treatment of his various requests for help from
us since his inauguration two years ago. After urging a careful review
of the balance of our relationships with Costa Rica, I stated:
2 The referenced letter was not found in Department of State files.

Costa Rica  445
“We are going to need Costa Rica one day and I do not like the
growing feeling here that they are being neglected, and the half-­jokingly
expressed view, which may one day become seriously held, that the
way to get cooperation from the United States is to play hard to get.
Considering the great tactical and psychological advantage of having
Costa Rica on our side in Latin American problems, such a result would
be little short of tragic.”
Unfortunately, my expressed fears as to a hardening of Echandi’s
attitude have been completely borne out, and this attitude has become
an important factor in his failure to cooperate with the U.S.-­supported
request of the other Central American countries for an immediate joint
July 8 and Managua’s NIACT to Department No. 10,3 end of first para-
graph of cable to Somoza from his Ambassador in San José.)
An attitude that Costa Rica has always been a genuine friend of
the United States but that this policy has not furthered Costa Rica’s
own interests; and that in general in Latin America the United States
is slower to help its real friends than to respond to the threats of an
unfriendly action, has now spread far beyond Echandi and represents
a widespread public attitude. It makes no difference really whether
this appraisal of our policy is justified, when we are considering, as we
now must, how to obtain the support of Costa Rica in our forthcoming
showdown about Castro.
I strongly favor an immediate attempt to change this attitude in
Costa Rica by taking favorable action on Costa Rican economic prob-
lems at once. I recommend this because not only do I feel that Costa
Rica’s fine international reputation makes it a pivotal country in Latin
thinking, but because I think that the hopes of successfully changing
the Costa Rican attitude by things which we can do immediately and
without great cost to ourselves are considerable, at least as compared
to the overall problem in most of the other Latin American countries.
I think that Costa Rica at the moment is hanging on a very delicate
balance. On the one hand, not only supporters of Echandi, but much
of the opposition, are ideologically convinced that Castro means com-
munism, and that Cuba today is a real threat to the hemisphere. On the
other hand, it is an unfortunate fact of political life here that the very
independence and democracy which gives Costa Rica such an import-
ant stature in Latin American eyes carries with it a psychology which
States for what he considered U.S. neglect of Costa Rica’s interests; in the telegram Willauer
stated that he believed it necessary to have an “immediate review in search of creation

demands that all Costa Rican political leaders assume an attitude of
independent thinking and choice of action on international issues.
Stemming from this very independence and quite openly coupling
with it “enlightened self-­interest”, Costa Rican public opinion in all
parties tends, as a matter of national pride, to adopt the feeling that a
very high degree of attention and consideration should be given by the
U.S. to Costa Rica’s own internal problems. From all walks of life I and
the members of my staff continually hear it said:
“Costa Rica has been a true and faithful friend of the United
States and of democracy. What has this gotten us? Virtually nothing.
Because we have been so helpful to you, you people in the United
States Government seem to take us for granted. In our own struggles
with our far left in Congress and in public opinion, those of us who
wish to help the United States are confronted with practical political
problems. We need to be able to point to concrete examples as to why
it is in Costa Rica’s best selfish interest to stay four-­square on the side
of the United States.”
Perhaps it may prove to be impossible to tip the balance immedi-
ately back in our favor on the specific issue of trying to get more Costa
Rican leadership on our side in Latin America on the Castro problem
now. But personally I doubt that this is true, at least to the extent of
strongly recommending that we at once take concrete steps to this end.
Furthermore, I think it is true that we must act now, if only to check this
harmful Costa Rican attitude from growing worse.
Specifically there are at least three local problems on which we
could help if we could give immediate loans or aid to Costa Rica. The
first is the critical need to relieve the public water shortage in San José.
Anything done on this would have a terrific immediate public impact
right here in the capital where national public opinion is moulded.
The price tag on the first stage of this project, which would cure the
current water shortage, is estimated at about $3.5 million. A study
under Point IV as to the general requirements has been made and
paid for by us. Before a specific program could be started, a detailed
engineering study at a cost of about $150,000–$200,000 must be made.
A grant of this amount with expressions of encouragement that a loan
for the final project would be favorably considered would have far-­
reaching public effects, but it alone would not suffice for the politi-
cal objective envisaged, because the substantive work would have to
come much later.
Secondly, Costa Rica’s two-­year-­old application for $5 million of
DLF 10-­year (or better) money to beef up the splendid rural credit sys-
tem of the country would have great impact, and so far as the Embassy
knows needs very little if any more paper work. This loan is partic-
ularly important because of the acute internal problem involving the
entire banking situation following on the probable loss of $2–$3 million
through the coffee scandal and the sharp internal dispute arising out

Costa Rica  447
of the Government’s move in diverting part of the short-­term Chase
Manhattan loan to rural credit purposes.4 A beefing up of the rural
credit system would directly help all walks of life in this country.
Thirdly, the Echandi Administration is attempting to implement,
through local bond issues which it can ill afford, a plan to improve its
own road network, as distinguished from the Pan American Highway.
This is known locally as the Plan Vial. Since every member of the
Assembly has a direct interest in a piece of this project, help on this plan
ought to gain us a lot of good will with the Congress, which is where
we most badly will need it to forestall criticism, if the Executive acts on
Cuba the way we want it to do.
Perhaps as a fourth point, we might try to find moans of purchas-
ing more Costa Rican sugar than they would otherwise expect under
the new law.5
If my recommendations are favorably received in principle, I sug-
gest the desirability of early consultation to work out the best possible
package and to decide on the most important matter of tactics for the
utilization of decisions taken.
Whiting Willauer
4 The proposed use of the $10 million Chase Manhattan Loan is described in desp.
to cut the Cuban sugar quota and make up the deficit by purchases from certain other
countries including Costa Rica. For text of the Act, see 74 Stat. 330.
CR–24.
Letter from the Ambassador in Costa Rica (Willauer)
to the Director of the Office of Central American and
Panamanian Affairs (Stewart)1
San José, July 27, 1960.
Dear Allan:
In your informal Washington roundups of July 15 and 22 (Reverse
Weekas)2 you remark that “President Echandi’s rather shabby perfor-
Official-Informal.
2 The letters from Stewart were not found in Department of State files.

mance made it impossible for the Central American countries to take
action” jointly to break relations with Cuba and you wonder whether
Cuba’s insulting view of San José as the situs for the Meeting of Foreign
Ministers3 “might not change President Mario Echandi’s attitude
toward Fidelismo.”
In fairness to Echandi, and in the hope that the Department will
not let the disappointment that I share with you were unable to per-
suade Echandi to join in a break relations, I wish to recall certain things
to your attention; as Echandi himself did to mine, at the time I obtained
his immediate support to the Peruvian initiative for action in the OAS
on the Cuban problem.
As I have constantly reported there has never been any doubt
Echandi’s own ideological condemnation of “Fidelismo.” He also was
one of the earliest Latin leaders to advocate OAS action against Cuban
communism. His most concrete move towards that was the offer he
made last month which I presented to the Department in my April visit
to Washington.4
As that time you will recall that Castro had just denounced the
Rio Treaty.5 Echandi and I worked out a plan whereby, using this cur-
rent threat to the Inter-American System, Costa Rica would join with
Colombia or with the U.S., or both, or with any other politically palat-
able Latin States in a declaration in the forum of the OAS which would:
1. Demand a showdown on whether Cuba in fact adhered to the
Rio Treaty.
2. Would praise the original objectives of the Cuban revolution and
would offer hemisphere moral and economic support to accomplish
these objectives if and when Cuba’s Government would give proof that
it intended to accomplish these within the principles of the Declaration
of Santiago,6 and was willing to divorce itself from International
Communism.
The plan in (2) above had been advocated by me before the March
28th Castro denunciation of the Rio Treaty in my letters to Assistant
3 Documentation on the Sixth and Seventh Meetings of consultation of Ministers of
Volume. V.
4 Ambassador Willauer departed from San José on April 21 for consultations
in Washington. Documentation on these consultations is in OAP Files, Lot 64 D 66,
“Interdepartmental Memos: Costa Rica, 1960.” He returned to San José on May 3.
5 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for sig-
6 Reference is to Res. I adopted by the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of

Costa Rica  449
the Treaty came I explained my ideas to Echandi. He enthusiastically
adopted them, and authorized me to offer that kind of action to the
Department in my forthcoming visit to Washington.
In my visit it developed that the Department was not prepared
then to go along with a U.S.-Costa Rican declaration, but that explo-
rations of possible Colombian action with Costa Rica would be made
through Bogotá. Nothing apparently came of these.
Whatever may have been the further complicating factors in
Echandi’s failure to join a break of relations (and there have been a
number of these) the fact remains that Echandi insisted that there was
not, at the time he was asked to break, a clear-­cut issue between Cuba
and Costa Rica as nations, as distinguished from the situation in March
where the “peg” for action was the then current defiance of the Inter-
American System.
As also previously pointed out, Echandi wished to be accompa-
nied in his action by the U.S., or by other democratically impeccable
Latin countries. One of the inherent difficulties in his political problem
in the proposed Central American break of relations always was that
Costa Rica would be open to accusation internally and internationally
of joining with Ydígoras and Somoza who had already taken action;
and since there was no current clear issue between Costa Rica and Cuba
to justify Costa Rica’s action in Costa Rica’s own direct interest, Echandi
would have to justify it as solidarity with other countries, two of which
were pretty unpalatable in Costa Rican and hemisphere opinion when
it came to an attack against Cuba based upon democratic principles.
I suggest that this explanation with any comments you care to
make be circulated to my colleagues in the other OAP countries. My
feeling is that would be most unfortunate if Echandi would be chided
by any of the governments of these countries into publicly taking the
position, which has privately expressed to me, that the “U.S. missed the
boat” when it did not accept his offer last April.
With best regards,
Whiting Willauer

CR–25.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in Costa
Rica (Willauer)1
Washington, August 5, 1960.
Dear Whitey:
I refer to your letter to me of July 18, 19602 in which you draw
ticularly convenient that you presented your ideas and suggestions
on assistance to Costa Rica in despatch form since they can be given
appropriate distribution among the various interested agencies of the
government, which ultimately would be involved in any action based
on your suggestions and recommendations. Naturally such distribution
does not occur with letters addressed to the Secretary or me although
these letters do serve to supplement and emphasize in a more personal
way the ideas conveyed more formally in your despatches.
I agree wholeheartedly with you that we would like to have “the
spontaneous support of Echandi toward our ends,” since the lack of
such support appears to have been the crucial element in the recent
failure to achieve the joint break with Castro. However, it does not seem
to me that United States economic assistance should be the quid pro quo
whereby the Costa Rican government would take measures which are
in the long term interest of the Costa Rican people. The decisive factor
should be whether or not the Costa Ricans are vitally interested them-
selves in maintaining the integrity of their political system against the
encroachments of communism and are willing to adopt the measures
necessary to that end. The United States is attempting to supplement
the efforts of the Costa Ricans to maintain and improve their political
and economic system but we are not attempting to supplant the efforts
of the Costa Ricans themselves.
Having said the above, I also wish to say that we have by no means
spared efforts in seeking to respond to president Echandi’s requests for
economic assistance. I can personally verify that enormous efforts were
spent in seeking the reapportionment of the United Fruit tax. Likewise,
with reference to the loan project for the Juntas Rurales, I can say that this
project has had the sympathy and support of myself and other officials in
ARA. A major deterrent in the consideration of all or part of this loan was
1960.” Confidential; Official-Informal. Drafted by Godfrey, on August 3.
2 A copy of this letter is filed with the source text, but not printed.
3 See Document CR–23.

Costa Rica  451
due primarily to the indecision and lack of clarity on the part of the Costa
Ricans themselves, who never provided clear distinctions between this
loan project (originally $5 million) and other projects for loan up to $30
million. The Costa Ricans apparently lost interest in this loan when they
did not receive favorable consideration of their insistence on provision
for a long term and a low interest rate for the loan. As an illustration of
this lack of interest, a request in April 1959 to the Costa Ricans for infor-
mation by the Export Import Bank for data in connection with consider-
ation of the loan remained without reply until March 1960.
With specific regard to the four recommendations for assistance
made in your despatch No. 14 I can make the following comments:
Suggestion No. 1. Water Works Project: As Allan Stewart informed
you in his weekly OAP letter on July 15, we had already discussed such
a loan project with Ambassador Escalante over a year ago and, by coin-
cidence, had just received the Ambassador’s request for assistance in
activating such a project. An informal discussion between Ambassador
Escalante and officials of State and the DLF was held on August 14 with
the result that (1) the Costa Ricans agreed to prepare a formal appli-
cation and (2) that DLF agreed to its engineers informally reviewing
the report by Rader and Associates to see if any additional technical
information would be needed in formulating such an application. It
was informally agreed that the application would include only the first
stage of development recommended in the Rader report for an amount
between $4 to $5 million.
Suggestion No. 2. Rural Credit Loan: Allan reported to you in his
informal letter of April 7, 1960,5 that Alvaro Castro, Manager of the
Central Bank, during his visit to Washington, informed the Export-
Import Bank that the Central Bank did not intend to press for the
time being this loan application. The reason given was that that the
Central Bank wished to see how the loan from Chase Manhattan would
be applied. Castro indicated that the Central Bank might formulate a
new project later this year. Approximately ten days ago Ambassador
Escalante informed us that there was no plan to renew at this time the
Juntas Rurales loan project since funds from the Chase Manhattan loan
were being used for this purpose. Instead, the Ambassador stated the
Costa Ricans wished to press the water works loan project. Until the
Costa Ricans renew the rural credit loan project we are in no position to
renew our efforts in its behalf.
Suggestion No. 3. Road Network (Plan Vial): Over a period of almost
four years the IBRD has discussed with the Costa Rican authorities the
1960.”
5 Not found in Department of State files.

possibility of a loan for road construction and maintenance. As Allan
sent a letter to the Costa Ricans inquiring as to their interest in discuss-
ing a loan of from $5–$8 million for the Plan Vial. Another letter was
sent about a month ago.7 Thus far, the Costa Ricans have failed to reply
to these IBRD requests for an indication of interest in pursuing nego-
tiations on this loan project. We understand that budgetary difficulties
have delayed approval of the generation of local funds for the Plan Vial
but no official Costa Rican explanation of this delay has been received
by the IBRD.
Suggestion No. 4. Additional Sugar Purchases: You have already
been informed of the Department of Agriculture regulation of July
21, 1960, which resulted in an extraordinary opportunity for Costa
Rica to market some 6,267 tons of refined sugar in the United States
by September 30, whereas, the previous increased quota opportunity
had applied only to raw sugar. This provides a special benefit to Costa
Rica which we took pains to convey to the Costa Rican Sugar Board
through Ambassador Escalante. Another “bonus” of 234 tons for Costa
Rica was just announced on August 1 by Agriculture. Costa Rica was
given special consideration in the recent Sugar Act,8 and I am sure you
appreciate that additional special treatment to Costa Rica is not justi-
fied since Costa Rica has not been a traditional exporter of sugar on any
appreciable scale. We shall continue, however, to consider Costa Rica in
the context of its role as a marginal supplier.
I am sure you will agree that in this letter I have reviewed at length
the suggestions contained in your reference letter and despatch. I hope
you will agree, also, that on record we have not been lax or remiss in
our efforts to offer every reasonable facility to the Costa Ricans in their
requests for assistance on the specific points you have raised. Frankly,
I am convinced that the Costa Ricans for one reason or another have
failed to take full advantage of the facilities for economic assistance
offered to them.
With best personal regards,
Sincerely yours,
R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
6 Not found in Department of State files.
7 The IBRD letter under reference was not further identified.
President to cut the quota of U.S. purchases of sugar from Cuba and to reassign these
purchases to domestic and foreign suppliers. (74 Stat. 330) Costa Rica’s final allocation
vol. XVII, p. 126)

Costa Rica  453
CR–26.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Costa Rican Affairs (Feldman).1
Washington, October 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Meeting of Costa Rican Minister of Finance and Economy with Mr. Mann, Assistant
Secretary to Discuss Various Loan Applications Made With the DLF and EXIM
Bank.
PARTICIPANTS:
Minister Jorge BORBON Castro, Minister of Finance and Economy
The Honorable Manuel ESCALANTE Duran, Ambassador of Costa Rica
ARA – Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary
OAP – Mr. Charles E. Higdon, Acting Director
OAP – Mr. Carwell
OAP/C – Mr. Arthur W. Feldman, OIC, Costa Rican Affairs
Minister Borbon opened the meeting by stating that he was in
Washington to discuss the Rural Credit Loan Application with DLF
and the Water Works Project and a loan application for the export of
U.S. cattle to Costa Rica with EXIM Bank. He was pleased with the
sympathetic receptivity shown by the agencies in discussing the loan
applications.
He referred to the letter President Echandi had sent, via his person
to Mr. Mann2 and to the serious situation faced by President Echandi in
obtaining suitable legislation on agrarian reform from the Legislative
Assembly, which is now considering the matter. Several radical
amendments have been tacked on to the bill which would counter
the policy of the Echandi administration by getting the Government
directly involved in the distribution and exploitation of land. The
Administration would prefer that the supervision and distribution of
rural credit be handled through existing agencies, which have made
an outstanding record in this operation over the past 10 years. Minister
Borbon stressed the importance of his returning to Costa Rica with
some written assurance of general agreement on the Rural Credit Loan
Application which President Echandi could then use in obtaining the
legislation he desires. Mr. Mann replied that he was in full sympathy
with President Echandi’s position and would see what could be done
to obtain such written assurance. Mr. Mann also indicated how pleased
A briefing memorandum by Feldman of October 6 on this meeting for Assistant Secretary

he was to be considered a friend by President Echandi, a feeling which
he sincerely reciprocated.
Minister Borbon briefly mentioned the Water Works Project loan
application which he had discussed with EXIM Bank officials and that
he had provided them with the documentation they had requested. He
stated that Ambassador Escalante had raised with DLF the question of
the local money component which would amount to about 50% of the
loan requested. Mr. Mann expressed interest in this project and asked to
be kept informed of the status of the loan application.
Minister Borbon referred to a new loan application he had made
at his meeting with EXIM Bank officials to enable Costa Rica to import
U.S. cattle for breeding purposes and thereby raise the quality and
quantity of local cattle. Minister Borbon believed that the export of
cattle and cattle products from Costa Rica would serve to somewhat
diversify the production of exportable products and thereby lessen the
country’s dependance on coffee and bananas. Mr. Mann agreed that
this was a worthwhile objective and expressed confidence that such a
project would receive a sympathetic hearing by the EXIM Bank.
Mr. Borbon then brought up the question of augmenting the U.S.
sugar quota assigned to Costa Rica. He stated that such an increase
would assist Costa Rica in its efforts to lessen its dependence on coffee
and bananas for income, and would complement the agrarian reform
program since the new farms could then augment not only the dairy
but also the sugar production as well. Mr. Mann explained that the set-
ting up of new sugar quotas was a function of the U.S. Congress, and
that the quota assigned to Cuba could not realistically be cut too deeply
since a new Cuban regime would require assurance of U.S. sales to sup-
port the Cuban economy. Mr. Mann pointed out that if sugar quotas
were increased for some countries at the expense of the Cuban, that
the time might come when the Cuban sugar quota might require revi-
sion upward and this might have to be done by appraising and cutting
back the newly established quotas. Such action would have a delete-
rious economic effect on those countries which had expanded sugar
production to meet the larger quotas assigned them. Minister Borbon
agreed with the seriousness of the problem. Mr. Mann suggested that
Representative Cooly3 might be the appropriate person with whom to
discuss the assignment of a larger sugar quota to Costa Rica, and he
expressed his willingness to favorably support such apportionment.
Minister Borbon informed Mr. Mann that the Costa Rican
Government is having to pay a $500 a day penalty because the Pan
American Highway was not completed by a certain specified date.
3 Harold D. Cooley (D–N.C.), Chairman, Committee on Agriculture House of
Representatives.

Costa Rica  455
(Date not mentioned). He stated that Panama, in a similar position, had
not had to pay the penalty. Mr. Mann was informed that an investiga-
tion had already been started and that a report would be forthcoming
in a couple of days.
Minister Borbon expressed his pleasure at having had a frank dis-
cussion of Costa Rican economic problems with Mr. Mann. Mr. Mann in
turn requested that he be informed of any obstacles which might arise
in the consideration of the loan applications by the DLF and EXIM Bank
and reiterated his intention to reply promptly to President Echandi, giv-
ing a report on the status of the Rural Credit and Water Works Project
loan applications.
CR–27.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Mann) to the President of Costa Rica
(Echandi)1
Washington, November 10, 1960.
Dear Mr. President:
I have delayed telling you what a pleasure it was to hear from you
in the hope that I would be able to give you some definitive answers to
the two questions to which your letter of October 1 refers.2
Both your Minister of Economy and Finance, Mr. Jorge Borbon
Castro, and your Ambassador, Mr. Manuel Escalante, made very effec-
tive presentations concerning both of these projects to the respective
banking institutions. Your personal letter has of course been especially
helpful.
I do not need to tell you of our interest in your plan to open up
new farms. I have talked again today with the Development Loan Fund
about this project. The Fund is awaiting some information which it
expects to receive next week from Costa Rica. I have been assured that
the Fund’s staff is considering this project on an urgent basis and with
sympathy.
by pouch to the Embassy at San José, November 12, 1960. No record of its delivery to
Echandi was found in Department of State files.
2 In his letter, President Echandi asked that the United States finance a plan for cre-
ation of new farms and that it agree to do so in time for him to announce the plan when

In regard to the water works project which is pending before the
Export-Import Bank, you are, I am sure, aware that the International
Cooperation Administration has already made available $20 thousand
to bring up to date the engineering report concerning this. Just as soon
as this report has been brought up to date the Export-Import Bank will,
we are assured, give this its most prompt attention.
I hope to be able soon to report further progress to you concerning
both of these projects.
Please permit me to express again the gratitude of the United States
Delegation to the recent Foreign Ministers meetings in San Jose for the
warmth and hospitality of the Costa Rican Government and people. We
were all distressed here to learn of the recent floods in your wonderful
country and hope that the situation has been brought under control.
Nancy joins me in sending to you and Mrs. Echandi our warmest
greetings and best wishes.
With greatest respect and esteem,
Sincerely yours,
Thomas C. Mann
CR–28.
Telegram from the Chargé in Costa Rica (Kimmel) to the
Department of State1
256. DEPARTMENT PASS DA FOR ACSI AND G–2 USARCARIB,
CINCARIB
Discussed NIACT 3562 this morning first with Foreign Minister and
then with President explaining U.S. prepared respond Ydígoras appeal
for U.S. assistance similar to that made by GOC during weekend.3
for information to Managua and Guatemala.
2 Telegram 356 to San José, also sent to Managua, and repeated for information to
Guatemala City, November 14, 1960, expressed concern over possible “Castro-Cuban-
Communist involvement disturbances Costa Rica, Nicaragua, and Guatemala.” It offered
U.S. air and naval assistance to Guatemala to prevent entry of armed forces or supplies
from abroad, stated that a Guatemalan request for OAS action under the Rio Treaty proba-
bly should follow the request for U.S. assistance, and instructed Embassies at Managua and
3 See Document CR–29.

Costa Rica  457
Explained GON probably making written request for such assistance
today. Echandi said profoundly moved by offer U.S. assistance but
GOC feels no need air or sea patrol or other assistance in present sit-
uation. Although President was convinced Friday night and Saturday
that invasion by Cuban force was occurring, he said subsequent devel-
opments made clear that recent trouble northern Costa Rica caused by
Nica revolutionaries as on previous occasions, with no threat against
CR intended. However, Echandi believes trouble here probably part of
general Commie conspiracy stir up trouble Central America with inten-
tion and hope toppling some governments, if lucky.
Regarding future, President said if any threat against CR develops
directly or indirectly, will ask for U.S. assistance in writing as outlined,
and will ask for OAS action under Rio treaty at same time.
Echandi suggested that if U.S. assistance is extended to Guatemala,
Nicaragua or other countries U.S. might as well issue policy statement
saying U.S. responding to formal request for assistance by governments
and that similar U.S. assistance available when requested in writing by
any CA government invaded or under threat of invasion by external
forces whether Cuban or other Commie elements.
Comment: Country Team chiefs and I agree with President’s
assessment that present situation under control and past weekend
activity probably limited to Nicaraguan revolutionaries. Also agree
with Echandi that Northern CR incident might have been part of gen-
eral plan. Marcial Aguiluz,4 in Costa Rica link to Cuba and has been
involved in previous excursions against Nicaragua.
Kimmel
4 Marcial Aguiluz Orellana was a National Liberation Party Deputy in the Costa
Rican Legislative Assembly and Secretary for Labor in the National Directorate of his
party.

CR–29.
Briefing Paper Prepared by the Officer in Charge of Costa
Rican Affairs (Feldman)1
Washington, November 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
COSTA RICA : Nicaraguan Insurgent Activities on Costa Rica-Nicaraguan Border,
early November, 1960
Chronology
On November 9, a senior officer of the Costa Rican Civil Guard
was captured by Nicaraguan rebels when a small Civil Guard detach-
ment he led went to investigate the reported presence of an insurgent
group in northwest Costa Rica near the Nicaraguan border. A rein-
forced Civil Guard detachment effected his release that same day by
capturing the rebel camp but all the rebels escaped. President Echandi
reportedly ordered the Civil Guard to pursue and liquidate the rebel
groups. The Costa Rican Government, as a precautionary measure
also ordered the temporary detention, pending deportation, of several
prominent Nicaraguan opposition leaders who were living in exile in
San Jose and who were considered to be actively involved in this inva-
sion attempt. On November 11, a Civil Guard patrol was ambushed
by a rebel group in the course of which the Director General of the
Civil Guard was killed.2 Five prisoners, all Nicaraguans, were taken
and flown to San Jose for interrogation. Costa Rican authorities in the
border area reported that four low flying unidentified aircraft dropped
supplies to the Nicaraguans insurgents in the build-­up area early in
the morning of November 12 but this report was not confirmed by our
Chief of the Army Mission,3 who was in the area as an observer.
The Government of Costa Rica, alarmed by conflicting and confus-
ing reports from the so-­called battle front and the death of the Director
General of the Civil Guard, interpreted the events of November 11–12
as portending an attack by an alleged Cuban force against the
Government. In response to an official request for a helicopter to evacu-
ate casualties, our Army Attaché4 received authority to utilize all Costa
The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 A Nicaraguan rebel band in a farm house on the northwestern Costa Rican frontier
3 Col. Frederick J. Bailey, Jr.
4 Lt. Col. Spencer P. Edwards, Jr.

Costa Rica  459
Rican based United States aircraft to evacuate casualties and army field
rations from the Embassy commissary were sent to the troops in the
field.5 A friend of the President approached Embassy officers in his
behalf about 1:30 a.m. of the twelfth with news of heavy fighting on
the border and requested United States air and naval patrols and other
assistance.6 However, when subsequent developments that day made
it clear that the rebels were all Nicaraguans intent on only invading
Nicaragua and that they did not constitute a threat against the Costa
Rican Government, no formal request for military assistance was made
of the United States Government.
Our Army Mission Chief reported that the rebel group which num-
bered about forty men, all Nicaraguans, was now dispersed along the
border by the patrol action of the Civil Guard.7 Although the Costa
Rican Government instituted air search and has augmented the Civil
Guard Patrols in the build-­up area, no rebels have been found since the
ambush of November 11. Our Army Mission Chief has also reported
that as of November 14, he has found no evidence of Cuban weapons
used by the rebels or of Cuban involvement in this attempted invasion
of Nicaraguans.
President Echandi was informed by our Chargé on November 15
of the United States Government offer to help prevent the receipt by the
rebels of supplies, especially from Cuba. President Echandi profoundly
moved by this gesture, gratefully declined the offer since he believed
that his Government had no need for air or sea patrols or other assis-
tance at the present time.
Estimate of the Situation
The sensitivity of the Costa Rican Government to the possibility
of a Cuban led attack against Costa Rica was made evident by the cre-
dence given at first to the unconfirmed reports of such an attack. These
reports were subsequently proven unfounded.
5 The Costa Rican Government asked Bailey and Edwards to make the Inter-
American Geodetic Survey “aircraft available for removal of wounded and for liaison
with the Costa Rican force headquartered at the town of Liberia, south of the Nicaraguan
border. The Army Attaché received permissions from the Caribbean Command to use
the aircraft as required.” (Memorandum by Roy I. Kimmel, Counselor, Embassy in Costa
Foreign Minister Vargas and First Vice President José Joaquín Peralta Esquivel called
Chargé Kimmel to the Presidential Palace and urgently asked for U.S. arms and support
7 On November 12, Bailey flew to Liberia, capital of Guanacaste Province, to investigate
the situation. He reported that the rebels, not more than 40 Nicaraguan revolutionaries, had
been dispersed. Vargas called the Chargé to say that Bailey’s report was correct and that no

It also showed how vulnerable and how unprepared the country
is to repel a well organized attack if one were mounted in force at this
time. The crack-­down on Nicaraguans exiles who were engaged in
plotting against Nicaragua and the Government’s threat to deport all
exiles who engage in subversive activities in Costa Rica against another
country are beneficial results of the unsuccessful invasion attempt.
Despite press reports alleging that Costa Rican Government
sources claimed Cuban collaboration with the Nicaraguan rebels based
in Costa Rica there is no evidence to date of Cuban involvement or
that Cuban arms were in the possession of the rebels. The Costa Rican
Government is in full control of the border situation and there is little
likelihood of a resumption of hostilities. The prompt and aggressive
action by the Civil Guard should reassure the Nicaraguan Government
that it can count on the Costa Rican Government for support in sup-
pressing a small Costa Rican-­based aggressive revolutionary action
against it.

Dominican Republic: U.S. Relations with
­Dominican Republic
DR–1.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle
American Affairs (Wieland) to the Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, January 30, 1958.
SUBJECT
Future Course of Dominican-United States Relations
Problem:
Ambassador Farland recently came up from Ciudad Trujillo for
consultation in the Department on the future course of our relations
with the Dominican Republic. This matter is urgent in view of a talk
the Ambassador had with Generalissimo Trujillo on January 17 when
the latter indicated that he plans to withdraw very soon from an active
role in his country’s affairs, turning over responsibility to others in
fact as well as in name. Trujillo spoke particularly of the pressure the
United States has brought to bear upon him because of the Galíndez-
Murphy affair2; further, his doctors advise him to get rid of his heavy
responsibilities. The policy question thus raised is whether the United
States is willing to resume normal relations so that Trujillo can dis-
engage himself from control without having this delicate process
hindered by the present uncertainties in U.S.-Dominican relations.
If the United States is not willing to clarify the relationship, Trujillo
Fund—1958.” Secret. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 Dr. Jesús de Galíndez, a Spanish citizen formerly resident in the Dominican
Republic, disappeared from New York City on March 12, 1956. Gerald Lester Murphy,
an airplane pilot who claimed he had participated in kidnapping de Galíndez and had
flown him to the Dominican Republic, disappeared from his apartment in Ciudad Trujillo
on December 3, 1956. Documentation on this subject is presented in Foreign Relations,

indicated that despite his long-­standing friendship he could not con-
tinue to cooperate as fully with the United States as in the past. As
an indication of what this would mean, the Dominican Government
recently notified us that it does not plan to attend the Law of the Sea
Conference in Geneva in February.3
This paper discusses this policy question and proposes a position
for Ambassador Farland to take with Trujillo.
Background:
During the past year our relations with the Dominican Republic
have become increasingly strained, primarily because of the Galíndez-
Murphy case, improper activities of Dominican officials and agents in
the United States, and Dominican meddling in other countries’ affairs.
In these circumstances, the United States has refused or hesitated to
act favorably on such normally routine matters as requests for techni-
cal assistance, visits by Dominican officials to the United States, and
export licenses for military equipment. We refused to permit the sale of
jet fighter aircraft to the Dominican Republic even though our Defense
Department found there was military justification for these fighters for
hemispheric defense purposes. The Dominican Republic, on the other
hand, smarting under United States press attacks and official U.S. pres-
sures of various types, has refused to cooperate effectively in clarify-
ing the Galíndez-Murphy cases, has tried to discredit our motives in
pursuing these cases and has tried to stir up trouble in other countries
where the United States has important political interests (particularly
in Guatemala). The recent decision not to attend the Law of the Sea
Conference indicates that Trujillo may try non-­cooperation on interna-
tional questions as a new countervailing tactic. Trujillo himself, at 66, is
weakening physically under the pressures of the situation. He appears
to suffer from high blood pressure, at least, and perhaps from other
organic disorders.
The fundamental U.S. interests in the Dominican Republic and its
political orientation are:
1. Its strategic position in the Caribbean, on the approaches to the
Panama Canal;
2. The guided missile tracking station on the northeast coast;
3. The continuing support the Government of the Dominican
Republic has given us in the United Nations and elsewhere.
3 A United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, attended by delegates from 86
ference is presented in Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. II, United Nations and General
International Matters, Chapter 8.

Dominican Republic  463
Discussion:
Our investigation of the Galíndez-Murphy case has pointed to the
involvement of Dominican officials, notably General Arturo Espaillat,
former Dominican Consul General in New York, and former Cabinet
member for Security. The investigation has also uncovered other evi-
dence of improper Dominican activities in the United States including
use of unregistered agents. John Joseph Frank was tried and convicted
in November 1957 for failure to register as a Dominican agent; Horace
William Schmall was haled before a Federal Grand Jury in January
1958 but refused to testify on grounds of possible self-­incrimination;
Carl Armfelt hastily departed from the Dominican Republic in January
1958 to avoid service of a subpoena to appear before a Federal Grand
Jury. The Dominican Government has employed Sydney Baron of
New York (and through him Morris Ernst and Judge Munson) to con-
duct an independent investigation of the Galíndez case, which per se
tends to impugn the good faith of the Department of Justice investi-
gation. General Espaillat has insulted our Government by stating to
our Embassy that Frank was “framed”. These developments have been
attended by keen public and Congressional interest and as a result
Trujillo and the Dominican Government have been subject to continual
public stigma.
Congressman Porter4 has broadened his interest in the Murphy-
Galíndez case to embrace the whole field of United States policy toward
Latin America, particularly with respect to the “dictatorship countries”.
Last summer Mr. Porter called for a suspension of technical and mili-
tary cooperation with the “dictatorship countries” and sponsored a Bill
to effect this change in policy. The Bill was defeated by a wide margin in
late July but while it was under consideration we felt obliged to refuse
to sell jet aircraft the Dominican Republic was then on the point of pur-
chasing. Other Dominican requests for military supplies or equipment
have been handled on an ad hoc basis. Similarly questions concerning
our technical cooperation program in the Dominican Republic have
been handled on a case by case basis, as have other questions such as a
proposed visit by “Ramfis”5 to Washington next June, and a proposed
visit in February by Admiral Richardson, Chief of the Dominican Navy.
Thus, although there has been no formal change in policy, elements of
uncertainty and hesitation have become very pronounced in our rela-
tions. This paper seeks to clarify our policy with regard to specific areas
of interest.
4 Charles O. Porter (D-Oregon)
5 Rafael L. Trujillo, Jr.

Proposed Position:
It is in our interest to carry on normal cooperative relations with
the Dominican Republic in as many fields as, and to the extent that,
such cooperation can be effective and mutually beneficial within a
framework of mutual respect. At the same time, it should be made clear
to the Dominican Government that the deterioration in relations during
the past year stems directly from improper activities of Dominican
officials in the United States and elsewhere. The disappearance of an
American citizen in the Dominican Republic (Murphy) and the dis-
appearance of another individual in New York who was entitled to
United States protection (de Galíndez) have been of particular concern
to us. The Dominican Republic would not countenance activities by a
foreign power within the Dominican Republic which it itself is carry-
ing out in other countries, and therefore, it should not be surprised by
our official and public reaction to improper Dominican activities in the
United States. Until such activities cease the Dominican Republic can-
not expect the U.S. to overlook them; we shall continue to investigate
evidences of improper or illegal activities and to take such measures to
curb these activities as the facts warrant. Naturally, evidences of illegal
or improper activities thus uncovered do not redound to the credit of
the Dominican Republic and make it more difficult for the U.S. to treat
other aspects of our relations in a normal way.
The initiative of the Generalissimo in bringing this question up
with Ambassador Farland presents us with an opportunity to get our
relations with the Dominicans back on a “normal, cooperative” basis.
We believe that the Ambassador, upon his return to Ciudad Trujillo,
should discuss the range of problems in U.S.-Dominican relations,
pointing out the Dominican activities to which we object and stating
the things the United States is prepared to do if these activities cease.
The essence of our side of the bargain would be reestablishment of
­normal, friendly relations.
We must consider the alternatives to taking a positive approach
to this question. If the Generalissimo actually were to let the authority
drop from his hands at this time, without adequate preparation, a polit-
ical breakdown could occur which would run contrary to U.S. interests.
Over the years, under the authoritarian regime of the Generalissimo, no
one has been prepared to assume any real measure of authority. If the
Generalissimo bowed out now, we might expect (1) Ramfis to become
the real locus of power or (2) Hector6 and Ramfis to take over jointly.
But, (3), if these two possibilities failed, a struggle for power would
probably ensue among the military with resulting instability in this
6 Hector Trujillo, brother of Generalissimo Trujillo, President of the Dominican
Republic.

Dominican Republic  465
important strategic area. An orderly transfer of power thus would be in
our over-­all interest, particularly if such a transfer also gave promise of
political and social responsibility. We hope for a greater measure of the
latter if Ramfis or Hector Trujillo receive power.
Upon his return to the Dominican Republic we propose that
Ambassador Farland inform Trujillo of our position as set forth above
and how it affects the following specific items of interest:
l. Espaillat: Our investigation of the Galíndez-Murphy case has
repeatedly brought Espaillat’s name to light. The Department of Justice
has shown interest in questioning him regarding these cases and we
have asked formally that Espaillat make himself amenable to the usual
procedures in the United States in such matters. We are determined to
continue our efforts to interrogate Espaillat in the United States under
conditions where he can be charged with perjury if he lies. We have
drafted a new note asking that Espaillat come to the United States to
testify. We propose to authorize Ambassador Farland to so inform
Trujillo and, in the context of the discussions, say that he will recom-
mend to the Department that it not be delivered if its purpose can be
achieved informally (i.e., if Espaillat would make himself available).
The Ambassador would explain that we have no desire to embarrass
the Dominican Government by presenting a formal note if the matter
can be arranged informally. (Draft note TAB A).7
2. Other Improper Activities in U.S.
An indicated in our note of November 11, 1957,8 (TAB B) we have
been disturbed over evidence of unregistered Dominican Agents oper-
ating in the United States, the organization of picketing demonstrations,
and distribution of propaganda of a type which friendly governments
do not ordinarily disseminate in another friendly country. We expect
that these improprieties shall cease, as requested in our note.
3. Dominican Meddling in Guatemala, Haiti and Other Areas
The activities of John Abbes Garcia and Onessimo Valenzuela in
Guatemala following the assassination of Castillo Armas9 were of seri-
ous concern to us. Dominican radio attacks on Guatemalan political fig-
ures have gone far beyond the bounds of propriety and truth and have
tended to sow confusion, distrust and division among non-­Communist
political elements in Guatemala at the very moment when these ele-
ments should have been encouraged to submerge their differences in
7 No attachments were found with the source text.
8 Not found.
9 Col. Carlos Castillo Armas, President of Guatemala until his assassination on
July 26, 1957.

the interest of stable, responsible non-Communist government. In Haiti,
Trujillo has given comfort and encouragement to General Kebreau,
despite the fact that the latter has brought pressure on the Haitian
Government not to settle the Talamas matter which is of so much con-
cern to our Government. In Puerto Rico, Governor Muñoz Marin was
forced to ask for the recall of a Dominican Consul because of impropri-
eties. Dominican attacks on Governor Muñoz Marin have been vicious,
distorted and unjustified, and public accusations tending to smear the
Governor as the tool of a Communist conspiracy are neither warranted
by the facts or in keeping with propriety. If the Dominican Government
has evidence of Communist activities in Puerto Rico or in the United
States, we shall appreciate receiving such information through custom-
ary diplomatic channels and we shall take appropriate action to inves-
tigate and curb such illegal activities.
4. Law of the Sea Conference
On January 16 the Dominican Foreign Minister told the Ambassador
that the Dominican Republic would not attend this conference because
it “has no problem” with any country on this question. We interpret this
as foreshadowing Trujillo’s possible future non-­cooperative attitude.
If Ambassador Farland finds his discussion with Trujillo satisfactory
on the first three points above, he will then press for a favorable deci-
sion on Dominican attendance at this conference. RPA is drafting an
instruction.
5. Technical Cooperation
The Department has recommended that the ICA program in the
Dominican Republic not be terminated as the Director of ICA10 has pro-
posed in December, and that the FY 1959 program remain as presently
agreed upon. We believe that the approach to technical assistance in the
Dominican Republic should be as follows: (1) Presently-­operating pro-
grams should follow their normal, presently planned course; (2) No new
fields of activities should be approved for the present; (3) Individual
requests for specific assistance should be considered on their merits
(an example is a recent request for short-­term services of a technician
in connection with airport construction); (4) This approach would be
reviewed from time to time in the light of our over-­all relations with the
Dominican Republic and in the light of how effectively the Dominicans
are cooperating in those programs already in operation.
10 James H. Smith, Jr.

Dominican Republic  467
6. Atomic Energy
we are prepared to cooperate with the Dominican Republic in a program
for developing nuclear “know-­how” and experience through research
and training, and we are ready to assist the Dominican Government in
implementing the existing bilateral agreement on atomic research. We
feel that Dominican interest in a power reactor should be discouraged
for the present pending training of technicians and further planning.
7. Military Assistance
Under the Military Assistance Agreement of March 1953 the
Dominican Republic agreed to maintain one fighter squadron of air-
craft and 10 naval vessels for hemispheric defense purposes.12 Under
the grant military aid program the United States undertook to supply
maintenance and operational support, training and training ammuni-
tion and materiel to modernize the MDAP naval units for more effec-
tive anti-­submarine warfare. Four jet trainer aircraft were furnished.
In December 1956 a Naval Mission Agreement13 was signed but
in April 1957 the Embassy and the Chief of the Naval Mission14 rec-
ommended that no further materiel under the MDAP be allocated to
the Dominican Navy and that our naval programs in the Dominican
Republic confine itself strictly to training activities. The reasons for
these recommendations were the inability of the Dominican Navy to
maintain ships and materiel in a seaworthy condition, graft, and failure
to utilize trained personnel effectively. Since August 1957 these defi-
ciencies are being corrected by the Dominicans and our Naval Mission
believes that an effective program can be carried on.
If Trujillo’s attitude on the first three points above is satisfactory,
Ambassador Farland may inform him that we stand ready to resume
normal cooperation in the Naval program in the Dominican Republic,
and to release materiel under the MAAG Program for agreed force
goals. Requests for export licenses for materiel to replace old or worn-­
out equipment would be considered promptly.
Recommendation:
It is recommended that you sign the attached telegram author­
izing Ambassador Farland to discuss Dominican-U.S. relations with
11 Not found.
12 For text of the agreement, signed at Washington on March 6, and entered into
14 Commander Thomas E. Keyes.

Generalissimo Trujillo in the light of this memorandum and to assure
him that the United States desires to resume normal cooperative
relations in those fields where cooperation can be effective, it being
clearly understood that an essential element in a return to normality
would be satisfactory Dominican cooperation to clarify the Galíndez-
Murphy case and to cease improper activities in the United States and
elsewhere.15
Ambassador Farland to discuss U.S.-Dominican relations with Generalissimo Trujillo in
light of this memorandum. After identifying several issues of contention between the two
countries, the telegram concluded, “If Trujillo prepared cooperate effectively on foregoing
points, thus providing essential element in return to normality hitherto lacking, U.S. pre-
pared treat questions relating technical cooperation program, military program and other
tion with Trujillo that day. The telegram stated in part that the Generalissimo planned to
revoke his decision not to send a delegate to the Law of the Sea conference. Farland con-
cluded, “All evidence indicated Generalissimo highly interested and concerned result my
consultation Washington and at this juncture appears to be willing cooperate all aspects
DR–2.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, June 26, 1958.
SUBJECT
­Congressional Resolution to Cancel Agreements With United States
Ambassador Farland wishes to discuss briefly the problems pre-
sented by the Dominican Congress’ adoption of a Joint Resolution last
week (Tab A)3 calling for the termination of various agreements with
note on the source written by Dulles’ secretary, Phyllis D. Bernau, indicated that the
Secretary saw this memorandum.
3 No attachments were found with the source text. A copy of the joint resolution
adopted on June 18 was transmitted to the Department of State in despatch 612 from

Dominican Republic  469
the United States relating to military and technical cooperation, and
the operation of a guided missile facility in the Dominican Republic.
This Resolution is now under study by the Executive Branch of the
Dominican Government which is expected to take a decision by July
2. Ambassador Farland plans to deliver our views to the Dominican
Foreign Minister this Saturday or Sunday.
Background:
The Dominican Government under the dominance of Generalissimo
Trujillo took this action because of its resentment over the steady crit-
icism it has received from certain members of our Congress and press
as a result of the Galíndez-Murphy affair, and the extravagant indis-
cretions of General Trujillo, Jr. The final insult (in their eyes) was the
recent decision of our Command and General Staff College not to grant
a diploma to General Trujillo Jr. because of his long absences and low
academic standing, although this factor is not included in the bill of
particulars drawn up by the Dominican Congress.
Our Objectives and Proposed Action:
Our objectives in this situation are to preserve our right to operate
the missile tracking station for the ten years agreed upon; continue our
mutual security program if the Dominicans decide after mature con-
sideration that it is in their interest to do so; and to minimize the reper-
cussions of the present incident on our long-­term interest of carrying
on normal friendly relations with the Dominican Republic as one of
the American Republics. To achieve these objectives we plan to inform
the Dominicans by formal note or aide-­memoire that it is our policy to
seek normal friendly relations with the other American Republics and
to carry on present cooperative programs if there is a corresponding
disposition on their part. We are trying to avoid any appearance in the
eyes of the world of threatening or cajoling the Dominicans in this mat-
ter, or of knuckling under to this type of pressure.
Attached is a biographic summary of Mr. Farland (Tab B). The
Ambassador will be accompanied by Mr. C. Allan Stewart.4
4 Deputy Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs. In a memorandum to
Rubottom dated June 25, Stewart explained in detail the background to the joint reso-
lution, and he recommended that Farland deliver to the Dominican Government a for-
Rubottom approved the recommendation on June 27. No record of a meeting between
the Secretary and the Ambassador was found in Department of State files.

DR–3.
Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a
Department of State-Joint Chiefs of staff Meeting1
Washington, June 27, 1958.
[Here follows the record of discussion of agenda items concern-
ing “U.S. Military Representation in the Middle East,”, “Lebanon,” and
“Poland.”
3. Dominican Republic
General White2 said he thought we should try to hold the line
in the Dominican Republic in the face of the Generalissimo’s current
unhappiness. General White noted that part of the proposed note to be
given the Dominicans seemed to take a very strong position as far as
our facilities down there are concerned. Mr. Stewart said that this sec-
tion is being deleted from the note.
Ambassador Farland described the current situation in the
Dominican Republic. Trujillo’s unhappiness is more deeply rooted than
simply the trouble involving Ramfis. Trujillo privately has indicated
his desire to cooperate fully on all military matters with the United
States but feels that we are not reciprocating his desire for coopera-
tion. Recently military cooperation had been improving. If we could
provide some naval assistance, like an old mine sweeper, it would be
very helpful. Ambassador Farland said he thought the note prepared
for him to give the Foreign Minister represents the minimum that we
should do and that in his verbal discussions he will seek to placate the
Dominicans and encourage mutual cooperation.
Ambassador Farland said that the Generalissimo feels that the
action of the United States Army authorities in not giving Ramfis a
diploma is largely political. The Dominicans note that other foreign
students at Leavenworth have received diplomas even though they
were absent for lengthy periods. The Ambassador said he had tried,
to explain the standards of Leavenworth to the Generalissimo. General
Taylor3 said that the critical thing at Leavenworth for all students is to
pass the examinations. [text not declassified]
on the source text indicates that this meeting took place at the Pentagon, and that the
memorandum was not cleared with the Department of Defense. The Department
of Defense was represented by 21 officers, including the Joint Chiefs, the Department of
State by 9 officers, the Central Intelligence by 1, and the National Security Council by
1. Robert D. Murphy, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, headed the
Department of State contingent, which also included Ambassador Farland.
2 Thomas D. White, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force.
3 Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.

Dominican Republic  471
Ambassador Farland said it is difficult for the Dominicans to
understand the freedom of press and public criticism existing in the
United States. He noted that Trujillo would like very much to visit the
United States and inspect our military facilities.
Regarding Trujillo’s retirement the Ambassador said that the
Generalissimo is tired but that his retirement will probably be more a
paper proposition than an actual turnover of control to his brother, the
current President, Hector Trujillo.
Mr. Stewart asked whether the proposed note was all right with
the deletion of the paragraph mentioned by General White. General
White said yes.4
Department of his conversation with Generalissimo Trujillo the previous day. The tele-
gram stated in part, “Conversation concluded with Generalissimo re-­affirming his pro-
U.S. convictions . . . and made point of fact he had personally signed mutual assistance
agreement on behalf of GOD; in view this fact he indicated GOD would weigh cancel-
lation with circumspection. Analyzing all circumstances of and statements made during
discussion I consider good possibility exists continuation program of mutual security and
the Ambassador reported that he had handed the diplomatic note to Foreign Minister
State files.
DR–4.
Editorial Note
On September 16, 1958, the Dominican Congress adopted a joint
resolution abolishing the resolution of June 18. In telegram 121 from
Ciudad Trujillo, September 17, 1958, Ambassador Farland informed the
Department of this action. The telegram stated in part, that the action
of the Dominican Congress reaffirmed “Gimo Trujillo’s policy of associ-
ating the Dominican Republic without vacillation and without reserva-
tion to the ‘destiny of the U.S. and to all peoples in the anti-­Communist
September 18, 1958, the Embassy forwarded to the Department of
State a translation of the joint resolution and also of Dominican
Foreign Office note 28105, dated September 17, which accompanied it.

DR–5.
Memorandum of a Conversation between the Secretary of
State and the Dominican Foreign Minister (Herrera)1
Washington, November 7, 1958.
SUBJECT
Termination of Military Agreements with the Dominican Republic2
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
Mr. Rubottom – Assistant Secretary, ARA
Mr. Little – Deputy Director, CMA
Dominican Foreign Minister Porfirio Herrera Báez
Dominican Ambassador Manuel A. de Moya
Foreign Minister Herrera Báez opened the conversation by stat-
ing that his Government has traditionally followed a policy of close
and friendly cooperation with the United States and that it wished to
continue these policies in the future. He continued by saying that his
present visit to the United States and the purpose of his call on the
Secretary related to the military agreements between our two coun-
tries. His Government had decided, he stated, that it wished to ter-
minate the Military Assistance Agreement of 1953 and the Naval
Mission Agreement of 1956, since his Government believed that the
purposes of those two agreements had been achieved. He said that his
Government hoped that it would be possible for our two governments
to agree mutually that these agreements be terminated in lieu of a uni-
lateral denunciation by the Dominican Republic, reiterating that his
Government did not wish, by its position on these agreements, to indi-
cate any change in its traditional policies toward the United States to
which he had referred. The Minister then handed the Secretary a mem-
orandum embodying this request, which is attached3 Mr. Rubottom
asked the Minister how the desire of the Dominican Government to
terminate the two agreements related to the agreement for the Missile
Tracking Station. The Minister replied that neither that agreement nor
the one covering the Loran station would be affected by this proposal.
Later in the conversation the Minister said that, if his Government in
Drafted by Edward S. Little on November 7.
informed the Secretary of several subjects which Foreign Minister Herrera might want to
discuss, including U.S. military assistance programs, an expression of U.S. appreciation
for Dominican friendship and cooperation, and the Dominican desire for greater access
to U.S. markets. Rubottom also recommended positions for the Secretary to take on these
3 Not declassified.

Dominican Republic  473
the future requested technical aid and equipment, it was hoped that
arrangements could be made for such assistance even though there was
no military agreement. It was apparent from the context of this remark
that the reference was to military aid and equipment, although this was
not specifically stated by the Minister.
The Secretary told the Minister that the Dominican Government’s
request would be studied carefully and said that he appreciated the
comments of the Minister regarding the attitude of his Government
toward cooperation with the United States. He stated that it would
be fruitless to deny that in the recent past there have been points of
disagreement between our two governments. He said that some coun-
tries in the world take certain actions with which we agree to a greater
or lesser degree, whereas others sometimes do things that we cannot
approve. The United States Government’s attitude is that other coun-
tries, being sovereign nations, may do as they wish in conducting their
internal affairs and that we will respect their sovereignty, but neverthe-
less we do have opinions on their actions. The Secretary alluded to the
fact that some of the things the Dominicans have done in the past have
had a poor public relations reaction here in the United States, mention-
ing specifically the letters of the former Minister of Commerce4 which
were critical of certain Congressional figures in the United States. The
Secretary stressed that the public reaction in the United States to acts
of others was beyond our government’s control and was a fact of life
which must be accepted. Nonetheless, the Secretary added, the United
States Government believes that our two governments should work
together to resolve our mutual problems. Mr. Rubottom commented
at this point that, as Ambassador de Moya was fully aware, a number
of problems affecting relations between our two countries have arisen
in recent months and that our government’s effort has always been to
deal with them in a way which would meet the objectives of both of our
governments.
Turning to another subject, the Foreign Minister said that he thought
Ambassador Lodge’s meeting on China with the Latin American del-
egates to the UN General Assembly in New York was very timely and
useful. In response, the Secretary briefly described his trip to Taiwan to
see President Chiang and some of the issues raised by the division of
China by communism.5
Before the Minister rose to leave, the Secretary said that he had
one comment he would like to make. He wished to tell the Minister,
and asked him to pass on his thought to his President and to the
4 Juan O. Velázquez, Minister of Industry and Commerce.
Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XVI, East Asia-Pacific Region; Cambodia; Laos.

Generalissimo, that the United States appreciates the important role
played by the Dominican Government in the development of the
Caracas anti-­communist pact.6 The Minister expressed his appreciation
for the Secretary’s statement and said he would transmit the Secretary’s
comment to his government.
It was agreed during the conversation that no publicity would
be given to the Dominicans’ intention to terminate the two military
agreements and as the Minister left the Secretary’s reception room he
explained to waiting newsmen that he had come to Washington only to
pay a courtesy call on the Secretary. After leaving the Secretary’s office,
the Minister stated to Mr. Rubottom that he hoped to be able to meet
later with Mr. Rubottom to learn the reaction of our government to the
Dominican request prior to returning to Ciudad Trujillo. Mr. Rubottom
replied that we would wish to discuss the matter with interested
officials of the Departments of State and Defense and suggested the
possibility of a meeting Saturday morning. The Minister agreed and
Mr. Rubottom said that we would advise Ambassador de Moya later in
the day if such a meeting could be worked out.
6 Reference is to Resolution XCIII, titled, “Declaration of Solidarity for the
Preservation the Political Integrity of the American States Against the Intervention of
International Communism,” approved on March 28, 1954 at the Tenth Inter-American
Tenth Inter-American Conference: Report of the Delegation of the United States of America with
DR–6.
Telegram from the Ambassador in the Dominican
Republic (Farland) to the Department of State1
Ciudad Trujillo, December 3, 1958, noon.
210. Have had lengthy meeting with Generalisimo. Advised him
I had been called to the Department for consultation as result GODR
memorandum given by Foreign Minister to Secretary Dulles, and that
on basis this memorandum U.S. in spirit cooperation is now prepared
honor request. However, pointed out that Ambassador De Moya had

Dominican Republic  475
informed me that action requested per said memorandum was not
in actual accord with that which had been contemplated by GODR,
that inactivity was preferable to termination, and that Generalisimo
expressed wish to discuss matter with me prior to any definite decision
by either signatory. Further, if this be the case, and in view Ambassador
De Moya’s statement concerning necessity hemispheric solidarity, the
Department with same spirit cooperation considers it appropriate to
ascertain Generalisimo views prior to implementing request.
After offering a number of thin excuses for not having had discus-
sion with me prior to time Foreign Minister delivered memorandum,
Generalisimo stated Herrera Baez mission was not to ask termination
of MAP agreement as such but rather his commission was to work out
best possible solution of MAP agreement difficulties together with
related matters, and if that effect non-­productive then to suggest ter-
mination as last alternative. Therefore for purpose re-­establishment his
position, Generalisimo requested convey to Secretary Dulles complete
assurances of GODR desire for cooperation and sincere friendship, stat-
ing both of which will continue as long as he has voice in GODR. He
added that long ago he had cast his country’s lot with the policies of the
U.S. and that he would not change that relationship.
He stated that in view this fact and to prevent further misinterpre-
tation he desired to meet with me in next few days to discuss his gov-
ernment concepts and policies in regard to military assistance program.
He further stated that he would ask the President, Vice President,2
Foreign Minister and if possible Manuel De Moya to attend said meet-
ing. He noted that the Foreign Minister was expected back from Mexico
shortly and that he would forthwith wire Ambassador De Moya in
Paris. He hoped further delay these few days would not complicate
matters. I explained time primary importance to U.S. and meeting must
be expedited. Atmosphere of meeting extremely friendly. Generalisimo
expressed appreciation for U.S. cordiality evidenced during Secretary-
Foreign Minister meeting and for the Secretary’s observations made at
that time.
Comment: Conversation indicated change of policy as reported to
me by Ambassador De Moya at meeting November 24. As yet unable to
ascertain extent this change. However in conjunction therewith it note-
worthy that Trujillo, Jr. was not included among those persons suggested
for aforementioned meeting. Also of interest is that Gereralisimo made
great point of informing me Arturo Espaillat had been removed from
all active military connections while engaged commercial activities.
The “observation” made during meeting with Ambassador De Moya
November 17 concerning Richardson and Espaillat apparently effected
2 Joaquín Balaguer.

Richardson’s release from prison and Espaillat’s placement in reserve
status. Naval mission now receiving more cooperation than anytime
heretofore. On other hand Air Force MAAG completely inactive.3
Farland
Department on his conference on the military agreements with Generalissimo Trujillo,
President Trujillo, Vice President Balaguer and Foreign Minister Herrera. The telegram
stated in part, “Following completely frank discussion, Generalissimo stated that he
believed better approach would have been re-­negotiation. I informed Generalissimo that
Department had heretofore agreed to re-negotiation but this had been superseded by
December, 24, 1958, stated in part, “Ambassador Farland is commended for his han-
dling of meeting with Dominicans and for the position he took in declining to offer to
Generalissimo a solution to the problem as requested by him, as well as for the effective
presentation of Ambassador’s position vis-à-­vis Dominican request for loan of ships and
DR–7.
Despatch from the Chargé in the Dominican Republic
(Lofton) to the Department of State1
Ciudad Trujillo, May 26, 1959.
No. 481
SUBJECT
An Assessment of the Political Future of the Dominican Republic.
An assessment of current thinking concerning the possible politi-
cal future of the Dominican Republic is set forth below in view of the
intensification of Communist efforts in Latin America, invasion threats
now circulating, the increasing age and pressures under which the mor-
tal Generalissimo works, and the apparent failure of Trujillo to take any
public steps toward designating a successor.
On the theory that many minds are better than one, one of the
reporting officers (Mr. Barfield) has just completed a survey of avail-
able qualified opinion. Four key questions were asked in the survey, but
some of the contacts were of such delicate nature that specific questions
were omitted. The group queried (a total of twenty four) was comprised
by Harry M. Lofton, Chargé d’Affaires, and John D. Barfield, Second Secretary of the
Embassy.

Dominican Republic  477
of eleven official Americans, three members of the local diplomatic
corps, two American clergymen, four American businessmen, and four
Dominican citizens. No one who has lived in the Dominican Republic
less than a year was approached. Excluding Dominicans, the average
length of residence here of the participants is approximately three years.
The questions posed and their answers follow:
(1) Do you think there will be a serious invasion attempt against
the Dominican Republic in the next six months and, if so, would it be
successful?
Answer – Eighteen answered that they believed there would be no
serious invasion attempt within the next six months and six indicated
one is unlikely. Only one person predicted that an invasion would be
successful if attempted.
(2) How long will the present regime survive?
Answer – All but one person expressed the belief the present regime
will survive until the Generalissimo becomes seriously incapacitated
or dies. The average estimate before this would transpire, was approx-
imately four years. One source thinks the Generalissimo would retain
control for an indefinite period even though seriously incapacitated – ­in
much the same fashion as Henri Christophe did in Haiti.2 (It is noted that
Trujillo’s mother is reportedly 96 years old and is still active.)
(3) What will be the sequel to the downfall of the Generalissimo
with respect to the assumption of authority?
Answer – Five sources said all contenders are so far overshadowed
by the Generalissimo that it is impossible to make anything approxi-
mating an intelligent prediction. One said son Ramfis would take over
on a permanent basis together with President Hector Trujillo. Two held
out strongly for the chances of Lt. General Jose Garcia Trujillo. The
remaining vast majority simply stated that a military junta would take
over. Only two said this would be done without violence. The prevail-
ing sentiment was that a relatively short period of time of tranquility
will transpire, accompanied by furious jockeying for power behind the
scenes, before the onset of inevitable violence.
(4) Will the government that eventually stabilizes the political situ-
ation be more or less cooperative with the United States than the pres-
ent one?
Answer – Nine answered more cooperative, nine about the same,
and four less cooperative.
2 Reference is to a leader of the Haitian war of independence who established a
kingdom in northern Haiti in the first years of the nineteenth century. Henri Christophe
suffered a paralytic stroke in 1820 and committed suicide later that year when revolts
broke out at news of his incapacitating illness.

Summary of Survey: Most of the persons questioned qualified their
remarks; therefore, the above is something of an oversimplification. A
basic pattern of expectation emerges, however, from a consideration of
this and other data available. There will be no serious invasion attempt
against the Dominican Republic within the next six months and if there
should be one, it will not be successful. The present government, will
probably survive until the death or serious incapacitation of Trujillo.
This is not likely to happen (barring death by violence) within less than
two years or more than ten, but when it does a military junta will take
over after a period of violence. Such violence will likely occur within
a year (or two at the outside) after the Generalissimo’s death and the
emergent military junta will probably not include any of the Trujillo
family. Several of the Trujillo family now show a potential to assume
control including Lt. General Jose Trujillo Garcia and Brig. General
Virgilio Trujillo. Except for one dissenting vote, all participants in the
above survey discounted “Ramfis” as a prospective political entity
except, perhaps, transitionally. He is not popular with the Armed
forces, is not noted for perseverance, and is not thought to be highly
motivated toward continuing in his father’s footsteps.
Comment: Although the majority of those queried did not predict it,
there is enough evidence to support a prediction that the military junta
possibly will set the stage for a more democratic government. Recently,
one of the reporting officers had a conversation with an influential pro-
fessional man who essentially corroborated the statements previously
made by other sources relating to the role of the professional class in
the post-Trujillo era.
He referred to a “democratic explosion” in the Latin American
area and emphasized the existence of competent persons in Dominican
society who would be capable of giving a more democratic twist to
the Dominican Government when the time arrives. He also stated that
his group of friends has undergone considerable harassment in recent
times. The crux of the matter is likely to be whether or not this group
can prevail over the insidious attempts of the Communists to infiltrate
Dominican power circles on Trujillo’s exit.
The Embassy agrees with the views of the professional mentioned
above that there no doubt exists competent persons in Dominican business
and professional circles not only capable of producing, but undoubtedly
desirous of a more democratic regime, but it is of the strong opinion that
these groups are not now willing to risk or assist in a change. Numerous
persons of these groups have repeatedly mentioned to Embassy officers
that they are most apprehensive in regard to the Cuban situation with
particular emphasis on the Communist menace and the obviously social-
istic share-­the-­land-­and-­wealth programs of Castro.
The majority of commercial and professional Dominicans probably
harbor no personal love for Trujillo as there are few that the 29 year Era

Dominican Republic  479
has not touched in some manner. They are, however, quick to empha-
size their economic well being derives from the Trujillo regime and
openly state they would be most reluctant to move against it or effect
drastic changes, even after Trujillo’s demise. They would prefer and
will probably demand a transition to a much more democratic regime
through which their personal interests would continue to be protected.
Politically significant discontent exists in several segments of the
population. The Embassy does not consider that such discontent is likely
to erupt in overt revolution under present circumstances. Elements
of disconent have been discerned within the professional classes, the
younger military officer class (not considered to be extensive and dif-
ficult to estimate), the non-Trujillo middle class merchant group, the
well to do agriculturists of the Cibae. Recently, an Embassy officer has
observed a nucleus of potential disaffection within the group of high
level business associates of the Generalissimo. Members of the two lat-
ter groups must be classified as opportunists who will swing with the
tides of fortune.
The Embassy considers the most important political development
since January 1 affecting the Dominican Republic was the downfall
of Batista, Castro’s action in placing numerous military supporters of
Batista before the firing squad doubtless converted many Dominicans
who previously adhered to his cause to active enemies, through fear of
any Castro inspired action against the Dominican Republic.
The anticipation of violence marking the end of the “Era of Trujillo”
inclines most people to “bear the ills they have rather than fly to others
they know not of”, particularly when the present economic and politi-
cal situation is compared to the pre-Trujillo one and the choice between
retrogression and painful advance is contemplated. There seems little
doubt that a greater degree of unity was achieved by Trujillo during
the months of January, February, and March of this year than has been
previously observed within recent years. Fear of Castro has probably
accomplished for Trujillo what nothing else could have.
Since the conference of American ambassadors at San Salvador
and the intervention of the OAS in Panama, this unity has dissipated
somewhat, motivated primarily by the adverse economic picture and
lessening tension. However, in view of the recent slight increase over
the previously existing rock bottom price for sugar and the encouraging
upturn in the U.S. economy which sooner or later should be reflected
in the Dominican economy, some improvement in the economic situa-
tion here is foreseen. Therefore, if the Dominican Government exercises
even a modicum of restraint with respect to its purchases of weapons
abroad, it appears probable that a reasonable degree of political stabil-
ity may be contemplated for the Dominican Republic for the foreseeable
future. A most important prerequisite for the validity of this prediction
is that the Dominican Government will take no overt step to exacerbate

its international problems. This unfortunately, cannot be guaranteed. A
factor auguring well for the future, however, is the current absence of
the bitter diatribes against Betancourt in the local press which appeared
both before and since his inauguration as President of Venezuela and
the tangible steps taken to normalize relations between the two coun-
tries. The result of this campaign are, however, problematical.
The most influential group of Dominicans today consist of those
who are wealthy industrialists and property owners and who have
benefitted directly from the Trujillo regime. Because of their influence,
numbers, and popular support which they control, this group must
be considered in any analysis of future political developments in the
Dominican Republic. The recent policies of Castro have unquestionably
had a profound effect and have noticeably instilled fear in this import-
ant element. During recent weeks members of this group have indi-
cated to Embassy officers their strong belief that if Trujillo were to meet
his demise today, by natural causes or violence, they and their support-
ers would through the framework of the Dominican Party supported by
the military, be able to continue for some time the status quo with a view
to gradual transition to a more democratic government. While mem-
bers of this influential group have long supported the Generalissimo,
they have not indicated they wish to continue indefinitely with Ramfis
or other members of the family. This group could be visualized as sup-
porting a figurehead (perhaps President Hector Trujillo) while moving
toward a more democratic government similar to that of the Somzas in
Nicaragua.
Whatever happens, a most significant factor to bear in mind is the
basic friendliness of the Dominican people to the United States. There
is unquestionably a reservoir of goodwill toward the U.S. among all
levels of Dominican society. At the time of the June 16 resolution of
the Dominican Congress to cancel aid agreements with the United
States, it was apparent from numerous indications that knowledge-
able Dominicans did not agree with the official line attributing the
Dominican Republic’s economic and political woes to the United States.
One final factor in the analysis of the political future of the
Dominican Republic which should not be overlooked is the fact that the
people are not now politically educated to accept democracy as it exists
in the United States. The person who emerges either from the ashes of
the Trujillo regime or from a relatively peaceful transition must be a
forceful leader, albeit not necessarily as dangerously leftist as Castro or
extremely rightist as dictator Trujillo.
In conclusion the Embassy must, perforce, qualify the above by
stating that dependable and objective Dominican sources of informa-
tion, as in all totalitarian countries, are scarce and hard to find.
Harry M. Lefton

Dominican Republic  481
DR–8.
Editorial Note
On June 14, 1959, Generalissimo Trujillo informed Ambassador
Farland of an attempted invasion of the Dominican Republic that after-
noon. In telegram 480 from Ciudad Trujillo, June 14, Farland reported
the following to the Department: “Trujillo advised me at 8:15 tonight
that one transport aircraft landed at Constanza late this afternoon with
18 insurgents aboard. Dominican Army garrison reported in pursuit.
Origin and nationality group as yet unknown. Landings momentarily
and will keep Embassy fully informed. Ciudad Trujillo calm and as yet
unaware this information but considerable military air activity noted
484 from Ciudad Trujillo, June 15, Farland reported on discussions with
Foreign Minister Manuel de Moya who stated that members of the insur-
to telegram 487 from Ciudad Trujillo, June 16, Moya informed Farland
that day that one of the invasion planes was chartered in Miami and
During the following days fighting erupted between the
Dominican Army and the insurgents, who had split into several small
groups. In telegram 493 from Ciudad Trujillo, June 18, Farland stated in
part, “Rumors continue confirm my original assumption collaboration
[between the insurgents and the garrison of Constanza]. Highly reli-
able source reports landing known to clandestine group several days
prior invasion and that number organized Dominican civilians made
sis of State and Central intelligence Agency material reported to the
in part, “Landings in the Dominican Republic appear to be relatively
successful and the government appears to have failed to stamp them
out. One of the main sources of these invaders is Cuba, where a drastic
purge of air force officers was carried out during the past week. This
purge was instigated by Raúl Castro and eliminated officers known to
be seriously concerned with the communist penetration in the armed
forces.” (Eisenhower Library, DDE Diaries)
In telegram 529 from Ciudad Trujillo, June 26, Farland stated in
part, “As final mopping up insurgents continues, of major importance
is fact that Dominican Campesinos gave full support and allegiance to
Trujillo. Failure of insurgents to win expected cooperation this group
preliminary caused defeat at Constanza and rout on north coast.”
July 2, Assistant Secretary Rubottom and Venezuelan Ambassador
Marcos Falcon-Briceño discussed a Dominican request for convoca-
tion of a special session of the Council of the Organization of American

States to consider the Dominican charge that preparations for an inva-
In a memorandum to Acting Secretary of State Herter dated July 6,
1959, Rubottom discussed the COAS meeting scheduled for that after-
noon. Suggesting a possible U.S. position at this meeting, Rubottom
recommended that U.S. representatives ask the Council of the OAS
to defer action on the specific request of the Dominican Republic and
to support the convening of a meeting of Foreign Ministers under the
Charter of the OAS to consider the entire problem of tension in the
Caribbean area. (ARA Deputy Assistant Secretary Files, Lot 61 D 411,
“OAS, 1959”) Documentation on the fifth meeting of consultation of
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics, which was
convoked to consider tensions in the Caribbean area, held at Santiago,
DR–9.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubbottom) to the Acting
Secretary of State1
Washington, December 10, 1959.
SUBJECT
Policy to Meet Contingencies in the Dominican Republic
Discussion:
1. Problem.
To determine what should be the policy and posture of the United
States towards the Dominican Republic with a view especially to pre-
venting, if possible, the establishment of a Castro-­like regime in the
event of the end or fall of the regime of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo
before the end of 1960.
Republic Planning and NSC Briefings 1960.” Secret; Limited Distribution. The source text
was Tab A attached to a covering memorandum from Hill to Rubottom dated December 3,
1959. It is a summary of a longer paper entitled “Current Policy Toward the Dominican
Republic,” which accompanied it as Tab B, not printed. In the covering memorandum,
Hill suggested a handling procedure whereby Rubottom would review both papers, send
the summary forward for approval to Livingston T. Merchant, Under Secretary of State
for Political Affairs, and, if approved by him, assign the coordination and implementa-
tion of the policy to CMA.

Dominican Republic  483
In view of a distinct possibility that the Government of
Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo might face a crisis or fall before the end
of 1960, it is of great importance that the United States work, without
exposing itself to charges of violation of non-­intervention commit-
ments, towards assuring insofar as possible that any successor govern-
ment is reasonably friendly to the United States and in harmony with
U.S. objectives for Latin America. In particular, the coming to power
during the critical months ahead, of a Castro-­like government in the
Dominican Republic might very well set in motion a chain reaction,
replacing the Government of Haiti and probably one or more gov-
ernments in the Central American area with governments more in
consonance with Castro’s way of doing things than ours. Such a devel-
opment, added to the Panamanian problem, could give rise to a much
more serious situation in the Caribbean than we now face and would
seriously jeopardize our chances of effectively dealing with the Cuban
situation.
It will admittedly be difficult for an experienced leadership
friendly to the United States to fill the vacuum in the Dominican
Republic if and when the Trujillo regime goes, and we cannot be cer-
tain that anything we can do would make such a result certain. The
authoritarian regime which has governed the Dominican Republic
for a generation has effectively liquidated and enfeebled virtually
all potentially rival and democratic leadership while the current
‘anti-dictatorship’ feelings of Latin American and the inevitable urge
to settle old scores upon the exit of the dictator will tend to give an
opening to the radial leadership supported by Castro and, in many
cases, infiltrated by pro-Communist elements.
There are, however, several factors which give some hope and an
opportunity worthwhile taking to reach our goals. Among the profes-
sional and commercial classes, including the active student elements,
of the Dominican Republic there is growing determination to take
action to supplant the Trujillo regime with a more democratic regime
which would, however, not be patterned on, or susceptible to guid-
ance from, Castro. These elements are usually friendly to the United
States, although of late there has been growing resentment against us
for not playing a role in overthrowing Trujillo. Certain elements among
them think they have, or are working on obtaining, military support
and may if they can get organized make an attempt to overthrow the
government at an early date. Whether or not this attempt takes place or
succeeds, it is primarily to this group that we must look for a govern-
ment in accord with our interests because (a) at present, in the event of
the death, incapacity, assassination, or overthrow of the Generalissimo,
it appears improbable that his regime can long be successfully carried
on by any member of his family or other strongmen, and (b) the more

radical leadership, now represented by Dominican exile organizations
in Cuba, Venezuela and elsewhere, would be unlikely to establish a
government in accord with our interests.
The period of greatest danger, as it appears now, will be in the
next ninety days when deteriorated economic conditions will coin-
cide with the fear of moderate ant-Trujillo elements that if they do not
move quickly they might be discovered and liquidated. Should the
Generalissimo survive and weather this period, the prospect is fair that
there will be time for a stronger and better organized moderate group
to prepare itself to step in at the time of his eventual exist.
2. Proposed Policy.
The essentials of the policy towards the Dominican Republic
which, with your approval, would guide us through 1960 would be:
a) In the event that the Generalissimo survives this period, main-
tain our official contacts with his government at their present almost
minimal level while discreetly expanding our contacts with moderate
elements and orienting our policies, actions and statements primarily
towards encouraging them to be prepared to establish a successor gov-
ernment friendly to us and our objectives.
b) In the event that an attempt is made to install a government
bringing to power members of Trujillo’s family or clique upon his
leaving the scene, recognize that such a government is unlikely to
achieve stability and withhold recognition or support until it is clear
that there is a reasonable chance of stability and/or a significant num-
ber of other American Republics extend recognition on their own
initiative, meanwhile also orienting ourselves so as to encourage the
moderate elements.
c) In the event of a seizure of power by moderate elements with a
reasonable chance of success, be prepared promptly to extend recog-
nition and support and to exercise our influence to encourage the new
government to oppose infiltration by pre-Castro and pro-Communist
elements.
d) In the event of a take-­over by pro-Castro or pro-Communist
elements, withhold recognition as long as there might be hope for
an immediate counter-move by moderate forces but, if this does not
materialize, extend recognition in concert with the other American
Republics but continue to orient our policies, actions and statements so
as to encourage moderate elements.
Recommendations
That you approve the policy outline in paragraph 2 above for
the general guidance of the Department, other agencies concerned,
and the American Ambassador at Ciudad Trujillo, in which event I

Dominican Republic  485
would send out more detailed implementing guidance as shown in
the enclosure.2 It is understood, of course, that the rapidly developing
situation might require review and revision of these estimates and
guidance at any time.3
2 Not printed.
3 A notation on the source text indicated that Dillon approved and initialed this
memorandum on December 17, 1959.
DR–10.
Memorandum of Discussion at the 432nd Meeting of the
National Security Council1
Washington, January 14, 1960
4. U.S. Policy Toward the Dominican Republic
Mr. Gray3 said the State Department had requested that this sub­
ject be considered by the Council on the basis of a presentation by the
Department. He called on Mr. Merchant.
Mr. Merchant said the U.S. objective in the Dominican Republic
was to seek to ensure that if the present regime in that country falls, the
successor regime will be friendly to the U.S. We want to neutralize the
ability of Cuba to influence any post-Trujillo regime. There appears to
be little prospect of a Communist take-­over in the Dominican Republic,
although an internal revolution against Trujillo is possible. A post-­
Trujillo government sympathetic either to Castro or to Communism
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted
on March 31, 1960, by Marion W. Boggs, Deputy Executive Secretary, National Security
Council. The portions omitted from this memorandum cover the following agenda
items: “1. U.S. Policy Toward South, Central and East Africa,” “2. Significant World
Developments Affecting U.S. Security,” “3. U.S. Policy Toward Cuba,” “5. Prevention of
Unauthorized Disclosure of NSC Documents and Deliberation,” and “6. The Situation in
Iraq.” In preparation for the NSC meeting, Rubottom transmitted to the Acting Secretary,
under cover of a memorandum dated January 13, 1960, a “talking paper” containing the
rationale for the U.S. position on the Dominican Republic and a copy of the policy guide­
Files, Lot 62 D 1, “Cuba and the Dominican Republic”)
2 Reference is to the NSC paper titled “U.S. Policy Toward Latin America,” February
3 Gordon Gray, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.

would be dangerous from the point of view of the U.S. Our objective
in the Dominican Republic, however, is difficult of attainment because
moderate elements who have opposed Trujillo are widely dispersed
so that the only active anti-Trujillo groups in the area at the present
time are either Communist or Communist-­infiltrated. There are some
elements of hope in the professional, business and academic groups.
Our actions in the months ahead will be designed to coalesce these
groups. Mr. Merchant then read a statement that he characterized as
internal policy guidelines: (1) in the event Trujillo survives, maintain
present official contacts with the Dominican Republic and expand our
contacts with moderate elements in the country prepared to establish
a successor government; (2) if an attempt is made to bring a Trujillo
clique into power upon the disappearance of Trujillo, recognize that
such an arrangement has little chance of achieving political stability;
(3) in the event of a seizure of power by moderate Dominican elements,
extend prompt recognition and support to the new government; (4)
in the event a pro-Castro government succeeds Trujillo, withhold U.S.
recognition if any hope exists for a counter-­move against such a gov-
ernment, but if no such hope exists recognize the new government in
concert with other Latin American republics.
Mr. Rubottom said there had been a surprising coalescence in the
Dominican Republic of moderate elements friendly to the U.S. and
convinced that a move against Trujillo must be made soon. Trujillo
has been trying to consolidate his position and has split with his son,
a development which may be the prelude to further repressive moves.
Mr. Stans4 asked whether there was not a military assistance program
of $1.6 million for the Dominican Republic. Mr. Rubottom said that
actually less than $400,000 worth of equipment had been sent under
this program. Any new military assistance program would be confined
to spare parts. The Vice President5 said that bad as the situation was in
the Dominican Republic, he felt the situation in Haiti was even worse.
It seemed to him that the situation in Africa was similar to the situation
in Haiti. Mr. Dulles said the situation in Africa was worse than in Haiti.
The National Security Council:
Noted and discussed the subject in the light of an oral presentation
by the Department of State.6
4 Maurice H. Stans, Director, Bureau of the Budget.
5 Richard M. Nixon.
6 This paragraph constitutes NSC Action 2178.

Dominican Republic  487
DR–11.
Editorial Note
Large numbers of Dominicans were arrested in January 1960 on
charges of conspiring to overthrow the régime of Generalissimo Trujillo.
Farland advised the Department of a proposal received from the Papal
Nuncio Lino Zanini, that they present Trujillo, with a note verbale
requesting general clemency for the Dominican political prisoners. The
telegram stated further that Farland advised the Nuncio of the deli-
cacy of the United States position regarding non-­intervention in the
internal affairs of other nations. The telegram concluded, “However,
I assured Nuncio that if circumstance propitious, prior my departure.
I would informally express to GODR principles involved aforesaid
note in context hoped for diminution Caribbean political problems.”
commended Ambassador Farland for his handling of the approach by
the Papal Nuncio. The telegram stated further, “Should opportunity
arise, Department would not object to Ambassador’s informal approach
(independent of Nuncio’s) appropriate GODR official in most discreet
way pointing out that while U.S. strongly adheres to non-­intervention
principle it is concerned with problem of possible general amnesty for
humanitarian reasons and from point of view of reduction of tensions
On January 31, 1960, a pastoral letter from the six Roman Catholic
bishops in the Dominican Republic was read in all Dominican churches.
This letter reaffirmed the rights of freedom of conscience, the press, and
assembly, stressed the Church’s determination to alleviate the suffering
of the Dominican people, and urged Generalissimo Trujillo to end the
excesses which plagued the nation. On March 3, in response to this pas-
toral letter, Trujillo stated that he could not interfere with the judicial
proceedings then underway, but added that he would free all women
held prisoner under the conspiracy charges.
In a synopsis of State and Intelligence material reported to the
President, dated March 10, John S. D. Eisenhower stated, “There is no
prospect for an early improvement in the deteriorating church-­state
relations in the Dominican Republic which have contributed to a seri-
ous weakening of the Trujillo dictatorship. The church leaders’ demand
for clemency for political prisoners has not been satisfied by Trujillo’s
3 March statement.” (Eisenhower Library, DDE Diaries)
On February 15, 1960, the Council of the Organization of American
States adopted a proposal providing for an investigation of the Dominican
situation by the Inter-American Peace Committee, which was reacti-
vated at the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of the American Republics, held at Santiago in August 1959.

DR–12.
Telegram from the Chargé in the Dominican Republic
(Dearborn) to be Department of State1
Ciudad Trujillo, February 9, 1960, midnight.
431. Today I accompanied Senator Smathers2 to remarkable inter-
view with Generalissimo. Also present were President Hector Trujillo,
Vice President Balaguer, Secretary De Moya, William D. Pawley, and
three members Smathers’ party.
Senator initiated substance conversation by expressing apprecia-
tion for Generalissimo’s support in United Nations generally and par-
ticularly against international Communism. Said he recognized Trujillo
had long been friend of United States. Generalissimo thanked Senator
and remarked he would appreciate a little help now and then in his fight
against Communists. Senator continued he well knew Generalissimo
had done great deal for his country in many ways and compared prog-
ress now evident in Dominican Republic with situation here prior to
Trujillo’s time. Senator remarked that bearing in mind friendship which
he had for Trujillo and former’s respect for accomplishments already
made, Senator would like see him rise to even greater eminence. Said
it seemed to him Trujillo had opportunity rise to heights and fame
unparalleled by any past or present Latin American Dictator. This
opportunity was to arrange while still alive for transition to moderate
democratic government. Senator noted all men had to die sometime for
one reason or another and this would have to happen to Generalissimo
eventually. What Smathers feared was that when that event occurred
enemies of United States and Dominican Republic would rush in
during confusion as occurred in Cuba and that Castro type govern-
ment which neither United States nor Generalissimo would like would
take over. Generalissimo’s comment was he did not believe his people
so stupid as to accept such government. He noted there was President
and Vice President and line of succession was therefore fully arranged.
Commented he not even in line. Not allowing subject become diverted
Smathers and Pawley both urged Generalissimo to begin promptly
steps toward democratic government by holding free municipal elec-
tions. Generalissimo said there would first have be constitutional
reforms but he would hold such elections within one year. Smathers
asked if he might say this to press on leaving interview and Trujillo
gave his assent.
This telegram was sent in two sections.
2 George K. Smathers (D-Fla.) visited the Dominican Republic.

Dominican Republic  489
Pawley interjected that one political fact was Dominican people
for most part were for their chief. Outside world did not understand
government by parties was not possible here under circumstances
because Dominicans desired one party. Generalissimo agreed saying
he had invited formation opposition parties but invitation had not
been accepted—­not only had he done this recently but also at other
times in past. De Moya pointed out next national election for President
would come in 1962 and that popular surge had already begun for
Generalissimo to be candidate latter nodded and remarked he had
refrained from saying he would or would not run.
Pawley then brought up subject of recent wave arrests here and
called attention to strong effect this having in other countries against
Dominican Republic particularly in press. He suggested that those
apprehended for plotting against GODR had proved be misguided
youths and they should not be treated as hardened criminals. United
States and many other countries would not understand their being
treated as such. Generalissimo remarked those held were being tried
according to Dominican judicial system. He stated that they would
have right of appeal and that until action in legal channels had been
completed he would not feel free to intervene. Pawley interposed
he knew Dominican juridical system to be excellent and to be much
like our own except there was no jury trial. Senator Smathers said he
knew nothing about judicial process here but if this so he was mak-
ing proposal that in order convince outside world justice being done in
Dominican courts some distinguished jurist such as District Attorney
Envin of Florida be asked come to Dominican Republic to witness tri-
als. Generalissimo said he would welcome such jurist in Dominican
Republic for this purpose. Pawley at first opposed this suggestion on
ground no other government would permit such thing but withdrew
in face reply by Smathers that other governments had better press than
GODR and part of problem was to convince press GODR was deal-
ing justly. Generalissimo then told stories about two past Dominican
Presidents who had been killed by persons whom they had trusted and
favored. With this in mind he confessed he was motivated by desire not
to be killed.
Following interview Generalissimo ushered all present to Chapel
on Palace grounds and with usual skill at such operations managed
have pictures taken being godfather to dozens of babies while accom-
panied by Smathers and United States Charge d’ Affaires.
Considering that obvious purpose was to publish pictures show-
ing Trujillo, United States and Catholic Church as happy triumvirate
and considering this scene somewhat less than accurate as Department
will appreciate from Embassy’s previous reporting this is one I pre-
ferred to duck but there was no escape.

My understanding is Pawley, Smathers and De Moya expect be in
Washington toward end of week and Pawley plans call on President
with Smathers to urge revised policy toward Trujillo. Their basic posi-
tion is Generalissimo is bad actor in many ways but is with us against
our Communist enemies and so should be guided and supported by
United States rather than snubbed.
Smathers called impromptu press conference following talk with
Generalissimo, reporting material covered this message. In attendance
were representatives United States and French press services, New York
Times, U.S. News and World Report, London Examiner, Miami Herald, and
local press.
DEARBORN
DR–13.
Telegram from the Chargé in the Dominican Republic
(Dearborn) to the Department of State1
Following are Embassy comments on information reference
telegram.
Senator’s approach to Generalissimo urging transition to moder-
ate government was extremely well done. It is obvious that to say such
things to Trujillo who has little practice in hearing suggestions of this
nature took skill and finesse.
Embassy is not optimistic that Trujillo will satisfactorily fulfill any
of promises made. He may hold municipal elections but if they are free
and democratic Embassy will then admit to being wrong in its prognos-
tication. He may allow jurist to come here to witness trials but Embassy
confident he will not see trial such as that February 13 according to eye-
witness accused had been subjected to harsh treatment between time of
arrest and date of trial and where defense lawyer played microscopic
role.
Trujillo’s remark to Senator, in Embassy’s view showed either
complete self-­hypnosis or unadulterated cynicism. His remarks about
2 See Document DR–12.

Dominican Republic  491
line of succession and indication he was not even in line avoided main
point Senator was making—­namely Trujillo alone has run GODR for
30 years and it was time arrange for democratic succession. Trujillo’s
straight-­faced reference to his invitation to opposition to form political
parties must have been based on assumption Senator entirely ignorant
of history Trujillo regime. Trujillo has cut down his opposition ruth-
lessly throughout his regime and this largely explains why thousands
of Dominicans live in exile and why thousands to Embassy’s certain
knowledge have applied (without success) for passports to leave.
DR. Embassy does not in least agree with Pawley’s observation that
not possible to form opposition party here because everyone wants
Generalissimo. Fear of economic and physical reprisals alone prevent
formation of opposition parties especially among business and profes-
sional classes and Embassy knows this from those who would form
such parties. Entirely possible if all heads in DR voted today peasant
vote would still return Generalissimo to office. However, this by no
means certain if free opposition political campaigns were allowed,
including use of press, radio and television.
Trujillo’s indication of fairness of Dominican juridical system can
only be justified by technical explanation. This system may be mag-
nificent on the books. Operationally when measured against judicial
practices in civilized western nations it is an outrage abounding in
trumped-­up charges, arbitrary arrests, search without warrant, and
inhumane treatment of prisoners.
Embassy believes policy question posed in penultimate para-
graph Embassy telegram 431 comes down to decision whether we need
Trujillo’s help against international Communism sufficiently to support
regime characterized by such unsavory practices. In Embassy view it
will not be possible guide Trujillo to abandon the practices. Example is
that even day after Smathers visit he gave press conference stating pas-
toral letter of Catholic Church was brought about as reprisal of Church
against GODR for allowing freedom for Protestant groups to operate
in DR. This is so ridiculous one can only marvel at Trujillo’s courage
in making the charge. Already evident from this insofor as Smathers
approach was invitation toward enlightened government practices,
Generalissimmo has not yet been converted.
Dearborn

DR–14.
Memorandum from the Representative at the Council
of the Organization of American States (Dreier) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs’
Special Assistant (Hill)1
Washington, March 14, 1960.
SUBJECT
Present Policy toward Situation in the Dominican Republic
The main criticism I have to make about the present policy toward
the situation in the Dominican Republic, as I understand it, is that it
is essentially negative, whereas under present conditions I believe we
need something of a more positive nature.
Under normal conditions, if we had plenty of time to let events
take shape, it would be reasonable for us to say that our policy toward
the Trujillo regime was primarily to make sure that it was not replaced
by a Castro or Communist-­dominated group. However, the course of
events points in this direction and the pressure is growing all the time.
It seems to me, therefore, that we should consider ways and means of
encouraging a satisfactory transition from the present regime to one
which will work toward the development of democratic procedures
and of a means of forestalling the efforts of Castro and others worse.
This, of course, has a bearing upon our position in the Inter-
American Peace Committee in regard to the Venezuelan charges against
the Dominican Republic as well as with reference to the possible moves
in the Committee or other organs of the OAS directed at Cuba.

Dominican Republic  493
DR–15.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs’ Special Assistant (Hill) to the
Representative at the Council of the Organization of
American States (Dreier)1
Washington, March 15, 1960.
SUBJECT
Policy Towards the Dominican Republic
While all concerned, including Ambassador Farland, would
whole-heartedly agree with the point in your memorandum2—­that it
would be desirable to encourage a satisfactory transition from the pres-
ent regime to one which will work towards the development of “dem-
ocratic procedures”—­this has already been considered in very great
detail, and the situation practically does not exist that this can be done
within a period of, say, one year. The ideal is not in-­harmony with the
facts as they exist and there is, therefore, imposed on us the in escap-
able necessity over the next year of assigning priorities between our
“negative” objective of keeping Castro out and our “positive” objec-
tive of working towards a more democratic regime. Unpleasant as it
is, we must recognize that we must precariously ride both these horses
as long as we can but that, if they come to a parting of the ways when
a real possibility of a Castro or Castro-­type takeover of the Dominican
Republic exists, we must be prepared to jump solidly on the “stop-­Castro”
animal.
With an eye to the longer term—­and to death, assassination or rev-
olution this year—­we must of course work with all possible assets to
assure that a successor government comes in which is friendly to us,
stable, and as “democratic” as Dominican realities will permit it to be.
This is being done insofar as possible, although we must recognize that
our overt activities—­including those in the OAS—­must necessarily be
limited by the consideration that we should avoid giving the present
government a too rough a shove down until we reach an estimate that
this would help achieve a U.S.-oriented rather than Castro-­oriented
successor regime.

We must, at possibly considerable cost, avoid making a wish father
to an illusion. The key to the Dominican situation is the growing, so-­
called “dissident” group of middle and upper middle-­class, profes-
sional and business people who are normally U.S. oriented. Ardently as
a quick victory might be wished for them to end their troubles and
ours with Trujillo, a very detailed assessment—­including a trip I made
to consult with Ambassador Farland in Ciudad Trujillo and detailed
consultation with all agencies concerned—­lead to these conclusions: (a)
the “dissident” group does not now have the capability or organization
to control any revolution it sets afoot, even if it assassinated Trujillo
and/or escaped immediate suppression; (b) it would in any event have
to depend on decisive elements of the Dominican Armed Forces—­not yet even
identified—­to maintain control of any revolution and to establish a stable
government resistant to Castro and Communism; (c) such a government if
established with the help of the Armed Forces, although less malodor-
ous than the present one, would have to pursue firm internal policies
and would be the object of continuing Castro and Communist attacks as “anti-­
democratic”; and (d) unless the U. S. were to decide on more or less open
material intervention, it will be many months before any actions of the
U. S. could materially alter the situation in favor of the “dissidents” and
that premature action on their part subjects them to piecemeal extermi-
nation, as so tragically shown earlier this year. It would, in short, be an
illusion to think what we desire will be possible any time soon.
In the background, unfortunately, is the necessity for us to choose—­if
need be—­until something better is available, between the continuation of
Trujillo and the assumption of power by a Castro-­oriented government. This
is an extremely ugly choice, and in selecting either we must stay at arms
length if possible. However, we must be sensitive to the fact any of our
actions which turn out to be more helpful to the assumption of power
by a Castro-­type government than to a pro-U.S. government would not
only prolong the Castro problem and be a severe blow to our secu-
rity interests but also expose the Department to what might well be the
greatest-­yet criticism from Congress and public opinion.

Dominican Republic  495
DR–16.
Memorandum from Edwin N. Clark to President
Eisenhower1
New York, March 21, 1960.
Re: TRUJILLO
A. PROBLEM:
Increasing opposition both from within and without may lead to a
collapse of the Trujillo regime in the Dominican Republic. Such a down-
fall, with bloody, chaotic conditions would bring further trouble for the
United States in its relations in Latin America, and might be a prelude
to the establishment of another Communist regime.
B. OBJECTIVES:
To induce Trujillo forthwith to take the necessary steps to insure
a transition to constitutional government, with the effective preven-
tion of any possibility of the establishment of a Communistic, Castro-­
like regime. This transition would be accomplished through the good
offices of the United States, if possible utilizing the Organization of the
American States.
C. BACKGROUND:
1. The dictatorship of Generalissimo Raphael Trujillo has been
in power in the Dominican Republic since 1930. During these years,
although high standards of living have been created within the repub-
lic, Trujillo has amassed a large fortune for the Trujillo family. Most
of this fortune is invested within the Dominican Republic, although
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. This memo-
randum was transmitted to Eisenhower under cover of two letters, both dated March
21, 1960, the first addressed formally to “Dear Mr. President,” the second a longer let-
ter addressed to “Dear Ike.” In the second letter, Clark stated in part, “You probably
remember the various steps which I took in 1955 to receive favors from Generalissimo
Trujillo for the United States. Consequently, Generalissimo Trujillo knows that I have
the privilege of personal friendship with you. Due to my unique position, I believe that
I may, as a private citizen, be able to work out a solution with Generalissimo Trujillo
which would redound to the great interests of the United States as well as to the people
of the Dominican Republic. If I fail, no harm done, Hence my memorandum to you.”
(Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series) The reference to Clark’s private
services in 1955 is unclear.
The President forwarded Clark’s memorandum to Herter under cover of a letter
dated March 21, 1960 which stated in part, “Please let me know what you think about the
matter. I suppose that Rubottom ought to be the one to study this, but I would like to keep
it as confidential as possible.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series).
A handwritten notation on the source text indicated that it was shown to Rubottom on
March 22, 1960.

substantial sums are believed to be held by members of the family out-
side the Dominican Republic.
2. The climate for dictators has materially worsened in recent years.
Trujillo knows his days of power are numbered. Further, he knows that
no member of his family has the ability to continue the dictatorship.
Trujillo desires to retire but, like all dictators, is in a quandary as to how
to do it.
3. Trujillo is a man of great pride and of great love of his country,
his people and his family. Trujillo desires when he passes from the scene
to insure the continuance for his people of their high standards and to
assure for himself in history the role of “El Benefactor.” On the other
hand, with his love of his family, he seems to be equally determined to
provide for the future welfare and safety of his family and of the mem-
bers of his government. It is highly doubtful that he will voluntarily
surrender power unless he can achieve both these goals.
4. Although Trujillo has promised to hold free municipal and
national elections within one year and two years, respectively, there is
a strong possibility that he may be overthrown before elections can be
held unless he takes positive actions to convince the opposition that he
sincerely intends to permit the establishment of constitutional, demo-
cratic government.
5. If Trujillo should abdicate or be overthrown unexpectedly, there
is a strong possibility that bloody, chaotic conditions would prevail
for an indefinite period unless steps are taken now for the prevention
thereof. Possibly a radical, anti-United States, pro-Castro government
would be established to replace Trujillo. Such a regime probably would
kill or imprison the Trujillo family and friends, confiscate and nation-
alize all of Trujillo’s extensive commercial Dominican enterprises as
well as foreign-owned Dominican business enterprises, without com-
pensation. Nationalization of the economy would seriously jeopardize
any United States efforts to encourage free enterprise concepts, and
Communistic practices might be firmly established.
6. In order to forestall bloodshed, chaotic conditions and the pos-
sible establishment of a Communistic government in the Dominican
Republic, it would be extremely desirable, if possible, to induce Trujillo
to retire, to establish a provisional government in such a manner as
would insure an orderly transition to a democratic form of government
and, finally, to provide for elections within a reasonable period after his
retirement.
D. CONCLUSIONS:
1. I believe there is a possibility that I may be able to induce Trujillo
to retire in a manner which would be beneficial to the United States.
Trujillo knows better than anyone the foregoing facts. He has already

Dominican Republic  497
indicated that he desires to retire if a way can be found to accomplish
it. I believe a simple but rather ingenious way could be found to accom-
plish this result by the creation of a philanthropic foundation to which
Trujillo and his family would transfer the assets of himself and his fam-
ily within the Dominican Republic, which holdings would be adminis-
tered for the benefit of the Dominican people.
It is highly probable that any new regime in the Dominican
Republic would confiscate the Trujillo family’s local assets and would
attempt to seize any other assets outside the Dominican Republic as
they were able to obtain. Therefore, in the plan for retirement and the
transition to a constitutional form of government, most of the fac-
tors which would provoke bloodshed and chaos could be removed if
Trujillo voluntarily turned over to a foundation to be used for the good
of the Dominican people the bulk of his fortune and if at the same time
peaceful conditions within the Dominican Republic were safeguarded
by the good offices of the United States and the Organization of the
American States.
2. The foundation hereinabove referred to should be administered
by internationally known United States and Latin American citizens for
the benefit of the Dominican people. Tentatively, the following names
have been suggested for trustees:
Ex-Presidents Hoover and Truman of the United States;2
Ex-President Eduardo Santos of Colombia;
Ex-President Galo Plaza of Ecuador;
President Kubitschek of Brazil (whose term expires this year);
Pedro Aramburu, former Provisional President of Argentina;
Ex-President Ruiz Cortines of Mexico; possibly Raphael Trujillo
himself.
3. The Trujillo family and their friends might be given asylum in the
United States during the establishment of this plan and until it became
evident that their return to the Dominican Republic would not be an
act provocative of bloodshed. When the plan was once established and
a peaceful transition to constitutional government was assured, mem-
bers of the Trujillo family might then return to the Dominican Republic.
However, it might well be that they would prefer to seek permanent
homes elsewhere.
4. Naturally, all of the foregoing steps would have to be taken in
the utmost secrecy. Further, to be successful, the good offices of the
United States would have to be utilized. In all probability the forum at
which this plan would be announced would be the Organization of the
2 The phrase, “President Eisenhower after 1961,”was lined out by the President at
this point in the source text.

American States so that its good offices also could be utilized in guar-
anteeing an orderly transition.
E. ACTION:
1. I intend to discuss the foregoing with Generalissimo Trujillo in
an endeavor to bring about his retirement in a manner which would
insure a peaceful transition to democratic government. Naturally, I
would refrain from such action if you did not desire it.
2. The foregoing plans and the implementation thereof are of
importance to the United States. Therefore, I greatly desire to discuss
these plans with the appropriate officials of your government, primar-
ily Allen Dulles, prior to my departure for the Dominican Republic.
Respectfully submitted,
Edwin N. Clark
DR–17.
Memorandum of a Conference with President
Eisenhower1
March 1960.
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary Herter
Mr. Allen Dulles
General Goodpaster
The President then discussed with Mr. Herter and Mr. Dulles ques-
tions raised by a recent memorandum of him from Ed Clark.2 [text not
declassified]3 There have apparently been serious atrocities by the Trujillo
regime in recent days. The people around Trujillo are turning against
him. Trujillo’s family has taken large sums of money out of the country
in recent days. [text not declassified] that regime may last as little as three
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary’s Records, “State [illegible in the origi-
nal].” Drafted by Goodpaster [illegible in the original].
2 See Document DR–16.
3 [illegible in the original], Ambassador to Peru, [illegible in the original], and to
Brazil [illegible in the original]. In a memorandum to Secretary Herter, dated March
[illegible in the original], 1960, Merchant [text not declassified] [illegible in the original].
According to the memorandum, [illegible in the original] stated that he now gave Trujillo
only one to three weeks to [illegible in the original]. He added that he thought Castro
would be in the Dominican Republic a week after Trujillo’s fall. ([illegible in the original])

Dominican Republic  499
weeks. [text not declassified] fearful that Castro or someone committed
to Castro will come into power soon thereafter. We have no moderate
substitute for Trujillo available. [text not declassified] considerable merit
in getting Trujillo out of the country and trying to make a transition to
some other government.
Mr. Herter also thought that on the whole course of events favored
by Mr. Clark seemed worth trying. He said we should not offer Trujillo
asylum in the U.S.
The President said that if Clark takes a part in this, he should not
say that he has any authority from the President, or has even seen the
President lately. [text not declassified]
[text not declassified] The President said the project might go ahead.
It should be kept secret, and that Clark would be acting on his own.
[text not declassified]
DR–18.
Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and
Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, March 25, 1960.
SUBJECT
Intelligence Note: Dominican Republic—Political Situation
A rising tide of discontent—­the first serious threat to the rule
of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo—­has been spreading through the
Dominican Republic’s influential commercial, professional and intel-
lectual classes for several months, and has even begun to penetrate the
urban and rural lower class, heretofore a Trujillo stronghold. Arising
largely from an economic crisis caused by low export prices and the
tremendous drain of foreign exchange into Trujillo’s frantic arms-­
purchase program, this discontent is reinforced by a virtually complete
lack of civil liberties. Opposition feeling came to a head in January with
the exposure of a conspiracy to assassinate the Generalissimo and seize
power. He retaliated with a wave of political arrests, totaling in the
thousands, which still continues. Concentrated chiefly in the influential
middle classes, the repression has left virtually no Dominican family
of any prominence untouched. The arrests have stiffened opposition

sentiment, especially as news of the prisoners’ mistreatment leaked
out. At this juncture, the Church issued a strongly-­worded pastoral let-
ter on January 31 condemning violation of civil liberties and calling for
release of the prisoners. Trujillo, unwilling to back down or to cross the
Church, adopted a temporizing stance. The Church, however, remains
adamant and has issued a second forceful pastoral letter.
The Generalissimo is thus at an impasse: any real concessions on
his part could be regarded as a sign of weakness and encourage fur-
ther demands; yet only some degree of real political freedom will now
remove the opposition feeling which threatens his regime. Although
it is probably even now not too late for the self-­styled “Benefactor” to
resolve this political tension by making a grand gesture of renuncia-
tion, his pride and stubbornly unyielding nature, typical of the dictator,
militate against any such solution. The current impasse will thus prob-
ably continue until Trujillo’s regime suddenly shatters from the strain
of its own inner tensions. While neither the date nor the manner of such
collapse can be predicted, it is clear that the regime’s prospects have
materially declined since last December, when the belief was expressed
in a National Intelligence Estimate that Trujillo would remain in power
through 1960.2 An increasing number of local observers claim that the
nation will soon experience a total economic collapse. According to
recent reports, as yet unconfirmed, members of the Trujillo family have
made massive withdrawals (one report sets the figure at $46 million)
from the government Reserve Bank although it is not considered likely
that the Generalissimo himself will flee.
In typical strong-­man fashion, Trujillo has not permitted the devel-
opment of any alternative leaders. The military does have its share of
ambitious men, but none with the reputation or personal following
to lead a one-­man government. It will, however, remain the locus of
power in the Dominican Republic and will be the key to success for any
new regime—­unless the services are torn by an armed factional strug-
gle, in which case there may well be no effective government at all. The
attitude of the military in general, or of its key leaders, is not definitely
known. Many of the younger officers and at least some senior officers
are reportedly sympathetic to the opposition, although the bulk of the
military is probably loyal. However, the military will not follow Trujillo
blindly to self-­destruction. At some time in the not-­too-­distant future,
Trujillo’s cause may well appear lost and he could be turned out with
his family in relatively bloodless fashion by his Generals.
The nature and viability of a successor administration are dif-
ficult to predict. Dissident sources have proposed a predominantly
Document 126.

Dominican Republic  501
civilian provisional junta, to be composed of one high military figure, a
respected civilian, and a high Church official as leader. The participation
of the military and the leadership of the Church should insure a rela-
tively stable and conservative government to which anti-­Americanism
would not be a major issue. Although the appeal of Castro and of his
leftist radicalism is not now strong in the Dominican Republic, much
leftist sentiment is concentrated among the exiles, who include some
Communists and sympathizers. Their influence in a successor regime
would not at first be important but many local observers predict that
any new administration would soon collapse, amid bloody disorder.
Radical sentiment would surely develop in such a milieu, and interven-
tion, in one form or another, by the Castro regime in favor of a leftist
faction or leader must be considered a possibility.
DR–19.
Memorandum of Discussion at the 441st Meeting of the
National Security Council1
[Extract]
Thursday, April 14, 1960.
Mr. Dulles reported that in the Dominican Republic, Trujillo’s posi-
tion continued to weaken and was now quite precarious.2 The whole-
sale arrests ordered by Trujillo last winter had affected almost every
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Extract. Drafted
by Marion W. Boggs. The extract printed here is the portion pertaining to the Dominican
Affecting U.S. Security”, “U.S. Policy Toward Cuba”, and “U.S. Policy Toward the
Dominican Republic.” Also omitted was agenda item 4, “Future NSC Agenda Items.”
of Central Intelligence, and Under Secretary Dillon made brief statements about the
Dominican Republic. Cabell stated, inter alia, that Trujillo’s position continued to grow
weaker, and Dillon commented that “Trujillo may fall before our policy of building up
moderate successor elements has had time to succeed.” According to the memorandum
of discussion at that meeting, drafted by Boggs, the NSC:
“Noted and discussed the statement by the Under Secretary of State that the posi-
tion of the Trujillo regime is deteriorating more rapidly than was anticipated at the time
Therefore, alternative policies in the event of an early collapse of that regime were being
actively considered by the Department of State, and would be the subject of consulta-
tion with the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.” (Eisenhower Library,
Whitman File, NSC Records)
This action, approved by the President as NSC Action 2212, was subsequently
transmitted to the Secretaries of State and Defense.

prominent family in the Dominican Republic. Although these arrests had
broken up the plotting against Trujillo, they had at the same time weak-
ened the dictator’s position. Mr. Dulles thought that further attempts
would be made to kill or oust Trujillo. Relations between the govern-
ment and the church were rapidly deteriorating. Mr. Dulles pointed out
incidentally that the attitude of the church in the Dominican Republic
was quite different from the attitude of the church in Cuba. The eco-
nomic situation in the Dominican Republic was worsening. Business is
stagnant and international financial sources are drying up. The govern-
ment has resorted to various subterfuges in an attempt to improve its
precarious financial position. Secretary Gates3 asked whether it was true
that Trujillo was one of the richest men in the world, with more money
than the Dominican government. Mr. Dulles said this statement was
true; Trujillo was reported to have milked the Dominican Republic of
$400 million, an estimate which was probably exaggerated and should
be scaled down by one-­half or two-­thirds. Secretary Anderson said he
understood that $44 million in gold had been recently removed from
Now York banks by the Dominican Republic and had been placed in the
Bank of Nova Scotia. Mr. Dulles said he had a detailed report on the
financial situation of the Dominican Republic, all the details of which
he would not read. However, it appeared that the Dominican Republic
now held $15 ­million in gold and that it had incurred a variety of obli-
gations; for example, a $16.5 million loan from the Bank of Nova Scotia
secured by the sugar crop. The Dominican Republic had also drawn $7
­million out of a $11.5 ­million credit with the International Monetary
Fund. Secretary Anderson said the International Monetary Fund’s deal-
ings with the Dominican Republic might present a problem to the U.S.
The Dominican Republic now had drawn so much from the Fund that
it could only draw in the future $2 million every 90 days without con-
sulting the Directors of the Fund. If the Dominicans should want to
draw more than $2 ­million every 90 days, the question would arise as
to how the U.S. Director should vote when the Dominican Republic
undertakes the necessary consultation with the Fund.
Mr. Dulles continuing his briefing, reported that Trujillo, apparently
not realizing his position, is not anticipating an early fall from power and
is apparently not planning flight. The Dominican military forces have
apparently been repelled by the excesses in Cuba and may believe they
will be compelled to act against Trujillo before the radical pro-Castro ele-
ments, which are daily increasing in strength, take over the government.
If there is a gap between the departure of Trujillo and the establishment
of the new regime, the radical pro-Castro elements might have an oppor-
tunity to seize power. If the army does not hold off these radical ele-
ments, a period of chaos might ensue. Mr. Dulles believed that Trujillo’s
3 Thomas S. Gates, Jr., Secretary of Defense.

Dominican Republic  503
downfall might not occur for weeks or even months but, on the other
hand, the situation might become critical at any moment.
The Vice President wondered whether the worst outcome of the
situation in the Dominican Republic would not be a take-­over by the
pro-Castro elements. He also wondered whether we were doing every-
thing possible to support other elements. Mr. Dulles said the difficult
question was that of leadership of moderate elements in the Dominican
Republic. The vice president of the Republic might be able to assume
power or the principal military officers might govern through a military
junta. Many prominent anti-Trujillo Dominicans were in exile. Mr. Dillon
said this government was following the situation in the Dominican
Republic closely and intended to try to prevent seizure of power by any
pro-Castro group. This would involve working closely with the OAS.
The Vice President believed that we could not let Castro or a pro-Castro
group take over the Dominican Republic even if we had to intervene in
order to prevent such a takeover. Mr. Dillon felt that in order to intervene
we would need an invitation. The Vice President feared that the old story
was being repeated in the Dominican Republic; that is, the pro-Castro
element was the only minority group with strong leadership and definite
objectives. Mr. Dulles said there was a group in Venezuela which would
like to move into the Dominican Republic and take over the government.
Mr. Dillon believed the Castro element in the Dominican Republic was
not strong enough to assume control of the government without support
from Cuba. It was, accordingly, very important that the U.S. be prepared
for rapid action. The Vice President agreed that it was very important that
the U.S., if necessary, take rapid action to prevent any move by Castro to
seize power in the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Dulles said the situations in Haiti and Venezuela were being
affected by the situations in Cuba and the Dominican Republic.
Betancourt, it is reported, has made a deal with the army whereby he
will abandon government by coalition, will rule Venezuela with his
own party supported by the army, and will take action against the com-
munist movement. However, it is possible that the communists know
of his plans and may take action to thwart them.
Mr. Dillon said there was one favorable aspect to the situation
in the Caribbean. If Trujillo could be removed from power in the
Dominican Republic while pro-Castro elements were prevented from
seizing power in that country, our anti-Castro campaign throughout
Latin America would receive a great boost. The Vice President agreed
that getting rid of Trujillo would be a favorable development for us.4
4 In NSC Action 2218, taken at this meeting, the NSC:
“Noted and discussed recent developments with regard to the situation in the
Dominican Republic, with particular reference to the importance of seeking to prevent
anti-Castro and anti-American elements from seizing power in the event of the collapse
of the Trujillo regime.”

DR–20.
Editorial Note
In a letter to President Eisenhower, dated April 21, 1960, Edwin
N. Clark reported on his conversation with Generalissimo Trujillo on
March 27 in the Dominican Republic. The letter stated in part, “I believe
we can conclude that a) Generalissimo Trujillo is in real trouble and he
knows it best of all; b) he desires to retire but at this moment does not
quite know how to bring it off, and c) although Trujillo is disappointed
that he has received no assistance from the United States in his present
difficulties, he has not yet reached the point where he is resentful or
angry at having to go it alone; however, these emotions, further aroused
by the pressure of events, may create an increasingly deteriorating sit-
uation so far as we are concerned.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File,
Name Series, “Clark, Edwin Norman”)
Clark discussed the situation in the Dominican Republic with
the President and Secretary of State Herter at the White House on
April, 25, 1960. According to a diary entry for that day, dictated by
Eisenhower, the three men discussed “a plan for removing Trujillo
from control of that country, and to establish in his position a con-
trolling junta which could immediately call for free elections and
make the attempt to get the country on a truly democratic basis.
Any plan to be successful would have to be skillfully executed and
would have to have the approval of a big majority of the members of
the OAS. However, the Secretary of State has undertaken to follow
through to determine whether something could be done that would
not plunge the country into anarchy or throw it under communist
control. Necessarily the plan should be one that would not place the
United States in the role of ‘interventionists’.” (Eisenhower Library,
Whitman File, Whitman Diary)

Dominican Republic  505
DR–21.
Special National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, April 26, 1960.
THE OUTLOOK FOR THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
THE PROBLEM
To estimate political prospects in the Dominican Republic in the
light of recent developments.
THE ESTIMATE
The Trujillo Regime
1. In our last estimate dealing with the Dominican Republic (SNIE
­30-­year Trujillo dictatorship was in trouble, but concluded that it prob-
ably would remain in power through 1960. Since then anti-Trujillo
sentiment has gathered momentum and the regime’s prospects have
materially declined. We cannot predict the time or the circumstances
in which the regime would be likely to come to an end, but this could
happen before the end of the year.
2. A notable change in the country’s political atmosphere has
developed since the wholesale arrests in January, in which members of
almost every prominent Dominican family were seized, in many cases
with great brutality, and subjected to heavy fines and jail sentences.
Drastic action may in fact have been necessary to break what appears to
have been an extensive revolutionary conspiracy; precise information as
to how far plotting to overthrow Trujillo had proceeded is still lacking.
However, the magnitude and severity of the government’s crackdown
revealed the regime’s nervousness, made it more intolerable to leading
elements in Dominican society, and alienated the Catholic Church. The
latter is now Trujillo’s most outspoken opponent inside the country.
3. Continuing arrests and new trials of alleged plotters suggest that
public unrest is spreading. Within the armed services, which remain
the mainstay of the regime, a few new signs of rivalry and dissension
have appeared; six army officers have been imprisoned and an air force
officer is the latest in a series of defectors. The arrest of close relatives
1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE files. Secret. According to a note on the
cover sheet the following organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate:
the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the
Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. The U.S. Intelligence Board concurred in this
estimate on April 26, 1960.

of high-­ranking officers and some terrorist activities directed against
individuals in these forces are probably also having an adverse effect
on their loyalty to Trujillo.
4. Since our previous estimate, the economic situation has deterio-
rated further. Business is stagnant, and an increasing number of people
are suffering economic hardship. In addition to some flight of private
capital, members of the Trujillo family are reported to have made sub-
stantial withdrawals from the national reserve bank—­a development
which might seriously weaken the government’s financial position.
Even if these reports prove unfounded or exaggerated, the spread of
rumors that such withdrawals were taking place would obviously con-
tribute to a decline in public confidence in the regime.
5. On the other hand, Trujillo himself shows no signs of relinquish-
ing control, and there is no information to indicate that discontent in the
military is wide-­spread. The plans of the internal opposition probably
have been set back by the regime’s repressive measures. The numerous
exile groups lack cohesion and effectiveness, despite the encourage-
ment and support given them, not only by Castro, but also by moderate
leaders such as Venezuelan President Betancourt. There are deep divi-
sions between pro-Communist and anti-Communist elements within
these groups.
The Succession
6. The character of the regime which will eventually succeed
Trujillo will depend upon the time and circumstances of Trujillo’s
departure. In present circumstances, we think it unlikely that Trujillo
will be overthrown by a Castro-­type invasion or revolution. It is more
likely that Trujillo will eventually be forced to leave by the military
acting with the encouragement and support of the upper and middle
classes and the Church. The longer his departure is delayed, the more
explosive the situation is likely to become.
7. Castro has already failed in an attempt to overthrow the Trujillo
regime through an invasion by Dominican exiles with Cuban sup-
port. His agrarian reform program has had no appreciable impact on
the Dominican peasantry, who remain generally unaware of it. They
generally still regard Trujillo as the Benefactor. The upper and middle
classes, though increasingly disaffected toward Trujillo, are repelled by
the excesses of the Castro regime in Cuba. The military also are repelled
by what they have seen happening in Cuba. Thus there is now in the
Dominican Republic no important element likely to support a Castro-­
type invasion or revolution.
8. Nevertheless, tension is rising in the Dominican Republic and
the eventual fall of the Trujillo regime will be increasingly anticipated.
In such circumstances, persons of property and military officers, apart
from Trujillo’s personal associates, will become increasingly anxious to

Dominican Republic  507
effect a change of regime before uncontrollable disorder develops. At
the psychological moment in this progression, it would be in accord
with Latin American custom for the military to call upon the dictator to
depart before the situation got out of hand. In such matters, however,
timing is of the essence. A premature move could be fatal. On the other
hand, to hesitate too long would permit an uncontrollable situation to
develop.
9. If its timing were right, a junta with military, upper and mid-
dle class, and Church participation could probably take over the
Dominican Republic without serious resistance. Such a junta would
probably also take over in the event of Trujillo’s flight, natural death,
or assassination. Once in power, however, such a regime would face
serious difficulties. The fall of the dictatorship would entail a consider-
able amount of disorder and confusion. Although its fall would mean
liberation to the upper and middle classes, the new regime would not
automatically command the support of the urban proletariat and the
peasants. Returning exiles, who are generally radical in their political
views, would probably seek to incite these elements against a moderate
government. Within the government itself, there might be a struggle for
power between military and civilian elements. Finally, the Trujillo fam-
ily has so dominated the Dominican economy that the confusion atten-
dant upon their sudden departure would probably worsen an already
bad economic situation.
10. Although Castro is probably incapable of overthrowing the
Trujillo dictatorship, the political turmoil which would follow the fall
of that dictatorship would afford him opportunities for political inter-
vention in the Dominican Republic. Castro would certainly do all in his
power to incite the masses against a moderate regime and to call for a
radical revolution on the Cuban model. Unless a moderate Dominican
government received prompt support from sympathetic governments
of an undoubtedly liberal character (Venezuela, for instance), Castro
might emerge as the ultimate victor.
U.S.-Dominican Relations
11. The fall of the Trujillo regime would present new problems in
U.S.-Dominican relations. Even among moderate opposition elements,
there is considerable resentment of past U.S. support for and failure
to intervene against the Trujillo dictatorship. Furthermore, almost any
new regime would feel a need to demonstrate to the Dominican people
and to other Caribbean peoples that it was not under U.S. domination.
However, a moderate government would also be in desperate need of
U.S. assistance. If the U.S. were to render essential aid discreetly, while
tolerating occasional demonstrations of Dominican sovereignty, such a
government would probably cooperate in fundamental matters. If, on
the other hand, a Castro-­type government were eventually to come to

power, the U.S. would inevitably be presented with problems similar to
those it has with Cuba.
12. The Trujillo government has declared that it will not renew its
missile tracking station agreement with the U.S. at its expiration in 1961.
This may be an attempt to extort U.S. support for the regime in its present
difficulties. If Trujillo should fall before the expiration of the agreement,
the attitude of a successor regime would depend on the contingencies
set forth in paragraphs 10 and 11 above. A moderate government would
probably feel obliged to demonstrate Dominican sovereignty, but would
also be influenced by its need for U.S. aid. A Castro-­type government
would probably denounce the tracking station agreement.
DR–22.
Memorandum of a Conference with President
Eisenhower1
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary Dillon
Secretary Rubottom
Ambassador Farland
General Persons
General Goodpaster
The President began by saying that he was being bombarded by
people who are opposed to Castro and Trujillo. Mr. Pawley and Senator
Smathers were in his office earlier in the day on this matter. Smathers
has an idea that Trujillo wants to get out, and that this can be arranged
if we are skillful—­i.e. that there can be a changeover without Castro-­
type forces coming into power. This would, however, take time and
care to bring about.
They had added that there now exist juntas with planes already
chartered, in Miami, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Venezuela ready to
pounce at the first sign of weakness. They think public opinion toward
Trujillo both among the people and in the Army is favorable—­that he is
regarded as a great benefactor. They see the great danger as being from
abroad, a revolutionary movement of the Castro type, linking up with
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary’s Records. Top Secret. Drafted by
Goodpaster on May 16, 1960. Information on the source text indicates that this conference
took place in the White House at 2:00 p.m.

Dominican Republic  509
some people—­definitely in a minority—in the Dominican Republic.
The President said their idea is that a group of political scientists,
about four in number, of recognized reputation could come into the
Dominican Republic and supervise an election. They think that Trujillo
should promptly announce the holding of free elections. These men
could invite the UN in to observe. The idea is that Trujillo is ready to
do this, but first he must be left alone for a while in order to bring it up.
The President went on to say that Mr. Pawley had charged that
the U.S. Government is trying to bring about a breaking of relations
of Peru, Colombia, and Venezuela with Trujillo. They claim it must
be recognized that Trujillo has brought stability and progress to the
Dominican Republic. The President said that Pawley seems to have
a pathological hatred for Castro. Senator Smathers is genuinely con-
cerned over the whole situation. The critical thing seems to be their idea
that Trujillo must announce elections and govern until a new group
comes in, with the UN or the OAS supervising these elections. The
President thought the State Department should keep this matter under
the closest attention, and should definitely not engage in trying to stir
up other Governments against Trujillo.
Mr. Dillon said one of the primary questions is whether in fact
Trujillo is ready to step aside. He told the President of a report [text not
declassified] Trujillo, [text not declassified] would not step aside, and in
fact did not plan to retire “before the year 2000.” Trujillo had said that
when Senator Smathers was there he talked only in a very rambling
way about elections, which Trujillo had planned long ago. Mr. Dillon
said the point is that we are fearful that Trujillo will not hold fair elec-
tions and we do not want our Government associated with some farce.
He went on to say that we had nothing to do with the breaking off
of relations with Trujillo by Latin American countries. Colombia and
Venezuela have done it because he fostered the invasion of Venezuela.
Mr. Rubottom stated also that we had nothing to do with the break-
ing off of relations. He added that the Colombians make the point that
having done this they are in a better position to break off relations with
Cuba later.
Ambassador Farland then said that Mr. Pawley is not disinterested
in this matter. He had disposed of his holdings, but retains a right to
reacquire them. In addition, a brother continues to retain major hold-
ings there. Mr. Farland said that he had tried to get Trujillo to step aside
some time ago and that, after agreeing, Trujillo simply did not and
would not do this. The main point about elections is that the dissidents,
who would run in these elections, cannot raise their heads. If they were
to try to campaign or to raise issues, Trujillo would not allow this to
be done. If Trujillo is associated in any way with elections, the man in
the street would have no faith in them. The President said he had been

told that in the trials he recently held, Trujillo had said he was ready to
invite observers to attend, but failed to make good on this. He agreed
that the key is whether Trujillo wants to get out. He said there are indi-
cations that Trujillo is telling a double story. Mr. Farland confirmed that
Trujillo had once made a statement that he was going to retire at once,
but then did not do so.
Ambassador Farland said that the economic situation is now dete-
riorating rapidly. The Dominican Republic is basically a very prosper-
ous little country, but now, however, Trujillo has gained possession of
all the sugar interests. The dissident group are “sitting on their pocket-
books” and Trujillo, because of the recent fall in sugar prices, can now
get no credit. Much of his money is in the form of local sugar plants.
He said it must be recognized that Trujillo has done a great deal for this
country. He said that if he were to run tomorrow he could be elected.
The fact is that he controls all news outlets, and it would be a year
before free elections could be meaningful.
Mr. Rubottom said that Trujillo is involved in all sorts of efforts all
over the hemisphere to create disorder. The President commented that
Castro is also, and he would like to see them both sawed off. Mr. Dillon
commented that the State Department is about ready to propose some
additional action against Castro.
General Persons commented that if there were an invasion of the
Dominican Republic from the outside, Smathers and Pawley think that
Castro would come in. Mr. Rubottom recalled that under the existing
military contingency plan we would send in our forces into the area to
keep Castro out.
The President said that the problem is to find a way to give a
chance for a new party to form. Mr. Farland said that various members
of the underground had been in touch with him for two years or more.
They are very anti-Castro, but they fear that Castro would try to carry
out a coup after a junta came in. The President commented that if a
junta were to act, the Army might join them, to get even with elements
of the palace guard.

Dominican Republic  511
DR–23.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, May 20, 1960.
SUBJECT
Report on Dominican Republic by Inter-American Peace Committee
In February 1960, Venezuela requested the Inter-American Peace
Committee to investigate the alleged flagrant violations of human
rights in the Dominican Republic that have contributed to international
tensions. The Committee, in acting on this request under the authority
granted it by the Meeting of American Foreign Ministers in Santiago
last August, was unable to obtain the permission of the Dominican
Government to visit that country, but gathered information from other
sources, including Dominican exiles who had recently left the country.
The Chairmanship of this Committee rotates annually and it
happens that the United States has the Chairmanship this year. The
Committee has now decided to issue a report on this matter, with
the Chairman, Ambassador Dreier, given the responsibility of having
the first draft prepared for the Committee’s consideration. In accor-
dance with the general sentiment of the Committee members, it is
anticipated that the report, after reviewing the Committee’s action in
the case, would conclude that flagrant violations of human rights have
taken place and continue to take place in the Dominican Republic,
involving imprisonment for political views, inhuman treatment of pris-
oners, and suppression of basic rights such as free speech and assem-
bly. The report would state that this situation has in fact contributed
to international tensions in the Caribbean area through aroused public
opinion, stimulation of activity by Dominican exiles, and retaliatory
maneuvers by the Dominican authorities.
It is unlikely that the members of the Peace Committee would
agree to a less forthright presentation than that outlined above, in view
of the notorious practices of the Trujillo regime and the present state of
opinion in the Latin American countries. Furthermore, a frank facing
up to the Dominican situation by a Committee in which the United
States plays a prominent part would, in the Department’s opinion, be
favorable to our general political position in the Hemisphere and help-
ful to our subsequent efforts to have the Peace Committee face up sim-
ilarly to the Cuban problem.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Confidential. The
source text bears the initials “D.E.”

I am attaching a brief description of the functions of the Inter-­
American Peace Committee.2
Douglas Dillon
Acting Secretary
cated by telephone, the President, after considering your memorandum of May twenti-
eth concerning a ‘Report on Dominican Republic by Inter-American Peace Committee,’
expressed agreement to the course of action proposed, stating that the report should be
forthright, but not caustic or violent.” (Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Dominican
Republic”)
DR–24.
Memorandum of a Conversation between Edwin N. Clark
and John C. Hill, Jr.1
Washington, May 25, 1960
SUBJECT
General Clark’s Role in U.S. Policy Toward the Dominican Republic.
After General Clark had indicated that he could not come to the
Department on the afternoon of May 24 or the morning of May 25, he
accepted Mr. Rubottom’s offer that I ride out to the airport with him
at noon today to brief him about developments with respect to the
Dominican Republic which affected the plan on which he had been
working.
Accordingly, I had a talk with General Clark at the National Airport.
Following Mr. Rubottom’s instructions, I told him that the Secretary had
wanted Mr. Rubottom to bring him up to date with respect to certain factors
bearing on our planning for the Dominican Republic:
1. We had had a number of indications, confirmed by our consultations
with Ambassador Farland here, that the Generalissimo had no intentions of
retiring from the Dominican scene but that, on the contrary, he intended
to go forward with plans for an opposition party and elections solely as
window dressing. In this connection, I showed General Clark an extract
of a conversation recently held by an American with the Generalissimo
in which the Generalissimo had stated that he would not even consider
the proposal made to him by General Clark. The Generalissimo had
on May 26.

Dominican Republic  513
further said that when General Clark had asked him when he would
retire he had not answered, but that he did not expect to retire before
the year 2000.
2. We could assure him that contingency military planning with the
Pentagon was well advanced and that, in fact, the U.S. was prepared to move
when and if the President decided.
3. We felt that it was now necessary to develop a concrete solution on the
assumption that we would not have the cooperation of the Generalissimo. I said
that we were working on this within the government, and—­since I did not in
any way indicate he would be consulted—­he should have got the inference that
there was no role for him at this time.
After brief reflection, General Clark said that his preliminary comments
were as follows:
1. He still strongly believed that the Generalissimo would leave the
Dominican Republic if inducements were held out to him to do so. He felt that
in the approach which he had made he had been so restricted by the Department
that he could not offer the Generalissimo inducements—such as U.S. cooper-
ation in settling him elsewhere and in having him appear before the OAS—
which would make it attractive for the Generalissimo to leave. He thought
that the possibility of the Generalissimo’s leaving voluntarily should
not be ruled out until we had made concrete and official offers to him.
2. He felt that contingency planning was not sufficient; the U.S. must
have an active plan to remove Trujillo from the scene if the situation were
not to drift to our disadvantage.
3. He felt that, after working with us, he had presented a plan which the
President had approved in the presence of the Secretary, we owed it to the Pres-
ident not to leave the matter dangling and to put before him a detailed plan in
writing. He (General Clark) would do his best to go along with such a plan
but would dissent from it if he felt that he had to do so. He clearly indicated
that he expected at some later stage to get together with the President and the
Secretary to approve a final plan for the Dominican Republic.
I had only a short time to reply to these comments, but did say that
I was sure everyone was concerned with moving ahead and that the
President was being kept informed.
As the General was boarding the plane, he said that we should both
reflect further on these matters and that I should call him when he returned to
Washington next week.
COMMENT:
I did not feel it my place to tell the General that he would be excluded
from further phases of planning with respect to the Dominican Republic. It
was clear, however, that he expected to continue to play a role in this matter,
that he believed the President had approved his plan, and that—­if it is not
intended that he should continue to play his role—­he will have to be told so at
a high level.

DR–25.
Memorandum of the Discussion at the 453rd Meeting of
the National Security Council1
[Extract]
Monday, July 25, 1960
3. FORTHCOMING MEETING OF THE ORGANIZATION OF
AMERICAN STATES WITH RESPECT TO CUBA AND THE
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Secretary Herter said that the Organization of American States
would hold a meeting on August 15 to discuss action with respect to the
Dominican Republic. Venezuela was trying to effect a separation between
the problem of Cuba and the problem of the Dominican Republic. The
OAS had sent a special mission to investigate the Venezuelan charge that
the attack on Betancourt2 had been directed by the Dominican Republic.
If the OAS proposes sanctions against the Dominican Republic, the case
would have to go to the UN. The OAS, however, can recommend mea-
sures which each state could implement individually. Secretary Herter
said the U.S. would suggest such measures as the following against the
Dominican Republic: withdrawal of Chiefs of Missions; the admonition
to take into account OAS condemnation in relations with the Dominican
Republic; refusal to permit the shipment of arms and ammunition into the
Dominican Republic; collaborating in preventing shipment of arms and
ammunition from the Dominican Republic to other countries, including
air and sea patrols; a request that other nations outside the hemisphere
take note of the measures recommended by the OAS; creation of a com-
mittee to observe the implementing of these measures.
The President asked whether it would not be desirable to add
to the list surveillance to make certain that no other American state
intervenes militarily in the Dominican Republic. Secretary Herter said
the recommendation on the shipment of arms and ammunition into
the Dominican Republic would prohibit such intervention and was
intended to cover the President’s point.
The President said he believed it was desirable to connect the cases
of the Dominican Republic and Cuba but he also believed that it was
very necessary to settle the Trujillo situation because it appears to be
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Extract.
Drafted and signed by Marion W. Boggs on July 28. Information on the source text indi-
cates that this NSC meeting was held at Newport, Rhode Island. Agenda items 1 and
2 are omitted; they cover, respectively, “Significant World Developments Affecting U.S.
Security” and “Measures to Enhance U.S. Military Readiness.”
2 For documentation on the attempted assassination of President Betancourt, see
VE–44 and DR–26.

Dominican Republic  515
impossible to shake the belief of Latin America that the Trujillo situ-
ation is more serious than the Castro situation. Until Trujillo is elimi-
nated, we cannot get our Latin American friends to reach a proper level
of indignation in dealing with Castro.
Secretary Herter then referred to the legal requirement for the
purchase of sugar from the Dominican Republic and said an effort
should be made to get the law changed in this session of Congress. The
President said if the law were not changed, he would simply refuse
to buy Dominican sugar. If impeachment proceedings were brought
against him, that would take longer than his term has to run. Secretary
Herter said his legal advisers had agreed that we were required to
buy Dominican sugar but we were simply ignoring that requirement.
As a result Congressman Cooley3 was on the warpath. In Secretary
Herter’s opinion, a great deal of the difficulty was expenditure of
Dominican money in the U.S. The President said that any proposals
to buy Dominican sugar should be sent to him for approval and he
would take a long time to study the matter. He also believed we should
frankly say that it appears that the Dominican Republic bribes are com-
ing into this country in an effort to influence this government. Secretary
Herter agreed that we would lose prestige if we bought sugar from the
Dominican Republic after refusing to buy it from Cuba.
Secretary Herter then reported that Mexico had been suggesting
that Brazil, Mexico, and Canada should mediate between the U.S. and
Cuba. Such mediation would recognize the idea that the sole parties to
the present controversy are the U.S. and Cuba. The President said we
have already said that we are ready to have our problems with Cuba
mediated. We want to have these problems settled peacefully. Secretary
Herter said that the whole problem had been shifted toward the con-
cept of the introduction of communism into this hemisphere.
The President said that if we attempted to take any action with
respect to Cuba before settling the Trujillo situation, we would be the
loser. He had confidence in the Presidents of Mexico and Brazil and the
Prime Minister of Canada but he thought the problem of Cuba was now
before the OAS and should remain there. Secretary Gates said we had a
difficult problem of public opinion because the American people were
interested in the situation in Cuba but did not care about the situation
in the Dominican Republic. The President said American newspapers
had been attacking Trujillo for fifteen years. He asked how we could
keep the OAS as a going concern. We could not do it if we focused
sanctions on Cuba and forgot about Trujillo. We were able to induce the
3 Harold D. Cooley (D–N.C.), Chairman, House Agriculture Committee.

Latin American leaders to talk seriously about Cuba only after agreeing
that Trujillo is also a problem.
Secretary Herter said that procedurally we could not get the case
of Cuba before the OAS until the Trujillo situation had been considered
because the Trujillo case was brought up first. With respect to sugar
legislation, he asked whether the President thought it would be unde-
sirable to prepare any new legislation for this session of Congress. The
President said he had not meant to suggest that he was opposed to any
new sugar legislation. He would prefer to have the authority of law
for refusing to buy Dominican sugar. He said that the OAS would not
consider the case of Cuba if we focused all our attention on Castro and
forgot about Trujillo.
The National Security Council:
Discussed the subject on the basis of draft U.S. recommendations
to the Organization of American States with respect to the Dominican
Republic, as read at the meeting by the Secretary of State.4
4 This paragraph constitutes NSC Action 2273.
DR–26.
Editorial Note
On August 3, 1960, Héctor Trujillo resigned as President of the
Dominican Republic and was succeeded by Vice President Joaquín
Chargé Henry Dearborn stated in part, “Clear from Balaguer’s accep-
tance speech August 3 there has been no change of government and
Rafael Trujillo still dominates . . . . Up to this moment no indication
any responsible Trujillo opposition member will participate Balaguer
administration. No indication anywhere that GODR plans to abol-
ish arbitrary arrests, prison tortures, or reprisals against its political
The Foreign Ministers of the American Republic met at San José,
Dominican complicity in the assassination attempt against President
Betancourt. On August 20, the foreign ministers approved a resolution
condemning the Dominican Republic and called on all members of the
OAS to break off diplomatic relation with that nation. The United States
severed diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic on August
26, 1960. For documentation on the Sixth Meeting of Consultation of
Foreign Ministers of the American Republics at San José, see Volume V.

Dominican Republic  517
DR–27.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Mann) to the Consul General in the
Dominican Republic (Dearborn)1
Washington, October 10, 1960.
Dear Henry:
I have scarcely been at my desk for two weeks and hence I have
not had time to get into the Dominican problem in the depth that I
will do in the near future. My first impression is that the problem of
dealing effectively with Trujillo was made more difficult by the reluc-
tance of the Foreign Ministers at San José to go along with a realis-
tic program designed not only to bring about orderly elections but,
equally important, to insure an orderly transition to a genuinely dem-
ocratic regime.
The latest I have is that the Brazilians may be planning some kind
of an OAS committee to “observe” elections and while I would like
to hear more about this if and when Brazil actually makes a proposal
along these lines before coming to any final decision, I am afraid that
this would be a “whitewash” operation which would not do credit to
anyone connected with it.
If there is not going to be effective multilateral action and if we are
limited by our non-­intervention commitments in what we can do uni-
laterally, the question comes to mind as to whether there is really any
chance of convincing the Generalissimo that in his own interest—­given
the strength and depth of popular feeling throughout the hemisphere
on the issue of his dictatorship—­he should, after making arrangements
for a provisional government publicly committed to holding elections
by a date certain, leave the country with his family and official entou-
rage so as to permit an orderly transition to an anti-­communist demo-
cratic regime to take place. There are a lot of people in the States who
apparently sincerely believe that the Generalissimo might be induced to
leave. I doubt it myself but I am also aware that this is a matter involv-
ing subjective judgment which it would be difficult to prove beyond
peradventure of doubt.
I should like on a very personal and confidential basis to have your
views concerning this and, in particular, who the best intermediary might
be. For example, the name of Wilbur Morrison, Vice President of Pan
American Airways, has been suggested. If the approach is not to be made
Only. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Mann’s typed name. A type-­written note
on the source text indicates that this letter was mailed on October 18.

by the United States alone another suggestion is that several American
States might get together and ask the Papal Nuncio to have a try at con-
vincing the Generalissimo. In either case, I suppose it would be necessary
for the emissary to state that he speaks with the knowledge of the United
States or the group of American States as the case may be. I am rather
inclined to give something like this a try on the theory that if handled
properly we don’t have a great deal to lose and may gain something.
Finally, I believe there is a real danger that without some orderly
plan of transition there is a real danger that pro-­communist types would
take over. I am not sold on the theory that the end objective ought to
be a bloody revolution to overthrow Trujillo. I think everything we do
should have as its end objective not vengeance but the creation of a
decent democratic government in the Dominican Republic.
Please let me have your comments on the foregoing as soon as
convenient.
Sincerely,
Thomas C. Mann
DR–28.
Letter from the Consul General in the Dominican
Republic (Dearborn) to the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Mann)1
Ciudad Trujillo, October 27, 1960.
Dear Tom:
I was glad to receive your letter of October 102 and to know that
you have been able to give your personal attention to our problems
here. I knew you soon would, but I have also been fully aware that
we were competing with any number of other problems all demanding
your immediate consideration.
I am in full agreement with your impression that the problem of
dealing effectively with Trujillo was made more difficult by the reluc-
tance of the Foreign Ministers to go along with a realistic program
designed to bring about orderly elections and ensure an orderly transi-
tion to a genuinely democratic government. The important word in that
Official-Informal.
2 See Document DR–27.

Dominican Republic  519
sentence is “realistic” and I am sure that is why you inserted it. First and fore-
most, the transition must not be a sham. This means that we must not fall
into Trujillo’s trap of being satisfied with measures which legalistically
remove him from control but, in fact, permit him to continue his dicta-
torship. An example of his efforts to achieve this is his announcement
yesterday that he will run for Governor of the Province of Santiago.
This is obviously a maneuver on his part to satisfy the U.S., the OAS
and the OAR that he has bowed out of national politics, but which, at
the same time, will permit him to remain in the country, to continue
controls over its economic and financial life by his time-­honored meth-
ods. Trujillo as Governor of Santiago will be in every practical sense
the same as Trujillo is now. While he is in the Dominican-Republic and/or
while he maintains his economic domination, he will also continue his politi-
cal domination whether he is President or dogcatcher. While this is a politi-
cal fact, the responsible opposition to his regime will not dare to form
true opposition parties. There will be no real freedom of assembly, of
speech, or of the press and radio for these people. On previous occa-
sions when they rose to his lure, once he spotted them he took severe
reprisals against them and they are not prepared to put their necks on
his chopping block again.
A realistic program to bring about free elections can only, in my
opinion, be built around one keystone – ­namely the removal of Trujillo
from the country. Once this happens we should work toward an orderly
break-­up of his economic stranglehold on the national life. I admit it is
quite likely that once the opposition gets moving, this break-­up may be
anything but orderly. This country, however, is as desperately in need of a rev-
olution as any country. I remember reading about and revolutions are not usu-
ally orderly affairs. It should be our objective to see that the Dominican
revolution is as bloodless as possible. At the same time, it is not rational
to expect, in view of all the pressures of hatred which have been build-
ing up here over thirty years, that no one is going to get hurt. I would
hope 1) that we could prevent the Ramfis-Espaillat-Abbes-Sanchez
gang of cut throats from staging a St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre
of the leading oppositionists in an effort to save the situation for the
Trujillistas, and 2) that we could persuade the opposition, if they gain
control, not to carry their purge beyond those immediately responsible
for the criminal actions of the Trujillo regime. Our friends here favor a
limited purge but if they cannot maintain their prestige among the oppo-
sition as a whole, there is no telling what excesses may result. If we attach
importance to the future in this country, I cannot urge strongly enough
that we do everything possible to restore the pro-U.S. oppositionists at
least to their influence at the time of the Sixth MFM. This can only be
done if the U.S. takes strong measures against Trujillo in one way or
another.

Assuming that Trujillo’s departure from the country is necessary
before we can progress further toward our objectives, how is this to
be brought about? I do not believe he can be persuaded to leave under pres-
ent circumstances by any U.S. citizen. In his mind he built this country
out of nothing. The creditable physical plant which exists here, the
high degree of sanitation, the law and order, the hundreds of Trujillo
­statues – all these things he sees as monuments to his glory. He con-
ceives of all this as built up by his own tireless efforts day by day for
thirty years. In addition to all this he is a tough, ruthless old tyrant who
has weathered many a storm when all around him thought his ship
was sinking. As of this moment I believe he expects to weather this
storm also. It would be against this background that some one sent by
us would have to persuade him to step out and I agree with you that
success in this venture is doubtful.
Not only do I believe our agent could not persuade him at this time, but
I also believe Trujillo would use our move against us. In my view he would
inform the UN and the OAS that we were threatening him and that it
was not the first time. He would refer to the attempt of General Clark,
who called on him as a result of an appointment made by Ambassador
Farland, and say here was another example of our intervention. The
Foreign Minister has already referred to the Clark approach to me as
intervention, as I reported at the time. [text not declassified] One of our
dilemmas is that for an agent to be impressive he would have to be some
one who could convince the Generalissimo that he spoke with author-
ity. Yet if he spoke with authority, this would give the Generalissimo
the weapon he needs to charge us with intervention. I believe that
Trujillo might (but only might) leave the D. R. today if he could be per-
suaded that he was about to be killed, but this is obviously no job for
an American.
You asked who I thought would be the best intermediary in case
we decided to approach Trujillo. Although I have said I do not believe
any American can persuade him to leave, I shall go on to say why I
do not think that certain persons who have been mentioned would be
good choices. In this same mail, I have written a letter to Frank Devine
stating at some length why I do not think Bill Pawley should be considered.
Please ask Frank3 to show you that letter. The Papal Nuncio is out of the
question. He is anathema to the Generalissimo and has not been in
the country since last May owing to strained Vatican relations. Trujillo
is presently conducting a war of nerves against the Catholic Church
here and Church policy seems to be to try to ride out the storm in the
hope of avoiding violence against it. The Church took courageous and
3 Frank J. Devine, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs.

Dominican Republic  521
unprecedented steps earlier this year by publicly criticizing the regime.
The Nuncio’s statements to me at the time implied: “Well, we have done
our part, now it is your turn”. I do not believe Wilbur Morrison would
be a happy choice either. He would be running a great risk since if the
Generalissimo should publicize the approach, Pan American’s reputa-
tion all over Latin America might suffer. None of the governments like
Trujillo, but I suspect they would like even less the idea of a high official
of a U.S. enterprise seeking to overthrow even Trujillo’s government.
I regret that I cannot propose a likely name for you, but I think you will see
why from comments on the embarrassment which I believe any approach of
ours might cause us.
Getting away from an approach by a U.S. agent or the Nuncio,
the type of approach I think we could make without coming off sec-
ond best would be one we might make in concert with other countries.
The preferable approach would be by the OAS itself, ourselves par-
ticipating. Next best would be an approach by, let us say, Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Mexico and the U.S. If we could include Canada this
would be very helpful indeed. An approach of this sort might stand
a chance of convincing the Generalissimo that the jig was up and the
countries involved would be numerous and powerful enough so that
Trujillo could not saddle any one of them with the onus of intervention. While
this tack might have the advantage mentioned, I suppose the greatest
obstacle in using it would be the unlikelihood that the countries named
would participate owing to their non-­interventionist commitments.
The approach by the OAS itself would perhaps be the most likely and
certainly the most legally defensible—­but I do not suppose that we
could obtain concurrence even there.
As I mentioned, I believe the only reason the Generalissimo might
leave is fear of imminent death—­and this is not certain. For this reason
I think the Dominicans themselves have got to do the persuading. We can
help them to do it in a number of ways, some of which are probably not legally
possible for us. The best way would be to stop buying sugar, coffee, cacao and
beef from this country. This would hit Trujillo and those around him. His
own henchmen might then turn against him as their pockets would be
affected. We should try to hasten the day when his own men will refuse
to obey his orders and will tell him there is a plane waiting for him at
the airport. Other measures which would help toward this result would
be an embargo on exports of petroleum products, especially lubricants
to the D.R. The country runs on these products and if we could make it
impossible or highly expensive for Trujillo to obtain them we would be
contributing to dissatisfaction among those dependent on him. Another
helpful measure would be to induce Canadian and U.S. banks to stop
loaning money to the D. R. [text not declassified] Anything we can do to
show the Dominicans that Trujillo is losing his grip may at some point

act as a catalyst to start the snowball rolling. [text not declassified] When
we recently sent some arms to the Haitians, there was a furious reaction
here. If there is anything that will drive Trujillo to madness and make
him act against his better judgment, it will be a Haitian scare. This is
probably dream-­talk, but I am throwing many things into the pot in the
hope that something may be helpful.
Then there is the question of, “After Trujillo, what?”. Right after
the Sixth MFM there was little doubt in my mind but that we could
expect a moderate U.S.-­oriented government here if we could at that
time have taken the sanctions that would have been effective against
Trujillo. Mr. X believed, and I agreed, that the resulting confusion in the
Trujillo family and in the national economy would have been such as
soon to enable the opposition to stage a successful coup. At that time
our friends were riding high in the opposition and we would have been
as well off as we could ever expect in our relations with the new gov-
ernment. Since that time our position among the dissidents generally has
deteriorated, along with that of the pro-U.S. contingent. If a revolution took
place today, it would be touch and go as to whether our friends would have
high places in the government. I believe our position is retrievable to a large
extent. We could win back considerable lost ground by stiff recommen-
dations from the OAS Sanctions Committee, followed by immediate
and effective action on our part, for example. I realize that this is a tall
order and probably impossible, but I am trying to state what I think it
would take to put us where we would like to be.
What I am leading up to is to say that the answer to the question,
“After Trujillo, what?” depends on us to some extent. If we are unable
to convince the dissidents that we are helping them materially to put
the skids under Trujillo, then it is quite likely that the extreme nation-
alists, the extreme leftists and other anti-U.S. elements will dominate
the future here. If we can effectively help the opposition, if we jump
to their assistance right after the overthrow, if we have some measure
of success in keeping the communist elements among the exiles out of
here for a period after the fall of Trujillo, then I believe we shall have a
good future.
One further point which I should probably not even make. From
a purely practical standpoint, it will be best for us, for the OAS and for
the Dominican Republic if the Dominicans put an end to Trujillo before
he leaves this island. If he has his millions and is a free agent he will
devote his life from exile to preventing stable government in the D.R., to
overturning democratic governments and establishing dictatorships in
the Caribbean, and to assassinating his enemies. If I were a Dominican,
which thank heaven I am not, I would favor destroying Trujillo as being
the first necessary step in the salvation of my country and I would regard this,
in fact, as my Christian duty. If you recall Dracula, you will remember it was

Dominican Republic  523
necessary to drive a stake through his heart to prevent a continuation of his
crimes. I believe sudden death would be more humane than the solution
of the Nuncio who once told me he thought he should pray that Trujillo
would have a long and lingering illness.
I apologize for the length of this letter, but I wanted you to have a
useful amount of my thinking on the questions you asked me. If there
is anything I know, it is that I am not infallible. It may, for example, be
possible for some one to think of a type of approach to Trujillo by a U.S.
citizen which might induce him to leave. If some such proposal seems
promising I would suggest you try it out on me since I will be quick to
say “good” if it looks feasible from this battleground.
With kindest regards,
Very sincerely,
Henry Dearborn
DR–29.
Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and
Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 22, 1960.
SUBJECT
Intelligence Note: The Current Situation in the Dominican Republic
General Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina has survived many chal-
lenges during his thirty years of completely personal rule but none have
been as persistent or serious as the current threats he faces. Confronting
him are internal economic crises and widespread political dissension,
plus the formal condemnation of the American community of nations.
Although Trujillo seemingly remains in complete control, the days of
his regime appear numbered, although the time and manner of his
overthrow cannot be accurately predicted.
Trujillo’s troubles can be traced directly to the fall of Batista in January
1959. Suddenly isolated, Trujillo soon bore the full brunt of the revolu-
tionary, libertarian tide inspired by Castro’s success. Trujillo’s reaction
was to embark on a ruinously expensive campaign of arms procurement,
and to support openly followers of Batista then exiled in Ciudad Trujillo.
The resulting economic dislocations soon turned a small but influential

segment of the Dominican population into determined oppositionists.
The turning-­point for this group, mostly middle-­class professionals,
businessmen and intellectuals, was provided by the Castro-­supported
invasions of June 1959. Although unsuccessful, the invasion attempt, by
its example of active resistance and because of Trujillo’s brutal repres-
sion, rekindled a demand for basic liberties and sparked a determination
to remove the Generalissimo.
What followed has been a most widespread and persistent
anti-Trujillo movement, characterized by increasing contacts among
dissidents, cautious attempts at organization, pamphleteering amongst
the university students and sporadic acts of terrorism by extremists.
This ferment first came to a head in January 1960 with the discovery
and ruthless suppression of a plot to assassinate the Benefactor. At this
juncture the Church intervened, calling for humane treatment of those
arrested and for a broader measure of civil liberties. Trujillo stubbornly
refused to retreat; combining minor concessions with intimidation
he has, at least temporarily, suppressed the Church. Plotting and iso-
lated acts of resistance continued, however, heightened by the nation’s
declining economy and the Generalissimo’s growing international dis-
repute. Dissident figures, exasperated by continued repressions and
emboldened by OAS condemnation of the Trujillo regime, prepared
another coup in August 1960, but this too was uncovered and quietly
but vigorously suppressed.
The situation in the Dominican Republic now appears, superfi-
cially at least, favorable to Trujillo. OAS condemnation produced noth-
ing more than severance of diplomatic, but not consular relations. No
meaningful economic sanctions have been levied. He has secured a large
share of the “windfall “sugar market formerly allocated by the U.S. to
Cuba.2 His international ­credit is still relatively secure and convert-
ibility of the peso has been maintained. The opposition is discouraged,
and the Church has apparently retreated. The business community, now
convinced that change is unlikely, is abandoning passive resistance. The
military and the police are still loyal, and the Generalissimo still holds
a monopoly of the means of power. However, the seeds of Trujillo’s
downfall have been sown and are still growing. The economy contin-
ues in drastic decline. Large numbers of the urban and rural poorer
classes have slipped below subsistence level. All imported goods are
in short supply. The dissidents, in spite of so many costly failures, have
now penetrated the armed forces. The Church, in spite of its seeming
passivity, is still pressuring Trujillo. Although not yet sufficiently strong
to end the era of Trujillo, these forces cannot be indefinitely contained,

Dominican Republic  525
and Trujillo is not likely to make the concessions which would mol-
lify them. Although he has permitted several members of his family to
leave the country, the Generalissimo himself will probably remain to
the bitter end.
How this end will come is uncertain. Assassination is an increas-
ing possibility—perhaps a probability, considering the desperate tem-
per of the opposition. Alternatively, economic and political conditions
might deteriorate to an extent where the military would intervene and
attempt to dismiss Trujillo, merely to preserve their own interests. In
any case members of the Generalissimo’s entourage will not be able to
retain power. The transition will probably be chaotic and bloody, a sit-
uation ripe for exploitation by pro-Castro and other radical elements.
Such tendencies are well-­represented among the exiles, although
anti-­Castro factions do exist. However, any external forces, including
Cuban, must rely on a protracted period of disturbance to make their
influence felt. The immediate successor regime would probably be a
military junta with civilian participation, moderate and not anti-U.S.,
especially if we provided sympathetic assistance at an early date.
There are civilian elements however, which might prove somewhat
antagonistic: U.S. prestige, previously high among the moderates, has
been declining steadily and these moderates have been losing influ-
ence to the pro-Castro extremists. The United States is being criticized
for not taking a strong stand against Trujillo—­specifically, for not
applying the import-­export restrictions which they are sure would
soon topple him. The bitterness of this group is due largely to dis-
appointment with the widely-­heralded OAS actions of last August,
and there is some question as to the depth and permanence of these
anti-U.S. sentiments. However, the tide is now running against the
U.S. and the longer the current impasse continues, the more unfavor-
able to U.S. interests the outcome is likely to be when the Dominican
pressure-­cooker finally explodes.

DR–30.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, December 8, 1960.
SUBJECT
Application of Additional Economic Measures against the Dominican Republic
Within the next several days it will be necessary for the Department
of Agriculture to estimate consumption of sugar in the United States. It
appears that it will be legally necessary to continue purchases of sugar
from the Dominican Republic for the first three months of calendar year
1961. Such purchases will include approximately 28,000 tons under the
regular quota which must be purchased at the United States price and
somewhere in the neighborhood of 200,000 tons extra-­quota which it is
planned to purchase at the world price. A separate memorandum on
this subject will be forwarded to you shortly.
While we hope that it will be possible to temper the effect in
Venezuela of an announcement concerning sugar purchases with an
indication that the Administration intends to recommend that the next
Congress grant discretionary authority to the President to forego such
purchases, this will nevertheless create a strain on our relations with the
Betancourt regime and will possibly strengthen communist-­inspired
opposition to Betancourt.
At the same time we are faced with the necessity of taking a
position on the question of whether the American States should on
a multilateral basis apply additional economic measures against the
Dominican Government. The Council of the Organization of American
States was requested by the San José Foreign Ministers Meeting to
study the desirability and feasibility of extending economic sanctions
to other commodities. A special committee was created by the Council
for this purpose and any further delay on our part in taking a position
will expose us to Venezuelan charges of bad faith.
In view of this situation I recommend that you authorize the
Department of State to suggest to the special committee that the United
States will be prepared to cooperate in a multilateral program prohib-
iting the exportation of petroleum and petroleum products, trucks and
spare parts to the Dominican Republic. A statement which it is pro-
posed that Ambassador Bonsal make before the special committee
early next week is enclosed for your consideration.2
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project CleanUp, “Dominican Republic.” Confidential.
1960. The text of the statement is printed as Document DR–30, Enclosure.

Dominican Republic  527
The Commerce Department has indicated its willingness to apply
the necessary export controls.3
Christian A. Herter
[Enclosure]
Suggested Statement to be made in Special Committee of the
Council of the OAS on Resolution I of the Sixth Meeting of
Foreign Ministers
My Delegation is now prepared to present for the consideration
of this Special Committee its views with respect to the mandate given
the Council of the Organization of American States by Resolution I of
the Sixth Meeting of Foreign Ministers to study the feasibility and
desirability of extending the suspension in trade with the Dominican
Republic to articles in addition to arms.
Some time ago this Committee was informed that the United States
was preparing a study on Dominican foreign trade by commodity and
country in an attempt to assess the feasibility of an embargo by the
American States on specific items of Dominican commerce. As a first
result of this study, petroleum and petroleum products and trucks and
spare parts, which are not produced in the Dominican Republic, appear
to the United States Government to be examples of items the export of
which to the Dominican Republic it would be feasible to suspend at
this time.
With respect to petroleum and its products, in 1959 62% of
Dominican imports by value came from the Netherlands Antilles
directly and from Venezuela indirectly, 14% from the United States,
and 13% from Venezuela. During the past year, Caribbean sources of
Dominican petroleum imports have been largely out off. There are
indications, however, that the Dominican Republic has started to tap
other sources of petroleum supply, namely in Canada, Europe and
perhaps the Middle East. This, of course, would tend to reduce the
effectiveness of a total suspension in the exports of the OAS member
states. Any effective embargo on all or most of the Dominican sup-
ply of petroleum would undoubtedly have a serious adverse effect
on the Dominican people as inevitably would any measures taken
which would have an impact on the Dominican economy. Dominican
internal transport and over one-­half of Dominican production of
of President’s approval.”

electric power are dependent upon petroleum. The capabilities of the
Dominican military establishment would, of course, also be greatly
reduced by an effective embargo.
With respect to trucks and spare parts, approximately one-­half of
Dominican imports of trucks in 1959 came from the United States and
the rest from Europe, while the United States percentage of the supply
of spare parts was probably higher. A complete embargo on such ship-
ments from OAS member states would doubtlessly have an effect on
Dominican internal transport, although that country would presum-
ably continue to increase its purchases from European sources.
While the United States is prepared to extend the embargo in
the manner suggested, it is, of course, for the Special Committee to
decide whether this should be done, having in mind the remarks of
some of the delegations at the San José Meeting concerning injury to
the Dominican people. In the event a recommendation to that effect is
made by this Committee, my Government would be prepared to sup-
port such a finding by the Council. While my Government understands
that any such finding on the part of the Council would be recommen-
datory rather than obligatory in nature with respect to the individual
member states, it would undertake in good faith to implement it, with
the understanding that the other member states would do likewise.
This should, of course, include measures by the other states to prevent
transshipment to the Dominican Republic through their respective ter-
ritories of these articles originating in any member state, in order to
insure to the extent possible the effectiveness of these sanctions. It is
important in my Government’s view to preserve the collective nature of
any further decisions and actions taken by member states in this regard,
following upon the action already jointly taken by them at the Sixth
Meeting of Foreign Ministers.
The United States is continuing its study of the feasibility of apply-
ing the suspension in trade to other commodities and expects to present
its further views when these studies are completed.

Ecuador: U.S. Relations with Ecuador
EC–1.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in
Ecuador (Ravndal)1
Washington, February 7, 1958.
Dear Chris:
regarding Ecuador’s application to purchase from the United States on
a credit basis four T–34 training aircraft and runway lighting equip-
ment for the Taura Air Base. You enclosed correspondence from Colonel
James O. Robinson, Jr., Chief of the United States Air Force Mission
to Ecuador, requesting the Department’s support of the Ecuadoran
application.3 Colonel Robinson stated that the above equipment was
­critically needed in Ecuador as no night jet training could be accom-
plished at Taura until lights should be installed, and the Ecuadoran Air
Force could not start its own flight training program until a suitable
transition trainer such as the T–34 should be available.
We have been working hard on this matter ever since the Ecuadoran
application for the equipment was received by the Department on
September 27, 1957. My reply to your letters on the subject has been
delayed until the actual status of the application could be clarified. Here,
in brief, is what has happened and how the matter stands at present.
When we forwarded the Ecuadoran application to the Defense
Department we recalled that Defense had previously informed us that
it did not consider the provision of T–34 aircraft on a grant basis to be
by John M. Perry of the Office of South American Affairs on February 5. The source text
is an unsigned carbon copy.
3 Reference is to a memorandum from Colonel Robinson to Perry H. Culley,
Counselor of the Embassy in Ecuador, December 13, 1957, and a message from Colonel
Robinson to Ambassador Ravndal, January 14, 1958. This correspondence is filed with
Ambassador Ravndal’s letters cited above.

consonant with existing military assistance program objectives, but that
it would give favorable consideration to a request to purchase primary
trainer aircraft of a type which would be suitable and available. We
noted that in her present difficult fiscal situation Ecuador might be bet-
ter advised to devote her limited resources for military expenditures to
support of T-33 aircraft which she already had and F-80 aircraft which
we were committed to supply her in the near future. We also noted
that Ecuador had been unable to liquidate outstanding accounts for the
transportation of personnel of the United States Army and Air Force
Missions, which exceeded $300,000. We stated that in view of Ecuador’s
fiscal situation we would be reluctant to approve the request for T–34’s
even on a cash basis. We understood that four T–34’s and spare parts
for one year would cost as much as $250,000. However, we requested
that the Defense Department, if it considered that Ecuador had a mil-
itary requirement for primary trainer aircraft, suggest a type which
would be suitable and would be available at a lower cost to Ecuador.
With regard to the lighting equipment, we understood that it was
to be used in connection with activities of the International Geophysical
Year in which the United States would participate. We noted that if our
understanding was correct it would be in the interest of the United
States for Ecuador to obtain the equipment. Therefore, we started, if
the Defense Department considered that credit should be extended
to cover this purchase, we would concur in a recommendation to the
International Cooperation Administration that an appropriate credit be
established.
It was not until shortly before the receipt of your letter of
January 17 that we received a reply from Defense on the above matters.4
Defense indicated that the T–34 would be suitable for the intended
use by Ecuador and that no other suitable trainer would be available.
Furthermore, four T–34’s would cost about $178,000 and would be eco-
nomical to operate. Defense approved sale of the four T–34 aircraft and
the lighting equipment to Ecuador on appropriate credit turns under
The various areas of the Department which have an interest in this
request have concurred in principle to the sale of this equipment on
appropriate credit terms and steps are being taken now to work out
details for approval by Mr. Dillon6 prior to obtaining the concurrence
4 Reference is to a letter from John L. Holcombe, Director, Office of Programming
and Control, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs,
to Robert G. Barnes, Special Assistant for Mutual Security Affairs, Department of State,
Equipment”)
6 C. Douglas Dillon, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs.
No record of his action on this request was found in Department of State files.

Ecuador  531
of the NAC. Although we have no reason to believe that the credit will
not be approved without undue delay, no assurance of such approval
should be given the Ecuadorans at this time. The terms will probably be
for a three-year credit repayable in regular installments, with an appro-
priate down payment and interest charged on unpaid balance.
With best wishes always,
Sincerely,
R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
EC–2.
Editorial Note
State instructed the Embassy to negotiate the sale to Ecuador of United
cent of transportation costs. The Department also sent a draft sales
States and Ecuador signed a $1.84 million Surplus Agricultural
Commodities Agreement in Quito on June 30, 1958. For the text of the
agreement, see United States Treaties and Other International Agreements
(UST), volume 9, page 1192. The agreement was extended and amended
instructed the Embassy to negotiate the sale of $1 million worth of
agricultural commodities, including transportation costs to Ecuador.
the United States signed at Quito a surplus agricultural commod-
ities agreement under which Ecuador would purchase for sucres
$1 ­million worth of edible oils, including transportation costs. The
United States would lend Ecuador one-half of the proceeds for eco-
nomic development; one-quarter would be designated for United
States Government expenses in Ecuador; and one-quarter would be
for “Cooley Amendment” loans for private investment in Ecuador
through the Export-Import Bank. For the text of the agreement, see 11

EC–3.
Letter from President Eisenhower to President Ponce1
Washington, April 22, 1958.
Dear Mr. President:
The visit of the Vice President of the United States, Richard Nixon,
offers me a welcome opportunity to extend to you and to your coun-
trymen the best wishes of the people of the United States for Ecuador’s
continued peace and prosperity.
In these tense and troubled times when people throughout the
Free World are striving to conserve and protect their precious heritage
of freedom and democratic government, I am particularly conscious of
the example your country now gives to the Free World of a nation enjoy-
ing political stability, freedom and steady economic development. I feel
too that it is truly in the self-interest of all nations in this hemisphere that
each develop a sturdy self-reliant economy. Steady and rational economic
growth is essential to meet the aspirations of future generations for a ­better
standard of living. It is because of this belief that I have been encouraged
by your country’s experience over the last decade. Political stability com-
bined with responsible and constructive economic policies have placed
Ecuador in an enviable position of financial and economic solidity.
I note also with special pleasure that your country will be host
to the Eleventh Inter-American Conference.2 Ecuador offers both an
appropriate and attractive setting for this important meeting of the
American States. The Organization of American States furnishes a dra-
matic example for the rest of the world of the feasibility of effective
and fruitful international cooperation dedicated to the achievement of
peace, justice and well-being. We are, in a true sense, a family of States,
seeking common goals along a common path.
In conveying these greetings from my countrymen, may I also
extend my personal best wishes to Your Excellency.3
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Corr. 1958, P-Q-R-S.” Delivered by Vice President Nixon during his visit to Quito, May
9–11. The source text is a carbon copy, bearing a stamped signature.
had designated Quito as the site of the Eleventh Inter-American Conference. For docu-
mentation on the Tenth Inter-American Conference, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol.
IV, The American Republics, Chapter 4. The OAS Council subsequently scheduled the
Eleventh Inter-American Conference to open on February 1, 1960, but postponed it to
3 For the text of President Ponce’s reply of May 13, see the Department of State

Ecuador  533
EC–4.
Editorial Note
President Richard M. Nixon visited Quito, May 9–11. A summary of his
conversation with President Camilo Ponce Enríquez of Ecuador on May 9
is printed as Document EC–5. Ecuadoran Minister of Economy Federico
Intriago Arrata presented a memorandum to Vice President Nixon con-
taining Ecuadoran requests with respect to pending economic matters. A
copy of the 54-page memorandum was enclosed with despatch 748 from
May 13, Ambassador Ravndal stated that Vice President Nixon’s visit to
Ecuador was an “unqualified success” and that it “did much to cement
on Vice President Nixon’s visit to South America, see pages ff.
EC–5.
Summary of Conversation between Vice President
Richard M. Nixon and President Camilo Ponce Enríquez
of Ecuador1
Quito, May 9, 1958.
President Ponce stated that Ecuador’s principal problem was that
of raising the living standards of the people. He felt that this could best
be done by private investment, which Ecuador favors and will encour-
age. He also proposed that there be a special inter-American meeting
on economic matters.
Vice President Nixon replied that the observations he had made on
his trip to date led him to agree with President Ponce that raising living
standards was Latin America’s No. 1 problem. To achieve this, he said,
economic relations among the people of this hemisphere must be close.
He complimented President Ponce on having established a climate of
political stability, which attracts private capital. He said that although
he feels that private enterprise is the best means of combating Latin
America’s economic problems, this fact must be demonstrated to the
peoples of Latin America. Political freedom and private enterprise must
be used in the general welfare. President Ponce’s record in this respect
is good, and there are no great problems between Ecuador and the U.S.
This summary was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 799
from Quito, June 20. That despatch also enclosed a summary of Vice President Nixon’s
conversation at Quito Central University on May 10.

President Ponce commented that the economies of Latin America,
which are based on production of raw materials, suffer greatly when
prices of these materials go down. He reiterated his proposal that a
special Inter-American conference be called to deal with this type of
problem. He felt that such a conference should be in preparation for
the 11th Inter-American Conference, so that subjects discussed at the
latter would be clear and would have been given a lot of prior thought.
He felt that Ministers of Economy should attend this preparatory con-
ference, that it should be held as soon as possible, and that it should
discuss matters of the type that Vice President Nixon had observed on
his trip so far.
Vice President Nixon endorsed President Ponce’s proposal, but
stressed the desirability of the conference being on an informal basis -
that it be neither too rigid nor too dramatic. He felt that it could be of
considerable help in solving problems of the hemisphere.
President Ponce accepted Vice President Nixon’s suggestion con-
cerning the informal nature of the Conference, saying that what he had
in mind was a “round table” type of meeting. He thought that such a
conference should try to find long-range solutions for economic and
social problems. For example, he thought that it might try to do some-
thing about helping to create a middle class in Ecuador, which the
country badly needs and which would also benefit the U.S. by provid-
ing it with more customers.
Vice President Nixon reiterated the importance of solving Latin
America’s economic problems, which in turn would make it easier to
deal with political problems. He said the leaders in the hemisphere
must redouble their efforts along these lines.
EC–6.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Ecuador (Ravndal) to
the Department of State1
Quito, May 10, 1958.
requesting:
1. Elimination requirement that American firms get first priority
PL 480 funds thus releasing more money Ecuadorean enterprises;
2 Federico Intriago Arrata.

Ecuador  535
2. That all measures possible be taken assure success Santo
Domingo colonization project;
3. Rapid processing of Ecuadorean requests to development loan
fund for one million dollars agricultural loan, one million dollars small
business loan, one million dollars silo construction and 1.75 million
dollars freezing plants in Guayaquil and Loja;
4. Consideration by U.S. of reduction duties on unbleached Panama
hats;
5. That EXIM Bank loans be repayable in local currency and that
such loans be for longer period;
6. That U.S. technical assistance be planned for a longer period than
one year and that scholarship grants also be for a sufficient length of time;
7. A loan of three million dollars from president’s emergency fund
for the 1959 Inter-American conference;
8. Signature of double taxation agreement between U.S. and
Ecuador (Minister also stated desire institute active policy attract for-
eign capital including parity treatment with Ecuadorean capital).
9. Only complaint was occasional U.S. competition with small coun-
tries giving example that U.S. sold rice to Peru under commodity credit
corporation and PL 480 thus taking away Ecuador chance to sell rice.
Ravndal
EC–7.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Ecuador (Ravndal) to
the Department of State1
Quito, May 13, 1958.
No. 730.
SUBJECT
Ecuadoran Discrimination Against American Shipping.
During the visit of Vice President Nixon and his party to Ecuador,
Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom and Messrs. Waugh and Bernbaum
by John I. Fishburne, Counselor for Economic Affairs at the Embassy in Ecuador.
2 The referenced despatch reported the possible effects of Emergency Decree No. 18

had a long conversation with Foreign Minister Tobar, Minister of
Economy Intriago, Minister of Public Works Duran, Minister of Treasury
Cordovez, Manager of the Central Bank Perez Chiriboga, Ambassador
[illegible in the original] Ponce Enriquez and Under Secretary of State
Espinosa. The principal topic of conversation at this meeting was the
recent Ecuadoran decree law requiring certain imports into Ecuador to
be transported on Ecuadoran or Grancolombiana vessels.3
Having received forceful indications of the seriousness with which
the United States views the new shipping measure, Foreign Minister
Tobar opened the meeting with a discussion of the decree and claimed
that it is not discriminatory at all. He pointed out that the Ponce
Government has been trying for a year and a half to eliminate the con-
sular fee differential, that the Flota Grancolombiana is actually an organ
of the Colombian and Ecuadoran Governments, and that the Ecuadoran
Government feels obligated to do all in its power to foster the growth of
the Grancolombiana. He said that all countries try to protect their mer-
chant fleets and that many of them go much further than Ecuador in this
respect. He mentioned particularly the Chilean Law calling for 50% of
all cargo entering and leaving Chile to be transported in Chilean ves-
sels. He said that Ecuador must support Colombia and that Colombia
exerted so much pressure after the consular fee differential was reduced
to 1%4 that Ecuador felt it must take some positing acting to help the
Grancolombiana. He pointed out that exceptions can be made to the pro-
visions of the new decree and then called on the Minister of Economy to
continue the discussion.
The Minister of Economy reiterated the same arguments and went
back over the history of Ecuadoran legislation on shipped preferences.
He said that the new decree could not possibly affect more than 18%
or 20% of all incoming cargo (and perhaps no more than 12%), and
that the effect on United States shipping lines would therefore be very
small. He referred to the preferential treatment given by Colombia to
its merchant vessels including, he said, the privilege of paying in pesos
and exemption from stamp taxes. He referred also to the United States
laws in support of its merchant marine, stating that the United States
has given a series of concessions to its ships including financial aid,
loans, and subsidies. He said it would be unthinkable that a sovereign
3 Reference is to the Ecuadoran shipping decree published in the Registro Official,
April 23, 1958; a copy with English translation was sent to the Department of State under
4 Reference is to the special rate of consular duties that the Ecuadoran Government
had conceded to those importers who transported their merchandise in Ecuadoran or
Flota Grancolombiana ships. Effective January 1, 1958, Ecuador reduced the consular fee
differential from 2½ to 1 percent.

Ecuador  537
government could not pass regulations that its own materials must
be brought in its own vessels. He referred to the shipping provisions
under the United States PL–480 program and the Eximbank loan pro-
gram and said that Ecuador accepts those regulations as being normal
and natural, implying that the United States should therefore not object
to the new Ecuadoran law.
The Minister also said that one of the principal reasons for the
Flota’s great increase in percentage of Ecuadoran-bound traffic is
the fact that the Flota ships go all the way to Guayaquil, whereas the
Grace ships offload at Puna with consequent added expense and expo-
sure of cargo to theft and damage. He said that Grace was complaining
so bitterly about the Ecuadoran law simply because it is a powerful
company and is accustomed to brooking no competition.
The Minister of Economy ended up by saying that if he had had
the slightest idea that the new law might be considered discriminatory,
he would have advised President Ponce not to sign it. He said that
Ecuador must keep the friendship of the United States which has been
so helpful to Ecuador in all its problems.
There was then a discussion of the percentage of cargo carried by
the Grace Line and the percentage carried by the Flota Grancolombiana,
with the Ecuadoran officials insisting that the new decree would have
little if any effect on the traffic of the Grace Line.
Assistant Secretary Rubottom said that the principle is the important
thing, rather than statistics, although these are interesting and import-
ant. He said that since there is no political problem outstanding between
the United States and Ecuador, the group was free to concentrate freely
on this shipping question and that he appreciated the frank manner in
which the Ecuadorans had brought up the subject. He pointed out that
the United States has tried for years to wipe off the slate the consular
free question and that it seemed to be on the way to termination when
this new decree was passed. He pointed out that the new decree was a
heavy blow to United States expectations of seeing an end to the ship-
ping problem and stated that in our point of view there is no doubt that
the new decree is discriminatory.
Mr. Rubottom said that the United States has always taken the
same firm position on questions of discrimination and that we must
continue to face such questions. He said that the attitude of the United
States Government is not dependent in any way on the Grace Line and
pointed out that the United States has been following the same principle
of protesting against discrimination in the case of Argentina and Brazil.
Mr. Rubbottom referred to the subsidies received by American ship-
ping lines and said the Ecuadorans are the first to recognize that if the
United States did not maintain a strong merchant fleet the resultant
weakness would prevent it from being able to face Russia. He pointed

out also that the provisions for shipment of PL–480 and Eximbank
cargoes on American vessels (to the extent of 50%) is natural since the
shipments are made possible by dollar loans which usually include the
dollar cost of freight.
Mr. Rubottom said he appreciated the fact that Ecuador was under
pressure from Colombia, but he pointed out that Colombia itself has
never passed an act so discriminatory as the new Ecuadoran law. He
concluded by saying that the provisions of Article 6 are not entirely
clear,5 but the act as a whole seems completely discriminatory.
Mr. Bernbaum said that if the United States did not prevent an
example of discrimination such as the new Ecuadoran law, the measure
could serve as an example for the rest of the world and other countries
might follow Ecuador’s lead. He pointed out that the United States
had protested the Chile law and that this law is not yet in effect. He
mentioned the difficulties with Argentina, dating from the time of the
Peron6 Administration, but added that these difficulties had recently
been solved through an exchange of notes with the new Argentine
Government.
Mr. Bernbaum admitted that a Government has the right to bring
its own cargo in its own ships for its own account, but pointed out that
the new Ecuadoran decree goes far beyond such a measure. He said
that the United States asks only for the right to compete on a commer-
cial basis and pointed out that subsidies like those granted to United
States shipping lines do not prevent competition.
The decree was discussed further along the above lines and the
Ecuadorans indicated that they would like information as to how
the United States had settled the shipping discrimination issue with
Argentina.
In summary, Mr. Rubottom spoke very frankly and forcefully and
left no doubt in any one’s mind as to the attitude of the United States
in this matter.
Enclosed for the use of the Department of State and other agencies
are memoranda from officials of the Grace Line showing how seriously
the new decree is expected to affect American shipping interests, and
a copy of a memorandum written by the Minister of Economy to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs in justification of the new decree.7
informed the Department of State in a note of June 10 that, in accordance with Article 6
of the April 23 decree, Ecuador had decided to limit applicability of the decree to cargoes
1955.
7 The enclosures are not printed.

Ecuador  539
The Embassy has learned that the German Ambassador8 in Quito
has received instructions from his Government to make a vigorous
­protest against the new Ecuadoran decree. The British Embassy in Quito
is also lodging a formal protest with the Ecuadoran Foreign Ministry on
behalf largely of Canadian interests.
Christian M. Ravndal
8 Rudolf Pamperrien.
EC–8.
Editorial Note
During the years 1958–1960, United States Government agen-
cies concluded the following loan agreements with the Ecuadoran
loan of $880,000 to the Ecuadoran Government for project assistance
Empresa Electrica Ambato, S.A., for a diesel power station and electric
Ecuadoran Government for highway construction on March 23, 1959;
sucres to the Ecuadoran Government for highway construction on
Ecuadoran Government for construction at the International Airport,
4 million sucres to Empresa Electrica del Ecuador, Inc., for electric dis-
tribution facilities on October 10, 1960. For further information, see
Agency for International Development, Status of Loan Agreements as
Export-Import Bank during the years 1958–1960 are listed in Export-
Import Bank of Washington, Report to the Congress for the Twelve Months
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
approved a loan of $13 million to the Guayaquil Port Authority for
port development on October 9, 1958. For further information, see.
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Fourteenth

EC–9.
Editorial Note
a trip of Ecuadoran Minister of Defense Alfonso Calderón Moreno to
the United States, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, the Federal
which he held immediately upon his return to Quito, according to the
Embassy’s report, he stated that in the United States he arranged to pay
an old Ecuadoran debt to the Department of Defense, arranged to buy
a Landing Ship, Medium (LSM), and had fruitful talks with General
Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr., Chairman of the Inter-American Defense Board.
No record of Minister of Defense Calderón’s talks during his unofficial
visit to the United States was found in Department of State files.
EC–10.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Santiago, August 16, 1959.
US/MC/102
SUBJECT
Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute
PARTICIPANTS
Ecuador-Peru Boundary.” Official Use Only. According to information on the source text,
Secretary Herter approved this memorandum on August 25. This conversation took place
in the Hotel Carrera at 6:00 p.m. Secretary Herter and Foreign Minister Tobar attended
the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Foreign Ministers of American States at Santiago,
August 12–18.
2 The designation US/MC/10 stands for the tenth of fourteen memoranda of Secretary
Herter’s conversations with Foreign Ministers attending the meeting at Santiago.
United States
The Secretary
Mr. Rubottom
Ecuador
Foreign Minister Tobar
Ambassador Chiriboga, Amb. to the U.S.
The Ecuadoran Foreign Minister called at the invitation of the
Secretary, accompanied by Ambassador Chiriboga. After several com-
plimentary remarks, Foreign Minister Tobar raised the problem of the

Ecuador  541
Peru-Ecuador boundary. He said that Ecuador wanted to keep the sub-
ject quiet between now and the Quito Conference in order to avoid any
kind of outbreak and to assure that Peru would attend the Conference.
He commented on the bellicose publicity from Peru regarding this
question.
The Secretary indicated that the Guarantors in Rio had this sub-
ject under continuing review and acknowledged the possibility that
a statement might be made by the Guarantors.3 The Foreign Minister
expressed the hope that none would be issued.
Mr. Rubottom asked the Foreign Minister whether his Government
still intended to invite the Chiefs of State of the other American Republics
to attend a meeting in Guayaquil at the end of the Inter-American
Conference next February. Mr. Rubottom specifically mentioned the
disturbances which had occurred in Guayaquil a few months ago as a
factor possibly being considered by the Government of Ecuador.4 The
Foreign Minister, ignoring the reference to Guayaquil, reaffirmed their
intention to invite the Chiefs of State to Guayaquil and indicated that
President Eisenhower’s health had been considered in the plan to meet
at sea level rather than at Quito.
(Mr. Rubottom had also alluded to the traditional desire of the
Government of Ecuador to balance the treatment of the mountainous
area of the country with that accorded the coastal region.)
3 Reference is to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States, who, as Guarantors,
signed the Protocol of Peace, Friendship, and Boundaries between Peru and Ecuador at
of the Protocol, see 3 Bevans 700.

EC–11.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)
to the President1
Washington, September 28, 1959.
SUBJECT
Confirmation of Determination and Determination under Section 451(a) of the
Mutual Security Act of 1954 as amended, permitting the use of funds in order to
­furnish military assistance to Ecuador.
Ecuador will be host to the 11th Inter-American Conference at
Quito in early 1960 which will be attended by the Foreign Ministers of
the 21 American States. Ecuador has also proposed that a meeting of
chiefs of state of the American Republics be held in Guayaquil during
the closing days of the Conference. The Ecuadoran Government, recall-
ing the serious disorders that occurred during the Inter-American
Conference in Bogotá in 1948 and expressing its grave concern over
known Communist plans to disrupt the forthcoming Conference
in Quito and the proposed Presidential meeting in Guayaquil, has
requested the United States grant assistance in developing appropriate
security measures.2
Current indications are that the Communists will seek to disrupt the
11th Inter-American Conference by employing their propaganda appa-
ratus, both in Ecuador and internationally, to portray the Conference
as an instrumentality of United States imperialism in Latin America
and, by using their penetration in Ecuadoran student and labor groups,
as well as agitators planted in peaceful crowds, to foment demonstra-
tions against the Conference and United States Delegates with a view to
discrediting and breaking up the Conference. The Ecuadoran security
forces are not adequate in terms of training, organization, and equip-
ment to cope with this Communist threat. Nor is the Government of
Ecuador able to finance the necessary equipment and training which
will not be provided except through United States aid.
Because it is in the United States interest that the Inter-American
Conference be held in a calm, democratic atmosphere unmarred by
Communist agitation or by an extraordinary demonstration of force,
and because of your possible participation in the proposed meeting of
Presidents in Guayaquil, it is believed imperative that the necessary
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files. Secret.
Ambassador Chiriboga’s request to Assistant Secretary Rubottom for technical assistance
to the national police of Ecuador and for personnel to train Ecuadorans in intelligence

Ecuador  543
grant assistance be extended Ecuador. Should the Communists suc-
ceed in disrupting the Quito Conference, this would do great harm to
United States prestige and foreign policy objectives in Latin America
and would undermine the confidence of the peoples of this hemisphere
in the Inter-American system which the United States in concert with
other American nations has been working constantly to strengthen and
perfect, most recently, for example, at the Meeting of Foreign Ministers
in Santiago.
Because of the urgency of commencing the internal security assis-
tance to Ecuador as soon as possible, on July 12, 1959, a training ­program
was submitted with the informal concurrence of the Departments of
State and Defense and the Bureau of the Budget for your approval. On
1954, as amended3 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act’’), you orally
determined it to be important to the security of the United States that
not to exceed $62,000 of the temporary appropriations for fiscal year
1960 made available for mutual security programs by Section 101(b)
of Public Law 86–764 and any amendments thereto be used to furnish
­military services to the Ecuadoran Army, without regard to the require-
$43,757 has been obligated for this purpose pursuant to the authority of
Apart from the services referred to above, there has now been
developed with the Government of Ecuador a program of assistance in
two phases. First, the United States proposes to provide riot control and
other appropriate training and equipment to the Ecuadoran National
Police, which normally are responsible for the internal security of the
country but are inadequately trained and equipped to discharge this
responsibility, in order to improve their ability to maintain security
during the Quito Conference and proposed Guayaquil meeting. This
phase of the program will cost an estimated $402,892.
Second, against the contingency that the situation should become
critical and a state of emergency should be declared by the President
of Ecuador, during which the police would be placed under military
command and the combined police and armed forces would be respon-
sible for the maintenance of order in the country, the United States
also proposes to provide a more comprehensive program of internal
­security training and equipment to the Ecuadoran armed forces. This
proposed military program comprises the furnishing of such training

and equipment to specially organized Ecuadoran “anti-Communist
forces”, and is estimated to cost $803,175 (military training additional
to that already furnished, estimated to cost $19,410, and military equip-
ment, materials and services estimated to cost $783,765).
While Ecuador is eligible to receive grant military assistance, the
furnishing of such assistance is specifically conditioned by the require-
ments of the first and third sentences of Section 105(b)(4) of the Act.
These provide, in effect, that military assistance may be furnished to
Latin American countries only to permit them to participate in Western
Hemisphere defense missions, and that internal security requirements
shall not be the basis for military assistance programs to such countries
in the absence of a Presidential determination. Accordingly, in order
to furnish the additional military assistance to the Ecuadoran armed
forces for the internal security program, it is necessary to waive these
requirements.
The use of funds as referred to above is considered to be in fur-
therance of the purposes of the Act and important to the security of the
United States.
IT IS, ACCORDINGLY, RECOMMENDED that you sign the
enclosed memorandum,6 thereby confirming your oral determina-
tion and making the new determination as required by the Act for the
above-mentioned purposes.
The Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Bureau of the
Budget concur in this recommendation.
Douglas Dillon
President confirmed his oral determination of July 14, 1959, for the proposed assistance
to Ecuador. A copy of the confirmation is attached to the source text.
The United States concluded an internal security assistance agreement with
to Quito, February 29, 1960, enclosed copies of the referenced notes and informed the
Embassy that the agreement was deemed to have entered into operation on July 15, 1959.
EC–12.
Editorial Note
Ambassador Christian M. Ravndal and Minister of Foreign Affairs
Carlos Tobar Zaldumbide exchanged notes at Quito on January 20 and
February 11, 1960, constituting an agreement for a five-year loan of two

Ecuador  545
United States patrol craft (escort vessels) to Ecuador. For the text of the
agreement, see 11 UST 241.
On February 24, 1960, at Quito, Ambassador Ravndal and Foreign
Minister Tobar signed an Agreement Relating to a Cooperative Program
in Ecuador for the Observation and Tracking of Satellites and Space
Vehicles. It provided for continuing the operation and maintenance of
the satellite tracking station at Paramo de Cotopaxi, known as the Quito
Tracking Station Facility. For the text of the agreement, see 11 UST 179.
EC–13.
Editorial Note
that Ecuadoran Minister of Defense Gustavo Diez Delgado had
accepted the invitation of Secretary of Defense Thomas S. Gates, Jr.,
to visit Washington and various United States military installations,
Defense Minister Diez, who had returned to Quito on March 18, stated
that the United States would supply Ecuador with $18 million in mil-
itary equipment. As reported in despatch 431 from Quito on April 1,
he expressed complete satisfaction with his conversations with United
States defense officials, stressing the economic advantage of United
EC–14.
Editorial Note
In a memorandum of conversation with Assistant Secretary of
State Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., on March 14, 1960, Ambassador José R.
Chiriboga Villagómez referred to a recent Ecuadoran request for a
sugar quota of 35,000 tons in 1960. Assistant Secretary Rubottom
of July 21, 1960, to Ambassador Ravndal, Foreign Minister Tobar raised
the Ecuadoran request to a 40,000 ton sugar quota in the fourth quarter
Chiriboga in a note dated August 5, 1960, that the United States could
not consider Ecuador as a source of sugar in the reassignment of Cuba’s

EC–15.
Editorial Note
the final results of the Ecuadoran Presidential election of June 5 as fol-
lows: José María Velasco Ibarra of the National Velasquista Federation
had received 373,585 votes; Galo Plaza Lasso of the Radical Liberal
Party, 175,076 votes; Gonzalo Cordero Crespo of the Conservative
Party, 172,690 votes; and Antonio Parra Velasco of the Left-wing of the
Monroy of the National Velasquista Federation was elected Vice
President. In a memorandum of June 8 to the Secretary on the election
results, Assistant Secretary Rubottom, expressed surprise at the extent
of Velasco’s victory, and stated that “in view of his actions during his
previous administrations, he is believed to be basically friendly to the
Embassy reported that members of the National Velasquista Federation
were “on friendly terms with the Embassy, and we expect no insuper-
2760) President Velasco was inaugurated for a four-year term beginning
midnight August 31, 1960.
EC–16.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Consul General at
Guayaquil (Allen)1
Guayaquil, June 23, 1960
SUBJECT
Ambassador Ravndal calls on President-Elect
Dr. José María VELASCO Ibarra
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Ravndal
Dr. José María VELASCO Ibarra
[Here follows two introductory paragraphs about President-elect
Velasco’s residence where this conversation took place and the pres-
ence of photographers.]
by the Consul at Guayaquil, Fred A. Somerford; transmitted under cover of despatch 92
from Guayaquil, June 24, 1960.

Ecuador  547
The Ambassador remarked that he had presented his credentials to
Dr. Velasco in 1956. Dr. Velasco acknowledged in a very friendly ­manner.
The Ambassador mentioned Ecuador’s “oriente” region, and mentioned
the “trocha’’ (a path made by cutting down jungle) between Brazil and
Ecuador, and the possibilities of opening a permanent road connecting
Ecuador with Brazil. Dr. Velasco replied that he had been aware of the
Ambassador’s interest in the “oriente”, and said that he would be most
willing to cooperate with Brazil in such a venture because it would be of
very great benefit for both Brazil and Ecuador.
The Ambassador expressed the desire to read the transition of the
felicitations from the Secretary of State to Dr. Velasco on the occasion
of Dr. Velasco’s electoral triumph, to which Dr. Velasco assented most
cordially. He thanked the Ambassador and said that on this same day
he would reply to the Secretary of State by telegram.
The Ambassador suggested to Dr. Velasco that the U.S. Government
was anxious to know of Dr. Velasco’s thinking regarding Point IV and
the military and other U.S. missions in Ecuador, and expressed the
hope that Dr. Velasco would collaborate with the programs of these
missions. Dr. Velasco replied that he was well informed of the bene-
fits which Ecuador had received and was receiving from Point IV pro-
grams in Ecuador. He said that he would most certainly cooperate with
the United States, but that there must be an end to the “papeleo” (red
tape) which bottled-up the launching of any program. Dr. Velasco made
it clear that the red tape bottleneck was not the fault of Point IV, but
rather of the Ecuadorean Government which took forever to sign nec-
essary agreements.
The Ambassador suggested that perhaps these administrative bot-
tlenecks could be abolished by means of agreement between the two
governments. Dr. Velasco reiterated his conviction that these delays
were entirely the fault of the Ecuadorean Government; that these short-
comings had to be corrected, and said that reciprocity and mutual
respect should result in the realization of mutual achievements.
The Ambassador said that we sought his views and advice on
how to help our friends in Latin America; that we would appreciate
Dr. Velasco’s ideas and advice with the view of improving our relations
with the Latin American people. Dr. Velasco thanked the Ambassador
for this tribute. Velasco reiterated his sincere desire to cooperate with
the U.S. Government, and mentioned a Secretary of State in President
Roosevelt’s last administration, with whom Velasco said he conferred
with the hope of attaining mutual benefits. He said, however, that con-
ferring with this Secretary did not produce any results. Dr. Velasco
again mentioned his desire to cooperate with the United States.
The Ambassador said that the U.S. Government was anxious to
help Ecuador in launching a low cost housing program, and that we

needed Dr. Velasco’s advice concerning such a program. Dr. Velasco
said that the poor class in Ecuador was suffering from a deplorable
economic situation, unemployment and little government initiative to
alleviate this situation. He said that he had to do something to calm his
people, because his people were restless. He continued by saying that
the United States had the technicians, and that these technicians could
help him in fomenting a low cost housing project. He mentioned the
township of Babahoyo which was in a very great need for a low cost
housing project, and said that such a project for Babahoyo would calm
the people of that community.
The Ambassador said that through the Embassy in Quito the U.S.
Government has been thinking about presenting a low cost housing
program to Dr. Velasco, and that we needed Dr. Velasco’s advice and
Dr. Velasco’s support for such a program. Dr. Velasco replied he needed
such a program, and asked that the presentation and the help for such
a program be urgent.
The Ambassador mentioned to Dr. Velasco that the United States
and Ecuador had common interests in the United Nations in combat-
ing totalitarianism; that the Russians were making efforts to penetrate
Latin America and sabotage our solidarity; and that we prayed that the
collaboration he gave us before in combating this menace, would con-
tinue during his forthcoming administration.
Dr. Velasco replied that he understood, and said that he would not
cease to awaken the Latin American conscience to this peril; that in so
doing he would be giving the United States great help. He continued
by saying that we could not allow the Russians to overrun our insti-
tutions; that the United States has been the equilibrium between the
democracies and the Russian menace; that the democracies must be
­strengthened because it was our obligation to humanity.
The Ambassador brought up the Cuban situation; the political
unrest which Cuba was exporting to many Latin American countries,
and told Dr. Velasco that he would like to exchange ideas regard-
ing this problem with someone in Dr. Velasco’s government. The
Ambassador asked if he could leave with Dr. Velasco a memorandum
which he had on this subject,2 and Dr. Velasco was pleased to accept
it. The Ambassador said that the memorandum could be amplified
with the view of coordinating ideas concerning the Cuban ­menace
in Latin America. Dr.  Velasco said that soon he would inform the
Ambassador about the person he would designate to collaborate with
the Ambassador on this matter.
2 The memorandum under reference was not further identified.

Ecuador  549
The Ambassador proceeded to make his departure, thanking
Dr. Velasco for granting him the interview, and Dr. Velasco thanked the
Ambassador for having called on him and for personally conveying to
him the congratulations of the Secretary of State.
Ward P. Allen
EC–17.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the First Secretary of
the Embassy in Ecuador (Rogers)1
Quito, August 31, 1960.
US/MC/12
PARTICIPANTS
2 The designation US/MC/1 refers to the first of three memoranda of conversations
of Under Secretary Dillon during his visit to Quito, August 31–September 3 to attend
the ceremonies incident to the inauguration of President Velasco beginning August 31.
Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place in the U.S.
Ambassador’s residence at 3 p.m.
United States
Under Secretary Dillon
General Robert Cutler
Mr. John Leddy, Special Assistant to the
Under Secretary
Edward S. Little, Charge d’Affaires a.i.
J. L. Hummel, Director of USOM/Ecuador
J. T. Rogers, First Secretary, Embassy Quito
Ecuador
Minister-Designate (Foreign Affairs)
Jose Ricardo CHIRIBOGA Villagomez
Minister Designate (Development)
Jaime NEBOT Velasco
SUBJECT
Ecuadorean-Peruvian Boundary Dispute
Minister-Designate Chiriboga opened the conversation by describ-
ing briefly the significance of the triumph of Dr. Velasco on June 5,
1960. He said that the popular demand for economic improvement
had expressed itself in the form of votes for Velasco rather than in the
form of an explosion. Velasco is well aware of and concerned about
this popular demand and is working to develop programs of economic
improvement which will satisfy popular aspirations.
Ecuador has problems, said Chiriboga, in the economic, social and
international fields.

In the international field the problem is the Rio Protocol of 1942.
This protocol, Chiriboga stated, was signed under strong pressure from
the then Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles at a time when the
Peruvian Army (which had invaded and destroyed Ecuador without
reason) occupied a good part of the country. The Protocol met with
strong opposition in Ecuador from the beginning. Nevertheless, the
Ecuadorean Government attempted in good faith to carry it out but
was prevented from doing this by the geographical facts, i.e., that no
watershed existed, where called for by the treaty. Peru has since said
in effect that the delimitation of the boundary should be completed
by following “the spirit” of the Protocol which, in Ecuadorean eyes, is
impossible. The Minister Designate pointed out that the “impossibil-
ity” of doing this has increased because of the gradual development of
the spirit of justice throughout the hemisphere.”
Accordingly, President-elect Velasco a few days ago had declared
with full public support that the Protocol is void. He said that Ecuador
did not want to have any problem with Peru and hoped that the
Guarantors would understand its position. He claimed that Peru is
working hard to obtain a statement by the Guarantor Powers which
Ecuador would strongly oppose and would interpret as an indication
that the Guarantors do not fully understand and are not sympathetic
with the position of Ecuador. The Guarantors should continue to seek
ways of solving the problem in terms of justice and equality.
As an indication of its desire to improve relations with Peru,
Ecuador is anxious to sign a bilateral trade agreement with its southern
neighbor.
Chiriboga said Velasco was determined to hold the XI Inter-
American Conference in Quito in March 1961 in order to solve problems
appropriate to it. Ecuador’s position is not that the boundary problem
should be solved at the Conference but it only wishes to point out that
the problem exists. He said he was certain the U.S. would continue to
follow its objective policy with regard to the boundary problem. He did
not expect the United States to take sides as between Ecuador and Peru.
In response to a question from the Under Secretary, the Minister-­
Designate said that the problem was not a question of the amount of
land involved but a matter of blood and history. The Amazon was dis-
covered by Ecuador and is as important to Ecuador as is Quito. It is a
natural boundary between Peru and Ecuador.
The Under Secretary asked about the present situation after Velasco’s
declaration, including that the Guarantors’ responsibilities may have
been modified. The Minister-Designate said that Ecuador was not trying
to push the matter and that there was no hurry in solving it.
The Under Secretary thanked Chiriboga for his very useful state-
ment. The United States desires a mutually acceptable settlement.

Ecuador  551
EC–18.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the First Secretary of
the Embassy in Ecuador (Rogers)1
Quito, August 31, 1960.
US/MC/2
PARTICIPANTS
Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place in the U.S.
Ambassador’s residence at 3 p.m.; it described a continuation of the conversation
reported in Document EC–17 on a different subject.
United States
Under Secretary Dillon
General Robert Cutler
Mr. John Leddy, Special Assistant to the
Under Secretary
Edward S. Little, Charge d’Affaires a.i.
J. L. Hummel, Director of USOM/Ecuador
J. T. Rogers, First Secretary, Embassy Quito
Ecuador
Minister-Designate (Foreign Affairs)
Jose Ricardo CHIRIBOGA Villagomez
Minister-Designate (Development)
Jaime NEBOT Velasco
SUBJECT
Ecuador’s Economic Development Needs
Minister-Designate Nebot repeated in part remarks already made
by Chiriboga on the nature of the social revolution of June 1960 elec-
tions. If their aspirations are not satisfied, people of Ecuador would take
a road other than that of peaceful election to achieve their objectives.
Nebot pointed to the deterioration in Ecuador’s terms of trade
over the past 20 years and the decline in the annual increase of the
Gross National Product. The problem of unemployment is increasing,
he said, with a 3.1 percent annual increase in population, which meant
50,000 new jobs required annually. This number of new jobs are sim-
ply not available. He said Ecuador needed help particularly in medium
­industries which complement Ecuador’s basically agricultural econ-
omy. He mentioned specifically electric power, highway construction,
and social needs such as housing. Nebot emphasized that effective
help is needed quickly and that not a great deal of time is available.
He added that at the moment there is no Communist representation
in Congress and no major division in Congress as regards economic
cooperation with the U.S.
In response, the Under Secretary reviewed U.S. economic aid pol-
icy over the past twenty years, pointing out that through the experi-
ence of the Institute of Inter-American Affairs and of Point IV we have
learned a good bit, including the fact that in order to make development

and assistance programs work, much more than money is required.
Trained personnel are absolutely essential to the success of any pro-
gram, whether in industry or such fields as public administration. We
have also learned, said the Under Secretary, that programs can be suc-
cessful only if their benefits are visible to the people.
The Under Secretary said that the recently announced Program
for Social Development in Latin America was initiated particularly
because of our feeling of hemispheric solidarity with Latin America and
because it appears that most Latin American Governments shared U.S.
views in this field and believe that effective cooperation is ­possible.2
The program will probably be carried out largely through the Inter-
American Development Bank and the United States is ready to work
with Ecuador in the fields of agriculture, road construction, credit,
power supply, training of personnel, urban housing, etc. Much of this
will be organizational help since it is beyond our capability to do every-
thing. We need to begin work where we can—where good planning
exists—before the Program for Social Development becomes effective
next spring. Other cooperative arrangements have been made recently,
on the basis of excellent planning, with Peru for development of its
eastern area and with Colombia (to be announced shortly) in the field
of housing, land settlement, education and general development after
careful study by ICA.
The Under Secretary emphasized his belief that this type of devel-
opment, on the basis of adequate preparation, is much better than the
other road for the people of Ecuador, the road of giving up their free-
dom in return for promises. He said that President Eisenhower had
asked him to express his best wishes to the new President of Ecuador
and his associates, and to say that the United States wants very much to
cooperate with Ecuador. Naturally we must operate under certain laws
which require that we know what we are doing before we do it. Speed
in fact results from good planning, frequently based on studies made
by DLF or other missions.
The Under Secretary mentioned that the Geodetic Survey mapping
program is obviously very fundamental in Ecuador’s development
program. An application to the DLF for this program could be han-
dled very quickly. The Under Secretary also referred to ICA, DLF and
other missions which are to visit Ecuador shortly and to the future role
of the Inter-American Development Bank. The Bank, he said, would
be helpful in technical assistance fields as well, and in many ways the
use of bank personnel might be more advisable than the use of U.S.
technicians.
2 For documentation on the referenced program of aid to Latin America, see

Ecuador  553
Minister-Designate Chiriboga responded by saying that Ecuador
was very much impressed that the United States—after having bene-
fitted from its earlier mistakes—had concluded that more help must
be given to Latin America. He said Ecuador is working hard on spe-
cific, clear-cut projects and that a number of these would be ready in
early October, some of which would be worked out by U.S. companies.
Minister-Designate Chiriboga mentioned a number of missions—World
Bank, Exim Bank, housing etc., and emphasized the need for speed,
saying he was frankly somewhat afraid for the future. He thought the
housing project was especially urgent and mentioned the arrival of
the ICA technician Baruch on September 10. He said he had spoken
recently to Vance Brand about a $5,000,000 loan for housing3 and that
the firm of Klein-Saks is sending a mission on September 15 to make a
survey of taxation problems and to reorganize the Banco de Fomento.
The Under Secretary referred back to the growth of Ecuador’s
Gross National Product and said he hoped Ecuador could avoid the
two extremes of stagnation and inflation. He said there had been an
evolution in U.S. thinking the past two or three years with regard
to the problem of commodities. We now realize that it is not simply
a problem of buying in the cheapest market available. Some success
has been achieved in the case of coffee and now it is not only the U.S.
Government which supports the international coffee agreement but
also U.S. ­importers. There are difficult problems in other fields—­cotton,
lead and zinc—but despite limitations the U.S. is interested in and
working on these problems on a case-by case basis.
Minister-Designate Nebot brought up briefly the problem of price
discrimination against Ecuadorean bananas, with Central American
bananas receiving higher prices. This is a matter of life and death. He
said he hoped some control over price discrimination might be possible.
The conversation was broken off at this point because of other
engagements and no response in substance was made to Nebot’s
statement.
3 The Development Loan Fund entered into a loan agreement for $5 million with
the Ecuadoran Housing Bank on October 31, 1961; for further information, see Agency
for International Development, Office of the Controller, Status of Loan Agreements as of

EC–19.
Editorial Note
reported that students demonstrating over Ecuador’s border dispute
with Peru stoned the U.S. Consulate General at Guayaquil and dam-
aged a staff car on September 22. According to the Embassy’s report,
entitled “Assaults and Other Acts against United States Personnel and
Installations Abroad, 1960–1965” (Department of State Historical Office
information on this incident. Additional reportage on the demonstra-
tions is in Department of State file 122.437.
EC–20.
Circular Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to
the Diplomatic Missions in the American Republics1
456. Informal meeting representatives for guarantor powers took
character of meeting. Following expression of views by Lafer of Brazil,
Taboada of Argentina and Muller of Chile2 agreement reached that both
Peruvian and Ecuadorean delegates at UN meeting would be informed
of following by four governments acting separately:
1. Meeting was informal in character. No announcement or state-
ment will be issued.
2. No formal meeting of the guarantor powers will be held until
after the Quito Conference. However, if there should be a unilateral
denunciation of the treaty before then, it would be necessary for the
guarantors to meet to consider the situation.
3. Guarantor powers could not be expected to agree to any unilat-
eral denunciation of treaty.
gram was drafted and signed by Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs. It was also sent to the U.S. Consulate at Ciudad Trujillo.
2 Reference is to Foreign Ministers Horácio Láfer of Brazil and Diógenes Taboada of
Argentina, and Walter Müller, Chilean Representative on the Council of the Organization
of American States.

Ecuador  555
Principal point made by Lafer was that it would be absurd for
guarantors to accept Ecuadorean doctrine of nullity since major part of
treaty provisions have already been implemented. He suggested possi-
bility of mediation re part of boundary not yet agreed upon.
Taboada observed Ecuador had not yet formally denounced
treaty and reported Frondizi,3 had informed Velasco Ibarra Argentine
­disposed to view problem calmly on assumption Ecuador would main-
tain same attitude of calm. Fonmin expressed opinion treaty could not
be nullified by unilateral act of Ecuador and expressed opinion formal
joint demarche by guarantors unwise.
Muller agreed with Taboada four power demarche unwise and
expressed preference for bilateral discussions in Quito designed to
encourage Ecuadorean government refrain from additional statements
and actions. He said Chile would consider unilateral denunciation
unacceptable.
Dillon
3 Arturo Frondizi, President of Argentina.
EC–21.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Rio de Janeiro1
525. Following are Department’s views on substantive issues pre-
sented by current Peruvian-Ecuadorean dispute (Deptel 493 to Rio,
You should discuss these points of view with representatives other
Guarantor powers with view to eliminating confusion and reaching
precise agreement:
(1) We consider 1942 Protocol between Ecuador and Peru cur-
rently valid and binding on both Governments particularly in view
of approval by Congressional bodies both countries as provided in
This telegram was drafted by Assistant Secretary Mann and initialed by the Secretary of
State. It was repeated to Quito, Lima, Buenos Aires, and Santiago.

Article IX. This has always been U.S. position. The word “currently”
as used above is intended to recognize that Government of Ecuador
has right to request that its claims of invalidity of protocol based on
(a) duress and (b) impossibility of applying boundary description to
the ground (the watershed issue under Article VIII B(1) of Treaty) be
submitted to the International Court of Justice. For the Department
to recognize that Ecuador has right to make such a request does not
imply that Department considers that Ecuador’s claims in this respect
are necessarily valid or that they would probably be sustained by the
International Court. Furthermore, we recognize that Peru’s agreement
to submission of Ecuadorean claim to International Court would be
necessary as neither country has accepted compulsory jurisdiction of
Court. In this connection we note Embassy Lima believes there is little
likelihood that Peru would agree at this time to a reference of Ecuador’s
claim to the Court.
(2) Department also considers that the 1942 Protocol may not be
nullified or abrogated by a unilateral declaration on the part of the
Ecuadorean Government. There are no caveats or qualifications to this
second point.
(3) Department also considers that under terms of the 1942 Protocol
Guarantors currently repeat currently have two principal responsibil-
ities. The First relates to the “guaranty” under Article V. The Protocol
does not define the word “guaranty” but it would seem to impose upon
the Guarantors a duty to use their good offices to the end that Peru and
Ecuador accomplish the definitive demarcation of the frontier line and
that Peru and Ecuador resolve any legal difficulties which stand in the
way of that demarcation. The second responsibility of the Guarantor
powers arises under Article VII of the Treaty which specifically pro-
vides that any disagreement arising in the execution of the Protocol
“shall be settled by the parties concerned” with the “assistance” of the
Guarantor powers.
Foregoing is consistent with comments which Department has
made (Deptel 493 to Rio) regarding Peruvian assertions that Protocol is
“untouchable”; that existing boundary markers are “immovable”; and
that parties should renew activities to complete demarcation. These
would seem to deny, by affirmative guarantor decision, the possibility
of future reference of legal issues to International Court. In our opin-
ion Guarantors should carefully avoid arrogating a judicial function to
themselves.
Following are Department’s views on tactics and procedures:
(1) No “gentlemen’s agreement” concerning any future Guarantor
meeting was entered into with Ecuador by Guarantors (Quito’s 231).3
The Guarantors informal decision among themselves on September 26

Ecuador  557
(Depcirtel 456)4 was based upon premise that Ecuador would cease
publicly agitate border issue and was designed provide cooling off
period both countries. This was made clear to Chiriboga (Deptel 430).5
(2) In view of continued agitation of issue, Department believes
a joint statement should be made by Guarantors rather than separate
statements which would be subject varying interpretations. This would
presumably include a clear statement of Guarantors position that
Protocol cannot be invalidated by the unilateral act of one of the parties.
(3) The text of statement can we believe best be worked out in Rio,
to be cleared then with Department and presumably other Foreign
Offices. We believe that it should be designed to encourage both Peru
and Ecuador to cease public agitation of issue having in mind the need
to maintain peaceful, friendly relations between the two countries and
the need for a united hemisphere capable both of facing up to the inten-
sified external and internal threats to its wellbeing and to the grave
economic and social problems facing it. Some of the language used in
Article I of Protocol and in last year’s draft Guarantor statement might
be useful in this regard.
(4) Department sees merit in suggestion made to us by Chileans
that statement would have less adverse impact on Ecuadoreans in
particular if it were issued in response to Chiriboga’s message appar-
ently sent to all Guarantors. (Lengthy telegram October 22 addressed
to Secretary6 presumably similar to memoranda you refer to as having
been received by Brazilian and Chilean Foreign Offices from Chiriboga.)
Statement might also refer in general to various memoranda received
by Guarantors from Peruvians. Department suggests that, before text of
statement is made public, later on behalf of Guarantors might consult
with Rio representatives of both Ecuador and Peru re statement. Later
might wish to make clear to Ecuadoreans that statement is directed to
issue of unilateral denunciation and is not intended close door on pos-
sibility of eventual settlement satisfactory to both Peru and Ecuador.
Herter
4 See Document EC–20.

EC–22.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Ecuadoran
Foreign Minister (Chiriboga)1
Excellency:
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram of
October 23, 19602 in which Your Excellency informs me that the gov-
ernment and people of Ecuador proclaim their rejection of the Protocol
of Rio de Janeiro of 1942 and state the reason on which this position
is based. In full agreement with the other guarantor powers to whom
Your Excellency addressed yourself simultaneously in identical terms,
I take the liberty of making the following response to Your Excellency’s
remarks, which are a cause of concern to the powers guaranteeing the
Protocol.
It is a basic principle of international law that the unilateral win
of one of the parties is not sufficient to invalidate a boundary treaty
nor to liberate it from the obligations imposed therein. Only mutual
agreement by both parties can modify its provisions or attribute com-
petence to an international tribunal to judge questions which may arise
regarding such an instrument. For these reasons, until the sovereign
and agreed will of Ecuador and Peru otherwise dispose, my country
considers that the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro—signed and ratified by
Ecuador and Peru and already applied in almost its entirety through
practical acts of demarcation to which the parties themselves attributed
­definitive character—is a valid instrument and should be complied
with. Moreover, my government considers that any doubts which may
arise between the contracting parties in the process of practical exe-
cution of the Protocol in the as yet undemarcated part of the frontier
should be amicably resolved in accordance with Article 7 of that instru-
ment with the assistance of the guaranteeing powers. Based on this
viewpoint and in its capacity as a guarantor country my Government,
faithful to formal undertaking assumed under the terms of the Protocol
and animated by the most sincere feeling of friendship for both con-
tracting parties, is disposed at any moment, in concert with the other
guarantors, to render them its assistance in search of a happy solution
of any disagreement between them.
dently unnumbered, was drafted by Richard A. Poole, Officer in Charge of Peruvian
Affairs and John T. Dreyfuss, Officer in Charge of Ecuadoran Affairs; and initialed by
the Secretary of State. The Foreign Ministers of the four Guarantor States (Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, and the U.S.), named in Article V of the Rio Protocol of 1942 sent identi-
cal telegrams, with the necessary changes, to Ecuadoran Foreign Minister Chiriboga on
December 7.

Ecuador  559
With regard to the preoccupation manifested by Your Excellency
concerning the concentration of Peruvian troops which may have been
observed on the southern frontier of Ecuador, I wish to manifest to Your
Excellency my confidence that no American country could today chal-
lenge the peaceful conscience of the continent and to remind you that
solidarity in the face of aggression established by the Inter-American
system is a secure guarantee against any armed threat.
The United States, together with the other guarantor countries, is
confident that the contracting parties will maintain between themselves
the close harmony and fraternal union which should prevail between
republics of the American Continent.3
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest
consideration.4
Christian A. Herter
sent that day by the Brazilian Foreign Office to the Peruvian and Ecuadoran Foreign
Ministers on behalf of the guarantor countries of the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro. They
appealed to Ecuador and Peru “to remove all reasons for tension between them and
establish an atmosphere of goodwill in their mutual relations which would permit them
to overcome their present misunderstandings.” The guarantor powers offered “to lend
4 The Spanish text of an eight-page telegram from Ecuadoran Foreign Minister
Chiriboga to Secretary of State Herter, December 8, replying to the present telegram, is in
ARA/EP Files, Lot 67 D 566, “Peru Relations—Peru-Ecuador Boundary.”
EC–23.
Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and
Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, December 16, 1960.
SUBJECT
Intelligence Note: The Situation in Ecuador
Dr. José María Velasco Ibarra was swept into the presidency on
June 5, 1960 by almost an absolute majority of the total votes cast in
a four candidate race. President of Ecuador three times previously
dum was transmitted to the Secretary of State via the Executive Secretariat.

magnetism through persuasive, sometimes demagogic oratory, per-
sonal honesty, and a broadly defined program promising benefits both
to the laboring classes and to business interests. Nicknamed El Loco (the
crazy one), Velasco is temperamental, nationalistic, unpredictable, and
although he recognizes the benefits derived from association with the
United States, he places greater emphasis upon Hispano-Americanism
than upon Pan-Americanism. Aware of the dangers of communism,
Velasco has nevertheless publicly played upon the possibility of a
closer association with Cuba and the Soviet Bloc in an attempt to fur-
ther Ecuador’s position in its boundary dispute with Peru.
Committed by his campaign to a program of prompt and effective
economic development, Velasco, since his inauguration on September 1,
instead has placed major emphasis on the long standing boundary dis-
pute. By agitation of this issue Velasco has apparently hoped to obtain
a revision of the Rio Protocol of 1942 which ended a limited border war
between the two countries on terms generally favorable to Peru. The
United States, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile countersigned the protocol
as "guarantors". As a consequence of Velasco’s affirmation that the Rio
Protocol is null because Ecuador had agreed to it under duress, and
after a telegram from Foreign Minister José Chiriboga to the guarantor
powers pressing this thesis, the four guarantor powers issued a state-
ment on December 7 which basically reaffirmed the protocol’s validity
short of an agreement by both countries for its modification or adjudi-
cation. The Ecuadorean reaction to the guarantors’ statement was sharp
and the popular demonstrations which followed were directed almost
exclusively against the United States.2 The Minister or Government,
Manuel Araujo, a rabidly pro-Castro left-winger, has taken advantage
of the widespread resentment to urge that Ecuador turn to the Soviet
Bloc for support. The cabinet voted to establish diplomatic relations
with the Soviet Union and Communist China and the Vice President,
Julio Arosemena, publicly advocated declining the “dubious honor” of
hosting the XI Inter-American Conference, once postponed and now
rescheduled for Quito beginning March 1, 1961. However, there has
already been substantial opposition to these gestures toward the Soviet
Bloc by the more moderate elements within Ecuador and President
on the Ecuadoran reaction to the guarantor powers’ declaration of December 7, stating
that the physical damage to the U.S. Embassy and other U.S. buildings in Quito and
Guayaquil was considerable. He predicted that Ecuador would neither acccept nor imple-
A memorandum of December 15 from Deputy Director Samuel O. Lane of the
Office of West Coast Affairs sent through Deputy Assistant Secretary Coerr to Assistant
Secretary Mann summarized anti-U.S. demonstrations in Quito on December 9, and

Ecuador  561
Velasco has indicated privately that he would not take the initiative
to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union although he
would give favorable consideration to any such Soviet request. These
relations, according to Velasco, would be completely without commit-
ments or strings and the Soviet Embassy would be drastically limited
in its size and activities. The factors mentioned above, combined with
the favorable reception in Ecuador of the recent U.S. affirmation of
our respect for OAS treaty obligations to come to the defense of any
American nation which suffers aggression,3 have reduced the probabil-
ity that diplomatic relations will be established with the Soviet Union
or that the Inter-American Conference will be cancelled.
The decision as to whether, and if so, when, the XI Inter-American
Conference will be held is now under consideration by President
Velasco. His decision to attempt to hold the conference as scheduled,
or to work for its postponement or cancellation, will be of major impor-
tance. Outright cancellation of the conference is reportedly favored by
a majority of the cabinet and could imply Ecuadorean repudiation of
the OAS. However, it is believed that Velasco is aware of the unfavor-
able impact that this would have on his economic development plans.
Likewise, a further postponement of the Inter-American Conference
would be a blow to Velasco’s prestige as he has severely chastised the
preceding administration for the original delay. Holding the confer-
ence in Quito as scheduled, or even after some delay, could possibly
reinforce Ecuador’s ties with the American system at a time when they
are strained but also runs the risk of serious popular demonstrations
against the OAS and the Rio Protocol guarantor powers. The situation
is further complicated by the fact that the Minister of Government,
Araujo, has authority over the police and conceivably could allow
such demonstrations to wreck the conference. It has been reported that
Velasco would like to remove Araujo from office prior to the date set
for the conference. Yet, despite several opportunities, Velasco has failed
to move against Araujo and Velasco may feel that he is unable to do so
under the present conditions. In spite of the President’s assurances that
adequate security measures would be taken should the conference be
held, there remains a probability of serious demonstrations as a result of
deliberate leftist agitation of the already emotionally charged boundary
issue. Barring a previous determination concerning the conference by
Velasco, the situation will be discussed further when Foreign Minister
Chiriboga arrives for a Washington holiday about December 22.
White, Director of the Office of News; text in S/PRS Files, Lot 77 D 11, National Archives

EC–24.
Telegram from the Chargé in Ecuador (Little) to the
Department of State1
341. During past ten days relations between members of U.S. Army
Mission and Ecuadorean officers with whom they normally do busi-
ness have been cool and strained.
However, today during three hour conference General Calle, Chief
Ecuadorean General Staff, categorically stated following to Chief U.S.
Army Mission:
1. Ecuador will not accept military assistance from bloc countries.
2. He appreciates past U.S. Army assistance received and will
appreciate similar aid in future.
3. Chief U.S. Army Mission and other officers of mission are free to
express their opinions to him or to their counterparts.
4. Former friendly, personal relationships will be re-established.
5. All of his military efforts are and will remain directed toward
defensive measures only.
Comment: Conference took place at usual Monday meeting with
Calle. His comments reflect improved atmosphere following Araujo
dismissal,2 and are in accord general position set out by Velasco in
meeting with Ambassador Bernbaum December 14 and in his subse-
quent public statements.
Little
gram was repeated to Lima and Guayaquil.
Velasco dismissed Minister of Government Araujo on December 16. According to this
report, Araujo’s “dismissal brought to a rapid close a period of leftist agitation without

Ecuador  563
EC–25.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Ecuador1
390. Following statement will be issued by Department of State
with approval Foreign Minister Chiriboga to hold for release twelve
o’clock noon Washington time December thirtieth.2 Embassy should
communicate this joint statement to Government of Ecuador for con-
current release.
“The United States and the Government of Ecuador today made
the following joint announcement:
Foreign Minister José R. Chiriboga of Ecuador has consulted
during the past few days with high level officials of the Department
of State and of various United States Government financial institu-
tions concerning President José María Velasco Ibarra’s economic and
social development plans and the part that the United States can play
in assisting Ecuador to realize these plans to raise the standard of living
of its people. Various missions from the United States have already per-
formed preliminary surveys of the projects Ecuador hopes to accom-
plish in the fields of low-cost housing, electrification, road construction,
provision of potable water to various Ecuadorean communities, and
economic mapping of the country. On the basis of these studies and the
discussions with Foreign Minister Chiriboga, U.S. officials are confi-
dent that prompt consideration can be given to the proposals for loans
that Ecuador plans to submit in the near future.
The projects discussed that appear to be promising include the fol-
lowing: Assistance to Ecuador in establishing savings and loan institu-
tions that will permit low-cost housing to be made available to people
of modest means, as well as assistance in initiating ‘self-help’ housing
in Ecuador.
Construction of first class roads from Santo Domingo to Esmeraldas
and from M. J. Calle to Huaquillas.
Municipal water systems which would contribute to the economic
growth of Ecuador and the welfare of its citizens.
Electric power installations in the Manta-Bahia de Caraquez area,
with accompanying transmission systems, and projects to increase
Drafted by Dreyfuss and signed by Lane.

the  power generating capacity in Cuenca, Alao-Riobamba, San Jose,
and Loja.
Mapping of Western Ecuador as a preliminary to establishing
development projects.
U.S. officials are awaiting receipt of loan applications for these
projects and for others which are still in the preliminary state, and look
forward to careful consideration of these projects as they are submitted
and to further mutual consultation with the Government of Ecuador.”
Merchant

El Salvador: U.S. Relations with El Salvador
ES–1.
Despatch from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)
to the Department of State1
San Salvador, March 6, 1958.
No. 481
SUBJECT
Possible Deterioration in Relations with the Salvadoran Government
While our relations with the Lemus Government have been cordial
and friendly, a number of recent developments taken in toto threaten to
produce a cooling off by the Salvadoran President and his Government
towards the United States.
The Lemus Government has given plenty of concrete evidence of
its friendliness. A few typical instances might include the following:
(1) The release of the U.S. flag fishing vessel Kokomo immediately
after its seizure without formal protest on our part, in a most cordial
atmosphere;2
(2) President Lemus’ freely given all-­out support and publicity for
President Eisenhower’s letter to Bulganin,3 including his own long and
favorable written commentary;4
Kalijarvi and Vallon.
Kokomo about eight miles off the coast of El Salvador for allegedly fishing in Salvadoran
waters. Lemus ordered the vessel released after representations by the American Embassy
and evidently by President Somoza of Nicaragua whose family had a business interest
in the Kokomo. Documents pertaining to this subject are in Department of State decimal
file 611.166 Kokomo.
Bulganin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;
for text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, p. 75.
Lemus a copy of Eisenhower’s letter to Bulganin.

(3) The general support of the Government of El Salvador for the
U.S. position in the U.N. and the particular support for the election of
William Sanders as Assistant Secretary General of the OAS;
(4) The conciliatory efforts of the Foreign Office to accommodate
the Salvadoran constitutional 200-­mile territorial water limit to the
United States position regarding conservation of resources and freedom
of the sea. As part of that effort, the Salvadoran delegate to the Geneva
Conference spoke in favor of the United States position barring the
admission of Communist China to the Conference.5
(5) The signing recently of a new Air Mission Agreement,6 in spite
of the higher costs imposed on the Salvadoran Government for the
maintenance of the Mission here.
All of these illustrations testify that relations could not have been
more cordial and friendly in spite of the stand the Embassy has had to
take opposing the position of El Salvador on certain issues.
While the Lemus Government has cooperated with us cheerfully
on important issues, our concessions to them have been few and rel-
atively minor in importance. There were accommodations made to
El Salvador during the Osorio administration;7 but since the inaugura-
tion of President Lemus, the one major favorable concession on our part
has been the agreement to sell 28 U.S. used airplanes to El Salvador.
It is against this background that we measure the present prob-
lem. Each item that follows can be defended cogently and persuasively
as the proper course for the United States to follow. Each can be justi-
fied in terms of our policies and objectives. Each alone can be managed
within its own context. However, when all are taken together the com-
posite is not manageable. In combination they raise the broad question
of whether we have given enough attention to the overall aspects. They
also raise the further question, Does the Department consider that any
changes are in order?
(1) The delay in inviting Lemus to Washington. The Lemus visit
has been under consideration for more than a year. He first publicly
expressed a desire to visit the United States while President-­elect.
Neither Lemus nor any of the other high officials of his Government
have made any secret of the importance they attach to this visit. It has
been the subject of radio and press commentary. In a recent conver-
sation with the U.S. Military Attaché in El Salvador, an official of the
5 Reference is to the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, held at
vol. II, United Nations and General International Matters, Chapter 8.
6 For the text of the Air Force Mission Agreement, signed at San Salvador, November 21,
1956.

El Salvador  567
Salvadoran General Staff said President Lemus had expressed his dis-
appointment to the staff officer over the failure of the United States
Government to invite President Lemus to Washington for a state visit.8
(2) The visit of Ydígoras Fuentes and the proposed visit of Echandi to
Washington. While President Lemus has made no public comment on
this score, he cannot have failed to be nettled at the extension of the
official invitation to Ydígoras Fuentes to visit the United States, espe-
cially since the invitation was announced while Ydígoras was visiting
El Salvador. It was a front-­page story in all the newspapers and the
subject of radio announcement. It is small comfort to President Lemus
that these visits have occasionally been referred to as informal or that
the visits have been made in an individual capacity since the men in
question have gone as president-­elect and not as chief of state. It is
impossible to explain convincingly the difference between a formal and
an informal visit when the news reels in El Salvador show Ydígoras
Fuentes and his wife debarking from President Eisenhower’s plane,
being met at the Washington airport by Secretary of State and Mrs.
Dulles, and thereafter being escorted to Blair House. Furthermore, the
newspapers have played up Ydígoras’ conversations with President
Eisenhower and meetings with other high officials of the United States
Government. They draw no distinction between the Ydígoras visit and
that of other high dignitaries to Washington. Informal comments by
private individuals, some with official connections, substantiate the
above evaluation. “The forthcoming visit to Washington by President-­
elect Echandi is certain to increase the feeling of President Lemus and
other Salvadorans that he is given unequal treatment or inadequate
consideration by the United States.”
(3) The state visit of President Ibanez of Chile. In this context the long-­
standing intention to invite President Ibanez to the United States loses its
proper perspective. While the press-­announced invitation extended to
Ibanez may not have been as irritating as the visits of Ydígoras Fuentes
and Echandi, nevertheless, coming on the heels of the other invitations, it
has served further to disillusion President Lemus with the United States.
(4) Drafting of Salvadoran Citizens. Disappointments such as those
recounted stir up other problems. We were unable to assure the
Government that Salvadoran citizens resident in the United States
would not be drafted except during time of war as provided for in
the 1926 FCN Treaty.9 The Department agreed that such acts were in
8 No record of this conversation with Lt. Col. Robert S. Ferguson, USA, was found
in Department of State files.
9 Reference is to the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Consular Rights, signed
at San Salvador, February 22, 1926; for text, see Charles S. Bevans, ed., Treaties and Other

­violation of the Treaty and sought to correct the situation by eliminating
Article 6 from the Treaty. The Government of El Salvador would have
been willing to accept the revision of the Treaty had it been possible to
assure them that no Salvadoran would be drafted until one year after
the date of notice. We were unable to do so, and as a consequence the
Salvadoran Government felt obliged to interpret the notice, correctly so
according to the Legal Division of the Department, as a termination of
the entire Treaty.10
(5) Three-­cent tax on soluble coffee. The 1936 Trade Agreement
between the United States and EI Salvador,11 provides for the free entry
into the United States of coffee. United States tariff schedules, however,
provide for a $.03 per pound tax for coffee substitutes, essences and
adulterants. El Salvador interprets the word “coffee” in the 1936 Treaty
in its generic sense to include all kinds of coffee. United States customs
officials, however, ruled Salvadoran soluble coffee dutiable under the
Tariff Act.
(6) The $250,000 check to Cruz Salazar. In the conversation with
the United States Military Attaché referred to above, the official of
the Salvadoran General Staff said that President Lemus had received
a photostatic copy of a check for $250,000 made out to Colonel Cruz
Salazar and signed by the chief of the Point IV Mission in Guatemala.
He said that President Lemus’ interpretation of the check was that
it had been given to Cruz Salazar by the United States Government
as part of a deal to insure the election by the Guatemalan Congress
of Ydígoras Fuentes. He said that this check provoked President
Lemus’ further disillusionment with the behavior of the United States
Government. While this can undoubtedly be explained, the possibil-
ity remains that Lemus may also consider this in terms of the large
amount of assistance being provided to Guatemala by the United
States as compared with the absence of grant aid to El Salvador.
Many Salvadorans have made no secret of what they claim to be the
premium the United States Government places on aid to unstable
governments while ignoring the no-­less-­needy but more stable and
democratic Latin governments.
(7) Lemus’ request for an MDAP Treaty. Although the Lemus
Government is aware that former President Osorio turned down the
United States offer of an MDAP agreement, it does not feel bound by
the earlier decision of the Osorio administration. President Lemus has
expressed interest in an MDAP agreement. This was discouraged by the
11 Reference is to the Reciprocal Trade Agreement, signed at San Salvador,

El Salvador  569
Embassy, which informed Lemus that no funds were available for such
a pact. As long as the neighboring countries, Honduras, Guatemala,
and Nicaragua, have MDAP agreements with the United States and El
Salvador does not, some residue of resentment on this score will con-
tinue to exist here.
(8) United States Officers for the Escuela de Guerra. Some months
ago officials of the Salvadoran Army put out feelers as to whether the
United States could provide two officers to teach in the Escuela de
Guerra as partial replacements for the departed Chilean Army Mission.
The Chief of the United States Army Mission discouraged this request
on the grounds that Salvadoran officers can be trained better in army
schools located in Panama or in the United States. The United States
Military Attaché informs us that two Chilean officers are en route to
El Salvador, possibly to fill the positions mentioned.
(9) Mrs. Lemus’ Welfare Program. Mrs. Lemus has been critical
regarding failure of the United States to assist her in her welfare pro-
gram, alleging that the Embassy promised to provide such help. The
Embassy made no such promise but said it would see what could be
done regarding any request she made. No such request has been forth-
coming. Nevertheless, Mrs. Lemus again criticized the Embassy, along
with other international agencies of the United Nations, for failing to
help her with the program.
(10) Development Loan Fund Application. We have had to be luke-
warm in dealing with El Salvador on the $8,000,000.00 loan sought for
improvement of the conditions of the campesino, primarily because
many projects contemplated do not seem to fall within the criteria of
the fund. This may account for the delay on the part of the Salvadoran
Government in submitting a formalized application for the loan.
This list of issues is not exhaustive. As already stated, the
items taken together add up to a possible cooling off by the Lemus
Government. Not only has this been reported by a member of the
President’s Staff, but our own sources bear it out, and members of
the Mission have sensed some change in attitude. The change in atti-
tude is the result of what might be termed negative actions on the
part of our Government rather than any sudden reversal based on
any single item. As already noted, each United States action can be
justified on political, legal, or other grounds, especially when taken
in its individual context. Nevertheless, the net effect is adverse from
our standpoint. Interpreted from the Salvadoran point of view, we are
either lacking in understanding or out of sympathy with Salvadoran
aspirations. It should be emphasized that the Mission here has at no
time been in conflict with the Salvadoran Government on matters at
issue. On the contrary, in spite of the unfavorable positions we have

had to take, relations up to the present moment could not have been
more cordial and friendly.
This despatch is not a criticism of any action undertaken in the
past, but is prepared to lay before the Department the need for affir-
mative action. It is the opinion of this Mission that the opportunity still
exists for overcoming whatever bad impression President Lemus may
have acquired regarding our attitude towards his Government. This can
most impressively be done by issuing an invitation to President Lemus
for a visit to the United States and by making some kind of loan avail-
able for his campesino program. Furthermore, sometime subsequent
to the Lemus visit, an invitation should be extended to the Minister of
Defense, Adan Parada, and one or two high-­ranking military officials
to visit the United States.
Thorsten V. Kalijarvi
ES–2.
Summary of Discussions during Milton Eisenhower’s
Undated.
Discussions in El Salvador were held by Dr. Eisenhower and mem-
bers of his party with President Lemus, members of the Government,
businessmen, labor leaders, and others. No formal meeting other than
the meeting with businessmen was held as such. President Lemus and
Dr. Eisenhower traveled extensively together and discussed many
subjects.
“Eisenhower, Milton: El Salvador, 1958.” Confidential. The source text is an unsigned
carbon copy. President Milton S. Eisenhower of Johns Hopkins University made a
President, to Panama, Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala. He
was accompanied by Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs; Tom B. Coughran, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury; Dempster McIntosh,
Manager, Development Loan Fund; and Samuel C. Waugh, President, Export-Import
Bank of Washington. For further documentation on the trip, see Documents ETA–7;
Salvador, August 11, 1958, transmitted memoranda of conversations of the Eisenhower
1958, supplemented despatch 55 with a report on Eisenhower’s visit to El Salvador.

El Salvador  571
President Lemus said that his administration was based on two
principles: honesty in Government and better living conditions. He
stated that neither he nor any of his Ministers were dipping into the
public coffers. He could not say that Government officials might not
try to do so in the future, but anyone who did would go to jail. The
President expressed his feeling that the three biggest problems in El
Salvador were housing, education, and public health, and he felt these
really had to be considered as one single problem. His administration
had undertaken a bold program to solve these problems, but they
had not expected the world economic recession, with the consequent
drop in commodity prices, and they hoped some way could be found
to enable them to go forward with this program. The administration
planned the construction of 2,000 more schools, and since his inaugu-
ration 40,000 additional children had been enrolled in the schools. The
president said it was necessary to fight communism by accomplish-
ments. The communists promised but did not fulfil their promises.
They had ruled Guatemala for ten years but they had achieved nothing.
However, in order to deprive them of arguments they could use, it was
necessary to improve the living conditions of the masses. In addition
to the Government’s bold housing program, it would likewise be nec-
essary for the big landholders to build homes for their tenant farmers.
A very few had done so, but not many. The Government was going
to press them to do so and if they still did not the Government would
find means to compel them to undertake programs of this type either
by passing a law, or else by making it possible for them to deduct some
part of the cost of construction of these workers’ homes from their taxes.
The President on several occasions said tribute to the great assis-
tance which the United States had rendered to El Salvador, particularly
in the field of technical cooperation. He indicated a need for help at the
agricultural school but at no time did he or any other Salvadoran offi-
cial mention specific sums or loans, other than to say that they hoped to
be able to go forward with their housing, education, and public health
programs. The President spoke with feelings of the hardships caused in
El Salvador by the drop in world coffee prices. He did not, however, as
was frequently the case elsewhere, believe that the United States could
correct this situation by some arbitrary action.
The President indicated that he strongly favored the union of
Central American states as a means of providing all the countries of
the area with a broader market for the free government of labor and
goods. This would contribute to raising the living standard of the
inhabitants of all those countries. He spoke also of the problem of
over-­population in El Salvador where 2.5 million people occupy some
8,000 square miles.

President Lemus expressed violent opposition to communism in
any form, and the need for the free world nations to unite their forces
against this threat to human liberty. The President expressed interest
in the matter of controlling the moves of communist agents in Central
America. He said that the Salvadorans had been very vigilant during
the period of communist rule in Guatemala and that this vigilance was
still required. The Commandant of the Military Academy, during the
ceremonies at which Dr. Eisenhower presented a United States flag to
the Academy, spoke words of praise for NATO and said that the nations
of the hemisphere should stand with this organization in defense of
world peace.
President Lemus, speaking of President Luis Somoza of Nicaragua,
said he believed that President Somoza was an honest man and that he
intended to implement his announced decision to return the country to
a more democratic way of life. However, he was faced with vested inter-
ests and duress that made it difficult for him to make radical changes
in the policies of his father. President Lemus also stated his belief that
President Somoza intended to pursue a more cooperative and friendly
policy toward the other countries of Central America. He expressed his
belief in President Somoza’s sincerity and said that it would be difficult
for the Nicaraguan President to make changes quickly but he had no
doubt that he would make these changes. He said that he would sum
up his opinion of President Somoza by saying that he was a sincere,
honest, and upright man.
The President expressed great concern with the lot of rural work-
ers in El Salvador, and expressed determination to do something for
them under his Campesino Program.
The President on a number of occasions spoke of how much he
was looking forward to his visit to the United States early next year. The
President also spoke with satisfaction of the recent agreement between
the Central American countries which eliminated the need for visas.
A group of non-­communist labor leaders also spoke to Dr. Eisenhower
and Assistant Secretary Rubottom at some length. They spoke out
sharply against the attitude of the big landowners whose greed in their
opinion fed grist to the communist mill. They said that if the big plan-
tation owners and landowners would only be a little more human now
they might save themselves trouble in the future. They spoke feelingly
of the low wages paid the workers on the land, and the great disparity
of wealth and poverty in the country. They seemed to feel that in some
way the United States might bring some sort of pressure to bear on the
landowners to pursue a more liberal policy.

El Salvador  573
The presence of sixteen graduates of Johns Hopkins University
highlighted further the close cultural connection between El Salvador
and the United States. At the meeting with the businessmen at the
Embassy, no translation was required as all of those present spoke
English.
Unlike other Central American countries, no specific program was
submitted, nor were specific requests for assistance made.2 A general
expression of need for assistance was made in the three fields referred
to previously of housing, education, and health. The President spoke of
his desire to complete the Acajutla Port Project.
The Salvadorans in a note, now almost a year old, have asked the
United States Government for a loan of $8 million,3 but they have
never come up with any concrete projects for the rural improvement
program in which Lemus appears so interested. We have on several
occasions, without result so far, informally explained that before con-
sideration can be given to their loan application, they must provide us
with a detailed explanation of their plans for using the money. Without
having their explanations, we now believe the DLF would be the only
agency that could make such a loan to them, and we doubt present DLF
policies would permit it to make such a loan.
CONCLUSIONS:—In view of the fact that no specific program was
presented in El Salvador, it is difficult to comment in a detailed fashion,
but it appears that some of the factors mentioned in connection with
other countries of the area would hold true in this country. These are:
(a) The need for an inventory of the nation’s assets, both human
and material;
(b) The need for assistance in determining the feasibility of
establishing new industrial enterprises and diversifying agricultural
production;
(c) An analysis and appraisal of the potentials of domestic and for-
eign markets, and a better understanding of the revenues that might be
derived from tourism, and
2 At a meeting between members of Eisenhower’s mission and Salvadoran
Government officials in San Salvador, July 28, 1958, concerning economic matters,
Antonio Serrano Langlois, Salvadoran Under Secretary of Economy, distributed a
memorandum of proposed development projects of the Salvadoran Government. He
said the program required $191 million, including $84 million from his Government
and $107 million in foreign aid. (Memorandum of conversation by W. Douglas McLain,
Jr., Third Secretary of the Embassy in El Salvador; enclosure 1 to despatch 55 from San
3 Reference is to a memorandum from the Salvadoran Embassy to the Department

(d) An examination of the structures and functions of Government
agencies relating to the economic development of the country and an
appraisal of the financial, tax, and trade policies which might best con-
tribute to the nation’s progress.
ES–3.
Editorial Note
respectively, El Salvador and the United States agreed, effective
November 17, to extend for four years the existing agreement pro-
viding for a United States Army Mission to El Salvador. Copies of the
notes were enclosed in despatch 317 from El Salvador, December 10.
ES–4.
Editorial Note
President Lemus of El Salvador made a state visit to the United
Secretary of State Herter and President Eisenhower. Memoranda of
these conversations are printed herein. On the same day, Salvadoran
Foreign Minister Ortíz Mancía and Economics Minister Rochac met
with Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom. A memorandum of this
tation on Lemus’ visit is in decimal file 716.11; and Conference Files,
Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1959,

El Salvador  575
ES–5.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, March 11, 1959.
SUBJECT
Visit of President Lemus of El Salvador
PARTICIPANTS
President Lemus of El Salvador; Foreign Minister Ortiz Mancia; Minister of
­Economy Rochac; Minister of Public Works Parker; Economic Adviser Jorge Sol;
Ambassador Castro; Acting Secretary Herter; Ambassador Kalijarvi; Mr. Rubottom
The Acting Secretary, after greeting the President and his party,
commented on how much Secretary Dulles had appreciated the indi-
cation from President Lemus of his desire to call on him at the Walter
Reed Hospital. He added that the Secretary was still under treatment
and had not actually seen any of the members of his own staff in the last
few days; therefore it would not be possible for him to have the plea-
sure of receiving the President, as much as he would have liked doing
so. Governor Herter then voiced his awareness of the excellent speech
made the day before to the Council of the Organization of American
States by President Lemus2 and offered to make arrangements for
the President or any member of his party to meet with Allan Dulles,
Director of the Central intelligence Agency.
President Lemus indicated an interest, if time permitted, and added
that he would like for the Foreign Minister to meet with Mr. Dulles,
even if he were unable to do so. The President pointed out the relation-
ship between the communist problem and the socio-­economic problem
in his country and other countries.
Mr. Rubottom mentioned that the whole thrust of the U.S. policy
was designed to attack the communist problem at its roots by help-
ing the governments and the peoples to raise living standards and
offer hope for the future. Governor Herter expressed his hope that the
President would express some of these same ideas in his speech before
the Congress, and the President indicated that he intended to do just
that.3 The President stressed his interest in the economic integration of
Latin America, and especially the five countries of Central America, as
by Acting Secretary of State Herter on March 24, 1959.
2 For the text of President Lemus’ speech before the Council of the Organization of
3 For the text of President Lemus’ speech before a joint meeting on Congress, March 11,

well as Panama if the latter were interested. Governor Herter expressed
general agreement and suggested that the President might want to
mention the subject in his talk with President Eisenhower. At that point
President Lemus asked the Minister of Economy, Mr. Rochac, to express
his views on the subject of economic integration.
Minister Rochac leaned heavily on the report of Dr. Milton
Eisenhower,4 especially that section suggesting a pilot project of two
countries like “El Salvador and Honduras”.5 President Lemus inter-
ceded to say that El Salvador wanted to be not just a borrower of monies
from abroad, but wanted to play an active role in economic develop-
ment; he added that this should not be misunderstood since his country
really needs assistance, but wants to do more than it has in the past.
Mr. Rubottom suggested that the pilot project, involving just two
countries, might require rather delicate negotiation on the part of the
countries concerned, since all the other countries of Central America
were vitally interested in integration.
The United States had moved from a position of more or less pas-
sive acceptance of the plan of integration, to one of active and enthusi-
astic support of it, but it would be in an embarrassing position to favor
any two countries over others in the area.
President Lemus referred to the recent visit through Central
America of Messrs. Frank and Turkel to discuss with the Governments
concerned, and anybody else interested, the subject of a regional mar-
ket. He said that they were anxiously awaiting the report that might be
filed following that trip, since the means to achieve integration had not
yet been thoroughly defined.6
Minister Rochac said that, by having a pilot project of two coun-
tries, it would be possible to speed up the achievement of the objective
of a Central American common market. They have already been work-
ing seven years and, unless something is done to break the road jam, it
may require eight years more.
4 Reference is to the report (submitted) to the President by Milton S. Eisenhower
ES-2.
5 The statement under reference does not appear in Eisenhower’s report to the
President.
6 Harry R. Turkel and Isaiah Frank of the Department of State visited El Salvador,
up Central American Economic integration. They talked with industrial and banking
figures and government officials, including Lemus. He strongly supported the idea of
Salvadoran economic integration with one or more Central American countries, perhaps
Honduras or Guatemala, before economic integration of the whole area. Their report on
the trip was not found in Department of State files, but documents pertaining to their

El Salvador  577
The Minister recalled how many civil wars had been fought in
Central America toward the end of the last century and that these had
been settled by the Pact of Washington in 1907,7 thanks to U.S. good
offices. He hoped that we would be able to do the same in the eco-
nomic field that we had done in the political sector back in that time. He
stressed the need to raise living standards, since there is now no middle
class in Central America.
Governor Herter said that we had been somewhat distressed by
some of the problems that have arisen in practice now that the European
Common Market has actually been created. He said that Benelux had
been a natural development, but that some new problems had been
created or old ones accentuated, rather than helped, by the common
market.
Minister Rochac referred to the relatively stable financial situa-
tion of Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, adding that the other
two (Costa Rica and Nicaragua) were not as well off. He thought it
was advisable to start with three countries or two, just El Salvador and
Honduras, and allow the others to come in gradually.
Mr. Rubottom suggested that the future problems of the common
market could be solved with good faith, hard work, and by devotion to
sound principles in the beginning of the project, just as we are under-
taking to do in the establishment of the Inter-American Bank.
Governor Herter alluded to the United States’ interest in the Law
of the Sea and the conference now foreseen a year from this month,
expressing the hope that we would have the cooperation of El Salvador.
The Foreign Minister, Sr. Ortiz Mancia, said that they thought we would
have their cooperation. They have a constitutional rigidity with respect
to the Law of the Sea, but they believe there is a way of harmonizing our
two viewpoints. (Later on the Foreign Minister assured Mr. Rubottom
that they would be able to do this.)
The Economic Adviser to President Lemus, Mr. Jorge Sol, made a
very strong plea for U.S. support of the economic integration of Central
America.8 Without this, according to Mr. Sol, there is no economic
future to Central America, since they are too dependent on just one or
two products.
7 Reference is to the General Treaty of Peace and Amity signed at Washington
by Representatives of Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador,
December 20, 1907; for text, see William M. Mallory (Comp.), Treaties, Conventions,
International Acts, Protocols and Agreements between the United States of America and Other
8 For documentation regarding economic integration, see the compilation on United
States regional economic policy.

Following Mr. Sol’s eloquent presentation, the entire party left the
President’s Guest House for the White House to meet with President
Eisenhower.
ES–6.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, March 11, 1959.
SUBJECT
Call on the President by President Lemus of El Salvador
PARTICIPANTS
The President; President Lemus; the Acting Secretary; Foreign Minister Ortiz
Mancia; Minister of Economy Rochac; Minister of Public Works Parker; Economic
Adviser Jorge Sol; Ambassador Castro; Ambassador Kalijarvi; Mr. Rubottom;
­Lieutenant Colonel Vernon Walters.
The President, after greeting President Lemus and his colleagues,
acknowledged that his visitor had an engagement to speak before a
joint session of Congress and suggested that, in view of the time factor,
President Lemus raise any matters of substance which he might have
on his mind.
President Lemus said that there was one subject of special interest
to him, i.e. how to increase the economic strength of his nation as well
as others. The President then inquired as to whether there was a proj-
ect for a Central American regional market. President Lemus replied
in the affirmative, pointing out that El Salvador for several years had
been convinced that there was too much economic compartmentation,
as well as overdependence on one or two products.
The President responded by pointing out that the problem of bor-
ders was not limited to small countries, since the United States and
Canada, even though a common geographic and security bloc, had
to contend with the political and economic problems created by the
division at the frontier. He mentioned specifically the problems of
lead and zinc, petroleum, wheat, and goods manufactured by wholly-­
owned U.S. companies in Canada. President Lemus, while recogniz-
ing the problem between the United States and Canada, said that their
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential.

El Salvador  579
compartmentation was even more serious and was practically stran-
gling them. The President recognized this and asserted that an inte-
grated market would strengthen all of Central America without any one
country needing to lose dignity or any part of its independence. What
is needed is for it to get started. The Salvadoran President declared his
optimism for the future, especially with U.S. cooperation.
Going back to his experience ten years ago in Europe, the President
recalled that he had preached the idea of economic integration there.
Now, in spite of difficulties, the European countries are approaching
their goal, placing greater importance on the advantages and less on
the risks of integration. President Lemus said that it was precisely these
examples which stimulated them. President Eisenhower recalled some
of the cooperative efforts in Europe, in which the U.S. had participated,
which had stimulated the common market, such as the European coal
and steel community, Euratom, and NATO. He admitted that we had
been motivated by our own interest as well as that of our European
allies.
Minister of Economy Rochac, at the invitation of President Lemus,
described the one-­hundred-­year effort of Central America to achieve
political union, followed by the realization about ten years ago that such
union could come about only as a result of economic integration. These
efforts have now resulted in two treaties subscribed to in Tegucigalpa
in June 1958, the first designed to free trade,2 and the second designed
to achieve industrial integration.3 He alluded favorably to Dr. Milton
Eisenhower’s Report and its suggestion that El Salvador and Honduras
might carry out a pilot project in economic integration which seemed
a more practical approach than waiting for all of the countries to agree
on a method. Mr. Rochac recalled the recent visit of Messrs. Frank and
Turkel from the Department, which had stimulated still further interest
in the subject in his country and in Honduras. The public is very impa-
tient and wants results rather than more studies. The Minister went
back to the Central American wars at the close of the last century and
recalled the role of the United States in the 1907 pact which had brought
peace between the five countries. Central America can do a great deal
by itself, but the United States, acting as a big brother, can help to
2 Reference is to the Multilateral Treaty on Free Trade and Central American
Economic Integration (with annexes), signed by representatives of Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua at Tegucigalpa, June 10, 1958, and entered into
3 Reference is to the Agreement on the Regime for Central American Integration
Industries, signed by representatives of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
see U.N. Economic Commission for Latin America, Multilateral Economic Cooperation in

accomplish even more. Perhaps our efforts of 1907 can now be dupli-
cated in the economic sector. Both El Salvador and Honduras urgently
need to integrate their economies—­this is not a capricious whim. El
Salvador has a burgeoning population and practically no territory in
which to expand, whereas Honduras has a vast area with a very small
population; El Salvador has no Atlantic coast and Honduras has no
developed areas on the Pacific; they are already joining their transpor-
tation routes and it would be easy to make their currencies convertible.
The President assured the visitors that they could count on the
sympathetic attention of the United States to their problems, as well as
our cooperation in every feasible way. President Lemus acknowledged
that they had just seen practical evidence of this cooperation with the
presence of Messrs, Frank and Turkel. He said also that, prior to his
departure from San Salvador, President Villeda Morales of Honduras
had empowered him to convey to the President Honduras’ hope that
the U.S. would support the efforts to forge ahead with the integration
program on an urgent basis.
The President suggested that it would also be helpful if every-­
body in the United States, irrespective of condition of health, would
drink twelve cups of Sanka a day rather than just one or two cups of
coffee. President Lemus acknowledged that this kind of help would
also be appreciated.
President Lemus said that his colleagues would be discussing
specific problems with their opposite numbers in the United States
Government, but that he had needed to know the President’s own
views.
With respect to communism, the President said that he assumed
that the Salvadoran President shared his concern over its growth and
inquired about Communist activities in Central America. President
Lemus declared that communism was a world-­wide problem which
they could not escape completely. Communism grows largely because
of underdevelopment and low living standards, as well as the lack of
sufficient education to discern between the facts and the propaganda
put out by the Communists, such as that of placing the blame for all the
world’s problems on the United States. This is not the case, of course.
The Salvadoran President referred to his OAS speech of yesterday and
the fact that the Communists are moving into intellectual groups, as
well as economically impoverished groups, thus complicating the prob-
lem even more, since the poor and uneducated are greatly impressed
when their superiors echo the Communist line. Greater effort must be
made to solve economic problems, such as the opportunity offered by
economic integration, to prevent the Communists from capitalizing on
their efforts to move into these groups not heretofore penetrated by
them.

El Salvador  581
Both Presidents rose at 12:10 and, following the taking of pictures,
President Lemus and his party departed for the Capitol.
ES–7.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of El Salvadoran Affairs (Ross)1
Washington, April 1, 1959.
SUBJECT
Salvadoran Interest in a Mutual Assistance Agreement
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Don Hector David Castro, Ambassador of El Salvador
Mr. Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary
Mr. Robert Ross, Officer-­in-Charge of Salvadoran Affairs
Ambassador Castro said President Lemus had asked him to
discuss informally with Mr. Rubottom the possibility of obtaining a
U.S.-El Salvador mutual assistance agreement under the provisions of
the Rio de Janeiro accord.2 He said that while the previous Salvadoran
administration, under President Osorio, had been “disinclined” to sign
such an agreement with the U.S., President Lemus believed his coun-
try’s inter American defense obligations and close friendship with the
U.S. indicated the desirability of an agreement of this type. President
Lemus would like to know, the Ambassador said, whether or not agree-
ments were still being signed and the possibilities for consideration of
one with El Salvador.
Mr. Rubottom said that certainly the absence of such an agree-
ment with El Salvador was not due to a lack of friendship between the
two countries nor does it have any deleterious effect upon this friend-
ship. He went on to say that the world and the future of its people had
changed a great deal since the Rio agreements. The Assistant Secretary
cited the new probability of any future war being an atomic conflict as
an example of the changes, since 1945. He also pointed out the effective-
ness of the Organization of American States as an instrument for the
avoidance of inter-American wars and reminded the Ambassador of
the small size of our mutual defense programs in Latin America, with
2 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty),

the exception of our program in Brazil resulting from the strategic loca-
tion of the country and our missile tracking facilities there.
He also told the Ambassador that the present trend of public and
Congressional opinion in the U.S. was away from defense expendi-
tures and in the direction of economic assistance. The Ambassador’s
frank discussion was appreciated, Mr. Rubottom said, and the ques-
tion would be given full consideration. However, Mr. Rubottom said
he could not be optimistic.3
Ambassador Castro appreciated the frank reply and said he
believed his President also doubted that this program was being empha-
sized by the U.S. at this time. He said he would advise President Lemus
of the conversation and await further informal reply by Mr. Rubottom.
It was agreed that no formal steps, such as a note to the Secretary,
would be taken at this time.
ES–8.
Memorandum for the Record by the Ambassador in
El Salvador (Kalijarvi)1
San Salvador, May 5, 1959.
1. As a follow-­up of the request of the Foreign Minister [text not
declassified]. I requested and was granted a session with the President in
the company of the Foreign Minister this morning.
2. [text not declassified]
3. The President said that the problem of Communism had two
aspects in El Salvador. The first was the possibility of infiltration into
the campesino area. He commented that he could not understand how
people who had suffered as long as the people in the country areas
could still maintain their stability and loyalty. He recognized that this
condition constituted a potential danger; however, he proposed con-
structive programs to raise the standard of living of the campesino.
declassified] Papers, 1959.” Secret; Eyes Only. Hill sent the source text to Rubottom and
Snow, June 11, 1959, under cover of a memorandum stating that Kalijarvi wanted Herter
and Dillon to have the report, [text not declassified].

El Salvador  583
In this respect U.S. aid, both direct and indirect, would be of definite
assistance.
4. The second aspect of Communism was the urban. In the towns
and cities, workers were much closer together, better organized, in
many instances more intelligent than the campesino, and were more
easily influenced by subversive propaganda. He mentioned both the
labor groups and the university students. In connection with the former,
he referred to communist-­dominated organizations; in the latter con-
nection, namely, the university, he was concerned about the perennial,
as he described it, “eternal” student. Both he and the Foreign Minister
appeared to have the same view as we do of the situation which con-
fronts El Salvador.
5. He briefly summarized what his Government was doing. He
spoke of his displeasure with the newspapers for permitting various
Communist articles or Communist-­slanted articles to appear in their
publications. He mentioned the column “Sputnik”, and the relative
softness of Viera Altamirano, editor and director of “El Diario de Hoy,”
toward Communists and Communist articles appearing in his paper.
I was surprised at the emotion that he generated on this subject and
the feelings he harbored with respect to certain writers. It was proba-
bly understandable because he took the articles as a personal affront,
speaking of them as being anti-­government.
6. He referred to the ease of movement across political frontiers
by agitators and Communists in Central America. He felt further inter-
national cooperation was necessary, that no single government could
take care of the problem by itself. He said that people had been granted
visas for the U.S., Canada, and other countries, and within a few days it
was common knowledge that they had reached Moscow.
7. In this connection he spoke of Cuba in derogatory terms. He
and the Foreign Minister were in agreement that Castro was following
tactics, especially in the liquidation of opposition, that were typically
Communist and un-Latin. He said he was disturbed about the ease
with which invasion of Central American areas could be engineered
from other countries, and concluded by pointing out that the problem
of Communism was extensive and involved.
8. He went on to say that the Communist objectives with respect to
El Salvador were not hard to discern. The Foreign Minister concurred
in Lemus’ view that the number-­one objective of the Communists in
Central America was El Salvador. He believed this was so because of
the stability which this country has had for several years, politically,
economically, and otherwise—a stability resting in part upon the liqui-
dation in 1932 of the disturbing Communist element. Communist tac-
tics aimed first at disaffecting all of El Salvador’s neighbors: Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica. (He said that Costa Rica was a hotbed

of Communism in Central America and one which concerned him very
much.) When all of the neighboring countries had been disaffected by
Communism, the final blow was reserved for El Salvador.
9. He brought out literature and records seized from Arias Gomez
and two or three other individuals who had been to Moscow and Cuba,
and read passages from the books, especially those by Khrushchev,
translated into Spanish.
10. Since we seemed to be arriving nowhere in spite of a long dis-
cussion, I said that as far as assistance in developmental programs both
in the country and in the city were concerned, I saw no problem about
what the U.S. might do to help. However, the correction of the internal
situation and his wishes there were another matter. [text not declassified]
11. He replied he appointed a committee of high government offi-
cials to deal with security matters in the Presidency. He wished to raise
this question with them. I commented that the U.S. had developed
organizations to deal with Communism, including the enactment of
specific laws. [text not declassified]
12. The Foreign Minister said there were two Cuban experts in
anti-Communism to whom the Government of El Salvador had granted
asylum. He thought they might be of assistance in connection with
Communism here. The President said he would like to place the entire
matter before the above-­named committee.
13. [text not declassified]
14. The Foreign Minister, after the interview with the President,
said his desire and the desire of a number of other members of the
Cabinet was that the President should create a bureau for action against
Communism in El Salvador [text not declassified].
Thorsten V. Kalijarvi
ES–9.
Editorial Note
On October 1, 1959, the International Monetary Fund set up a
$7,500,000 standby credit which the Salvadoran Central Bank could
draw on for balance of payments purposes until March 31, 1960. By
using this credit the Central Bank could maintain a high level of liquid
reserves without selling gold before coffee sales added to reserves at the
end of the year. For additional information, see International Monetary
Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended

El Salvador  585
ES–10.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Ambassador in
El Salvador (Kalijarvi)1
San Salvador, November 20, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
Lt. Col. José Maria Lemus, President of the Republic of El Salvador
Thorsten V. Kalijarvi, American Ambassador
President Lemus asked me to remain after the presentation of the
parchment2 saying he had a problem he wished to discuss with me.
He stated that he needed U.S. assistance. He had already requested
a Military Assistance Program. Now, instead of making a specific sug-
gestion, he wished to request such aid as could be given. The growing
instability of the area, especially communist agitation and possibilities
of attacks by El Salvador’s neighbors left El Salvador vulnerable. He
referred to the despatch of a shipload of arms to an unknown desti-
nation from Mexico, to the invasions attempt from the sea, and to the
constant disturbance of the whole area. Some time ago El Salvador had
purchased a number of airplanes from the United States and then had
bought additional planes to rehabilitate those already purchased. Some
planes were lost on the way down and others had deteriorated in ser-
vice. He referred to the five planes which are to be sent to Costa Rica
for repair and rehabilitation. He contrasted these with the jets now con-
templated for purchase by Cuba. He referred to some 50 pilots capable
of flying the planes, but no planes to fly. He noted the lack of funds
of the Government of El Salvador for the purchase of necessary mili-
tary equipment in order to maintain itself in a strong defense position
against possible attack. While his illustrations were drawn from the air
force, he was general in his discussion, including the need for ships for
coast guard purposes, for control against smuggling, and for guarding
the coast against possible attack. He added that the problem confront-
ing his government was grave and the need for U.S. assistance, while
not immediately urgent, certainly was in need of prompt consideration.
There was a strong implication that he was asking for military equip-
ment financed by the U.S. Government as well as for assistance in orga-
nizing the military forces of this country.
He voiced a desire to keep the budget in the black, maintaining the
social and welfare projects that have been undertaken, and at the same
This memorandum was an enclosure to despatch 224 from San Salvador, November
20, 1959, not printed.
2 The parchment under reference was not identified.

time to embark upon a program of defense emphasizing new equip-
ment, ships for protection of the coast, and assistance in strengthening
the air force.
I replied that I understood his problem and that I was sure every-
one would be sympathetic with his expressed needs. I would advise
my government of our conversation and of the meeting which he had
proposed for next week as a follow-­up, with a request for instructions
as to how to proceed.3
Departmental comments requested. Unless instructed to the con-
trary, plan to pursue discussions with the President. If possible, hope
to place matter on broader basis with the aim of reviewing measures
apart from military assistance that could be undertaken to strengthen
security along the lines of Embassy Despatches No. 165, October 8 and
No. 206, November 9.
[text not declassified]
ES–11.
Editorial Note
Representatives of the United States and El Salvador exchanged
extending the Agreement of November 21, 1957, for a United States
Air Force Mission in El Salvador. The notes were transmitted to the
ES–12.
Editorial Note
Representatives of the United States and El Salvador signed an
Agreement Relating to the Guaranty of Private Investments at San
The agreement was sent to the Department of State under cover of

El Salvador  587
ES–13.
Telegram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)
to the Department of State1
304. Developments here over past few months have presented fast
moving panorama. Embassy, in attempting be as alert and sensitive to
these developments as possible has not meant to be alarmist. However,
review and analysis current situation deemed desirable.
There can be no denying: (1) that whole country is in state of
uneasiness; (2) that some serious strains and even open cleavages
have developed in recent months among components oligarchic tri-
archy (Army, landed gentry and church) which has ruled this coun-
try for decades; (3) that President has lost, especially over past three
months, great deal of support the previously enjoyed and is finding
himself increasingly isolated; (4) that oppositionist elements, led by
Communists and supported morally and financially from Cuban
sources, are gaining in strength, boldness and position, and are taking
advantage of current situation to heighten tension, create disillusion-
ment and promote dissension; but (5) that President Lemus is still in
control of situation and is showing signs of an intention to fight back
and to forswear cornerstone his policies to date, which has been pres-
ervation of status quo.3
Re (1) above current pre-­electoral atmosphere is doubtless contrib-
uting significantly to general uneasiness. Government Party is facing
its first real opposition in years and if free elections permitted, even rul-
ing oligarchy admits that inroads likely to be deep. On the other hand,
2 Reference is to San Salvador press reports that the Havana newspaper, El Mundo,
reported on April 2 that the Salvadoran Air Force, led by dissident General Quintanilla
and Captain Buitrago, had that day overthrown the Salvadoran Government. These
3 In a conversation with Under Secretary Dillon at San Salvador, recorded in a mem-
orandum of February 9, 1960, President Lemus said that his Government was seeking to
expand its social welfare programs partly in order to counteract inroads of communism

some elements fearful that too obvious maneuverings to control out-
come might spark serious disturbances with overall deleterious affect
on political stability of country. Uncertainty as to how best to deal with
this dilemma is in itself causing uneasiness.
Unrelated but combining to spread uneasiness and even fear
through sizeable segment local population have been recent circular
letters threatening death to certain leading families here, series daylight
abductions and rapings of rather prominent ladies and generally high
incidence of lawlessness, all of which of course play into hands extrem-
ist elements.
Re (2) and (3) above, President Lemus deteriorating position
Disaffection has continued and widened even since then and it now
no longer a secret that 14 families have withdrawn their support.
President himself tacitly acknowledged this and probably even wid-
ened breach during press conference early April when he called for
change in mental outlook on part moneyed classes and, with veiled
threat of resorting to legislation, urged them to humanize their
wealth for good of country.
At crux of cleavage is wealthy element’s belief that President is
largely to blame for current situation because of his do nothing atti-
tude and policy, especially with respect to Communist-­led subversive
activities. They believe that if President had taken strong action against
extremist elements and had prohibited them from returning from exile,
organizing and openly agitating, country would not have been whipped
into unhappy state of uneasiness and tension that exists today, which
they naturally, and probably rightly view as threat to their privileged
position. Whatever the causes and they are manifold, President today
is an isolated man with his back to wall. (4) above, Communists, using
other dissident elements, are not only largely responsible for creating
current situation, but they are exploiting it to full and, thus far, with
impunity.
There is a widely held belief here, however, that while local ground
sufficiently fertile to provide sustenance for Communists to grow in,
they could not and would not have been able to advance as they have
without the Cuban situation. Opinion strongly voiced and heard in
every quarter is that U.S. must bear share of responsibility for what is
happening here. Fully conscious that Cuban money and other types
of support flowing in, question asked how it could be considered
possible for country like El Salvador to deal more courageously and
firmly with insidious Cuban machinations than U.S. itself has thus far

El Salvador  589
demonstrated willingness to do. With this: marrying of local with inter-
national uncertainty, an element of defeatism has spread which locals
maintain is unlikely to be routed until U.S. alone or in concert other LA
nations provides a lead.
Although isolated and confronted with situation which seems to
be snow-­balling, there are as yet no firm grounds for concluding that
President Lemus has lost control of situation. Development of past
week suggest, moreover, that he now fully realizes that maintaining
status quo is no longer a viable policy and that he may be preparing
to move more affirmatively. Has : (1) struck back at wealthy clique, (2)
reshuffled some important military and national police posts (Embtel
not yet moved to ban scheduled April 27 Communist-­dominated CGTS
labor congress), (4) in direct way indicated that anti-Communist and
social welfare legislation may be in offing. He also has some strong
personal traits which if brought into play could exert positive influence
in his favor.
Thus, while not writing him off, Embassy convinced that criti-
cal period from now through April 24 elections and May Day. Any
outbreak of disorders could tip the balance. As we see it, there is
sufficient hostility and opposition so that if clique were to organize
and gain even partial support of Army, President Lemus could be
unseated. Most of requisite elements for such development appear to
be present. Should this eventuate, Embassy convinced, however, that
change would be in personalities at top and that, over short term at
least, little alteration in country’s basic orientation or friendship for
U.S. would result.6
Kalijarvi
6 This conclusion was reported to the President by John S.D. Eisenhower on
April 11, 1960. (Eisenhower Library, DDE Diaries, Synopsis of State and Intelligence
Material Reported to the President)

ES–14.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central
American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Washington, April 12, 1960.
SUBJECT
Deterioration of Conditions in El Salvador
Problem
For some time we have been seeking an opportunity to impress
upon President Lemus and upon the economic leaders of El Salvador
our growing concern about the deterioration of political and social con-
ditions in that country.
The current visit to Washington of Minister of Economy Alfonso
Rochac will provide a good channel to get our views across to both
groups.2
Discussion
Our Embassy’s reports over the past six months have become
increasingly apprehensive over growing Cuban/Communist activating
and greater social unrest in El Salvador (Tab A).3 Fidelismo is spreading
like wildfire among the under privileged; there is growing lawlessness
in the country, rape, murder, robbery and thievery. There are indica-
tions that some groups who have previously supported President
Lemus are lukewarm or in opposition, either because the President
has not moved energetically enough against communists, or because
the President appeared to favor action which would limit their almost
absolute economic control of the country. There are also reports of graft
in the government and subversion of the courts. We have no reports to
indicate that the government is taking any action to remedy the social
and economic conditions in the country, which have recently been
described publicly by church officials as the worst in Latin America
(Tab B).4 The church statement observed that in El Salvador, the rich
consider the poor as slaves.
General: El Salvador, 1960.” Secret. Drafted by Maxwell Chaplin.
2 A handwritten notation by Rubottom on the source text reads as follows: “Since I
may not see him, I believe Messrs, Mallory and Mann might handle.” It is also noted on
the source text that Mann saw this memorandum.
3 Not filed with source text.
4 Not filed with source text.

El Salvador  591
Against this background of rapidly growing unrest stimulated by
Cuban evangelism, we see the Salvadoran leaders—­the oligarchy of
the Army, the so-­called 14 families and their gentry, and the church –
­divided among them­selves, unable to give adequate leadership to
attack the fundamental causes of the unrest.
President Eisenhower, the Secretary, Allen Dulles, yourself, and
our Ambassadors to El Salvador have all previously indicated our con-
cern about social conditions and communist activity in El Salvador to
President Lemus, but without visible results. A very strong approach to
Dr. Rochac at this time might reach both the President and the economic
aristocracy. Rochac is of the middle class, with a liberal or radical back-
ground, and apparently without close ties to the gentry, so you might
be preaching to the converted. However, it is well known that he is
highly respected in his country and in the U. S., and this, together with
his reputation for honesty and objectivity, would give great weight to
any message from you he might take back to El Salvador.
Recommendation
That you call Dr. Rochac in for a forceful discussion along the fol-
lowing lines:
1. We have observed a deterioration of conditions in El Salvador
which appear a serious threat to stability of the Government. Not only
has the Government failed to take effective action against commu-
nist and Cuban subversion, but more important, it has failed to act to
reduce the basic social and economic problems which create a climate
favorable to revolutionary activity.
2. We consider that the current agitation in El Salvador is probably
overdue, and should serve as a clear warning to the country’s govern-
ing groups. It is common knowledge that the campesino’s standard of
living in El Salvador is almost the lowest in Latin America. It is only
logical that communist and Cuban agitators realize this and concen-
trate their activities where the wealthy class is most vulnerable and
where the chance of success is greatest.
3. We are reliably informed that agents of the Cuban government
in association with communist groups are spreading the doctrine of
violent social revolution in El Salvador and among other countries,
and are directly interfering in the domestic political scene. Several of
these same countries have urged that the U.S. act against the Cuban
government unilaterally or through the OAS, apparently without being
prepared to recognize that the interventionist extremism of the pres-
ent Cuban government constitutes an even more imminent danger to
them than to the U.S. We consider that those who are thus threatened
by Fidelismo and Cuban subversive activities should feel no hesitance
in bearing their share of responsibility for any collective action which

may be required to counteract these threats, and should not hesitate to
make known the grounds they have for complaints of Cuban interven-
tion in their domestic affairs. However, we certainly would not wish to
see action taken against Cuba used as a pretext for violent repression
of all those forces working for social improvement in other countries.
Though we deplore the direction in which the Cuban government is
now moving, we have long supported not only in principle, but in
practice, some of the necessary social and economic reforms which not
only Castro but many democratic governments seek, the most obvious
example being land reform.
4. Only the Salvadorans can resolve the problems their country
faces. The wealthy must be prepared to make real financial sacrifices
to feed, clothe and educate the poor. They must be more responsive to
social pressures, or they will be wiped out totally. The recent anony-
mous letter forecasting the assassination of the loading members of the
military and the aristocracy in El Salvador may have been only agita-
tion, but it is not at all unbelievable that such a thing could happen if
present trends continue.
5. We should be able to express our concern to Rochac without
fear of personal affront, for we know of his outstanding efforts in
his field to promote the development of his country, and do not con-
sider him insensitive to his country’s problems. Many of those with
whom he deals are insensitive, however, and might be interested in
knowing how the U. S. Government views conditions in El Salvador.
We hope he can convey this message to President Lemus and to the
economic leaders of his country. We are eager to help out with well-­
planned aid projects, but it is difficult to help those who will not help
themselves.5
5 The source text bears approval lines, but no indication of action by Assistant
Secretary Rubottom.
ES–15.
Editorial Note
El Salvador had “reportedly quiet and orderly elections” for munic-
ipalities and the Legislative Assembly on April 24, 1960, according to
Ambassador Kalijarvi. The elections appeared “freer than anticipated,”
as indicated by the outcome in Salvador, giving the opposition Partido de

El Salvador  593
gave the ruling Partido Revolucionario de Unificación Democrática
a total vote of 368,545 to 51,557 for the opposition, and control of all
Legislative Assembly seats and all but six municipalities. In telegram
demonstration against alleged electoral fraud by the Government drew
only a “small, unenthusiastic crowd.” He concluded that the “public in
general seems disposed accept results and administration believed safely
1960, from the Director of Office of Central American and Panamanian
Affairs, C. Allan Stewart, to Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs, stated that the opposition’s showing
in the elections “comes as a considerable surprise to us and it indicates
we can now expect the tempo of political activity in El Salvador to be
noticeably accelerated.”(ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 16, “Political Local -
General: El Salvador, 1960”)
ES–16.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Chargé in El
Salvador (Downs)1
San Salvador, June 7, 1960.
PARTICIPANTS
Lt. Col. José María Lemus, President of El Salvador
C. Allan Stewart, Director, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs,
Department of State
Donald P. Downs, Chargé d’Affaires a.i., American Embassy, San Salvador
Mr. Stewart and I called on President Lemus at 10 a.m. on June 7.
The conversation got underway with President Lemus painting in
broad strokes a picture of the internal situation here in El Salvador.
He revealed that he was very much disturbed over recent trends and
particularly with the infiltration of the University, the labor unions,
the press, and other public institutions that the Communists in hand
with the Cubans had been able to accomplish. He said that it was now
clear that El Salvador was the main target but that it held, at the same
time, the key to this area’s future. He said that as long as El Salvador
remained free the danger to other countries in the area was lessened.
However, if El Salvador fell, then it would be a very easy thing for the
General: El Salvador, 1960.” Secret. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

Cubans and the Communists to take over the other countries of the
Central American region. The President said that he had been very
patient, that he had tried to conduct a democratic government and
that he had attempted to avoid being repressive. He added, however,
that the limits had now been reached and that the time for acting had
arrived. Mr. Stewart asked President Lemus why his government
had not availed itself of the Inter-American Peace Committee and the
machinery which this Committee provided. He said he believed that it
was exceedingly important that all the governments in this area inform
the Inter-American Peace Committee of specific instances of interfer-
ence in the internal affairs of their countries by Cuban representatives.
In this way a documented file could be built up and could be used by
the Peace Committee in carrying out the mandate which it had received
from the Foreign Ministers in Santiago.2 The President asked about the
procedures that might be followed in doing this. This was explained to
him and the President took down the name of Mr. John Dreier.3
The conversation then turned more specifically to Cuba. After
recounting some of his experiences with the previous Cuban Ambassador
here, President Lemus declared emphatically that he was willing to act
jointly with other Central American countries in breaking relations
with Cuba. He said he would prefer that all five Central American
countries take this action jointly. Mr. Stewart then told President Lemus
of his earlier conversations with President Villeda Morales4 who had
stated his willingness to follow his (President Lemus’) lead in this mat-
ter. Upon hearing this, President Lemus authorized Mr. Stewart to tell
President Villeda when he saw him the next day that El Salvador was
willing to break relations with Cuba and was prepared to consult with
Villeda’s emissary to work out the arrangements. He said that he would
be prepared to receive Villeda’s emissary here or to send an emissary
to Honduras to work out the specific date and time. He also authorized
Mr. Stewart to tell President Echandi of Costa Rica the same thing. The
more the President talked of this prospect, the more the idea seemed
to appeal to him and he reiterated his authorization for Mr. Stewart to
discuss the question with Villeda Morales and Echandi.
President Lemus then turned to the question of assistance. He
explained that up to the present, El Salvador had carried the burdens
alone. He mentioned the cost involved in the recent reconditioning in
Costa Rica of 10 Corsairs belonging to the Salvadoran Air Force and
2 Reference is to the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
3 Representative of the United States on the Council of the Organization of American
States, and Chairman of the Inter-American Peace Committee.
4 Ramón Villeda Morales, President of Honduras.

El Salvador  595
recounted his conversation with Ambassador Kalljarvi of last fall in
which he had made a request for assistance from the United States.5
This assistance was now more urgently needed than ever. El Salvador’s
borders and coasts were wide open to anyone who desired to penetrate
them. For example, not a single boat was available with which to patrol
the coast. Mr. Stewart said that in this connection, he wished to tell
President Lemus that the question of possible military threats against
the countries of Central American from external sources had been dis-
cussed prior to his coming here and that he had Mr. Rubottom’s author-
ity to assure him that the United States, working through the OAS
machinery, would come to the assistance of any Latin American gov-
ernment so threatened. Our assistance would be immediate and more
than fully adequate. On this point, President Lemus could rest assured.
Mr. Stewart then explained at some length the problems involved in
concluding a mutual assistance bilateral, emphasizing the congressio-
nal aspects, etc.6 He told the President that we were now exploring the
feasibility of utilizing other channels through which it might be possi-
ble to provide certain types of assistance to the public security forces.
He pointed out that the Embassy had, some two weeks ago, requested
the Minister of Defense to provide it with information concerning the
National Police, the Guardia Nacional, the Customs Police, and the
Treasury Police. This information would be of great assistance to
the Embassy in preparing recommendations on such a possible pro-
gram. The President reached in a folder and took out the Embassy’s
Aide Memoire to the Minister of Defense,7 which he had obviously
been holding. He telephoned to the Minister and asked him to pre-
pare a reply on an urgent basis for his prior review.8 He reiterated his
hope that some assistance would be forthcoming, repeating that it was
impossible for his government to do all that had to be done in the social
field and elsewhere without outside assistance. He explained what he
hoped to accomplish with the new development project at Metalio. He
said he knew that this would not solve the campesino problem, but it
could serve as an example of what could be done, an example to the
at San Salvador that “current U.S. policy is directed toward economic development and
utilization of national resources toward this end, deemphasizing unrealistic military
expenditures.” It suggested ICA expansion of the public safety program in El Salvador
7 Not found in Department of State files.
dum of their conversation at that time states that Lemus agreed to a suggestion by Downs
that El Salvador might buy one or two coast guard boats from the United States, if they
became available. (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 16, “Political International-General: El
Salvador, 1960”)

landowners of the country who had to be made to appreciate that they
had social responsibilities.
In closing the interview President Lemus spoke in heated terms
about the articles on El Salvador which have been carried by United States
magazines and newspapers over recent months. He said he was at a com-
plete loss to understand why, for example, Time magazine persisted in
depicting this country, one of the best friends the U.S. has, in a bad light.
He referred specifically to the latest Time article in which a picture of each
Central American country was printed, all of them, with the exception
of El Salvador, showing positive aspects. He asked why El Salvador was
being singled out for denigration. He said he appreciated that this was a
delicate matter for a government to involve itself in, but he nevertheless
hoped that the Department would use its influence whenever possible
in an effort to correct the injustice being done his country. It was import-
ant as it could adversely affect the willingness of U.S. business to invest
money in this country and the attitude of lending institutions as well.
The President thanked Mr. Stewart warmly for his visit and asked
him to convey his very best wishes to Mr. Rubottom.
ES–17.
Despatch from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)
to the Department of State1
San Salvador, July 26, 1960.
No. 21
SUBJECT:
Joint USOM/Embassy Recommendation for Assistance to the Public Security Forces
of El Salvador
Recommendation
Within the framework provided by the Department’s A-85 of
May 18, 1960,4 the Country Team of this Mission has given careful con-
Downs.
2 For the enclosure to this despatch, see Document ES–10.

El Salvador  597
sideration to the type of assistance that might best help to solve some
of the problems faced by the Government of El Salvador. It now pro-
poses that, in lieu of a Military Assistance Program, the United States,
through the International Cooperation Administration, assist the govern-
ment here in improving the capability of those units and organizations
charged with public security and with control over the national frontiers.
It is believed that this assistance can best be accomplished by:
a. Bringing to El Salvador a well qualified consultant to survey,
within the shortest order or time, the organization, operations and
equipment of the public security forces and to recommend measures
for improving their effectiveness.
b. Providing through special assistance funds a modest number
of light motor vehicles and the necessary communications equipment.
The recommendation contained in paragraph a. above has been
discussed with General Lopez Ayala, Sub-Secretary of Defense in
charge of public security, by the USOM Director, who found the General
warmly in accord. It has also been discussed with Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Dr. Ortiz Mancia, who on July 15 reported to the Chargé that
the matter had been discussed with President Lemus. The latter was
greatly heartened by this show of interest and, in giving his approval,
expressed his hope that the specialist could arrive and the study be
completed at the earliest possible date.
Background
As recorded in the referenced communications from this Embassy,
President Lemus over the course of the past ten months or so has made
several direct appeals to me for assistance from the United States in
improving the capability of the internal and public security forces of
El Salvador. This matter was raised by the President once again during
the visit here on June 7 of Mr. C. Allan Stewart, Director of the Office of
Central American and Panamanian Affairs. Taken from a Memorandum
of Conversation dated June 7, 1960,5 the conversation on this subject
went as follows:
[Here follows quotation from paragraph 3 of June 7 memorandum
of conversation.]
A few days following this conversation, President Lemus gave the
Chargé a memorandum incorporating the requested information. A
copy of this memorandum and a translation thereof are attached.6 As
pointed out by the President at the time of handing over the memoran-
dum, one of the greatest current threats to the security of El Salvador
lies in the open possibilities for infiltration of national borders. This
5 See Document ES–16.

infiltration takes various forms: entrance of subversive agents, introduc-
tion of subversive literature, smuggling of arms, traffic in contraband
items, etc. These activities could be greatly reduced by the operation
of a well-­organized and equipped border patrol. It is believed that the
enclosed memorandum clearly demonstrates the almost appalling lack
of equipment available to the public security forces of this country for
carrying out their responsibilities. This fact is borne out to some extent
by knowledge that when a local court orders the deportation of an indi-
vidual, he is literally walked to the frontier by a detail from the Guardia
Nacional.
With respect to the non-­existence of craft for patrolling coastal
waters, it has been made clear to President Lemus that it is most unlikely
that equipment such as patrol launches would fall within the scope of
the program currently under study. In reply to an inquiry as to whether
his government might, under special circumstances, be in a position to
purchase such craft, he said it would provided the price were low.
Justification
As is well known, this area is currently going through one of its
most troubled periods in history. Castroism working in concert with
international communism has made serious inroads, and, because of
the combination of conditions existing here, El Salvador appears to have
been selected as a prime target. The fact that El Salvador is extremely
vulnerable is recognized by President Lemus, and he is rightly con-
cerned. What has been accomplished to date in an effort to hold back
the tide and to channel it into evolutionary streams rather than per-
mit it to flow into revolutionary torrents has been accomplished by the
Government of El Salvador almost exclusively on its own. The assis-
tance received from the United States and other outside sources has,
up to the present time, been negligible. Yet, not only are the resources
available to this Government extremely limited, but time is running out
at an increasingly rapid rate. If assistance is to be effective, it is going to
have to be made available on a crash basis.
There can be no denying that the public security forces of this coun-
try face some very real and serious problems. Reports of clandestine
movements of agents and arms are reaching the Embassy in increasing
volume. And overt threats to public order and safety have shown a
decided increase in both number and boldness over the past several
months. These facts together with the demonstrable inadequacy of the
tools at the disposal of the public security forces of this country for car-
rying out their responsibilities provide more than adequate grounds for
implementing this recommended program on an urgent basis.
In the hope that early favorable action would be forthcoming
on the above recommendations, USOM included funds for bringing

El Salvador  599
a consultant to El Salvador in its June submission of OPARs and E-I
tables. An early decision on the recommendations contained herein
would be greatly appreciated.
Thorsten V. Kalijarvi
ES–18.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
El Salvador (Kalijarvi)1
San Salvador, August 24, 1960.
PARTICIPANTS
President José María Lemus
Ambassador Thorsten V. Kalijarvi
In response to the recommendations of the Acting Foreign Minister,
President Lemus received me in his office this morning at 11:45. He
apologized for keeping me waiting, but explained that he had been at
the desk since two o’clock this morning; and as I could readily under-
stand, the current situation called for a great many things to be done.
He answered as follows to my inquiry of how he regarded the pres-
ent situation. A number of developments have converged and resulted
in the current disturbances. First, the next elections (for Presidents) are
scheduled to take place in 1962 and a number of aspirants have become
active with their eyes fixed on that event. Second, the Communists
have become active and have caused the GOES increasing trouble
since January of this year. Third, the OAS conference at San José2 has
furnished the Communists throughout the hemisphere with a rallying
point, and the order to create disturbances has been given affecting
El Salvador along with the other countries. Finally, the Rector of the
University,3 a notorious leftist, has political ambitions and is directly
responsible for the student agitations.
Lemus then gave me a telegram he had sent to Ortiz Mancia, the
Salvadoran Foreign Minister, at the MFM in San José. He asked that it
Salvador, 1960.” Confidential. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 Reference to the Seventh Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs,
3 Napoleon Rodríguez Ruíz.

be sent to Washington and to Secretary Herter (see our telegram 100
of August 24).4
He then showed me the Manifesto of the Consejo of the University
Grafica and gave the President a time limit in which to answer. He
laughed and gave me a thermofax copy of his telegram of reply (see
were the work of the philocommunists in the student body and the
CGTS whose activities, in flagrant violation of the Constitution, had
been carried on as a result of the Rector’s tolerance and with his full
knowledge. He therefore said that the Rector would have to carry the
full responsibility in the public conscience for the current disturbances
and any that were likely to occur in the future. The security forces were
fully prepared to protect the peace and order.
He added that the Rector had not once raised his voice in the inter-
est of moderation, but had instigated and encouraged disorders, and
if he thought he was giving any time limit within which to act, he was
mistaken. Lemus was giving the Rector the same time limit within
which to bring about order or he (Lemus) would act.
The President then referred to his previous requests for a modest
amount of tear gas. He stated that he had no desire to meet mob vio-
lence with armed force, but noted that government supplies of gas were
old and probably of little use due to deterioration, and also were in very
limited supply. He asked what response I had received from his pre-
vious requests. I told him that thus far we had been unable to receive
active assurances of immediate help. The President said that he needed
the gas, and needed it right now and not tomorrow or next week. He
asked me to request an emergency supply on an urgent basis, and said
that if it could not be provided as a gift or sale, that perhaps it could be
provided on a loan basis. I assured him that I would relay this urgent
request on a priority basis.
We then passed on to the question of the coast guard vessels and I
reported that the request was under consideration in Washington. The
outlook seemed good. He said he was pleased.
4 Telegram 100 was repeated to the Secretary of State at San José. The referenced
Salvadoran telegram instructed the Salvadoran Foreign Minister to inform the Foreign
Ministers meeting at San José about the pro-Communist and pro-Castro agitation in El
6 The lines after “Embdes” and “August” were left blank in the source text. Lemus’

El Salvador  601
Regarding his request for two security advisors to assist at the Casa
Presidential, the President again expressed his urgent interest, saying
he wanted to have the use of these advisors right now, rather than at
some indefinite time in the future.
On leaving I asked if he intended to remain firm regarding the stu-
dents sent out of the country. He said he intended to exercise a firm
hand. What was more, if the disorders did not subside, he would arrest
the Rector and the Deans and throw them out of the country.
All through the talk he received phone calls through [which?] he
received information or issued orders. Among the former was a call
from Rubio Melhado7 saying that the Rector had asked to see him. On
laying down the phone Lemus said, “I think he is afraid.” Among the
latter he gave orders for the distribution of government leaflets. While
tired, he seemed to be confident and sure that he could control the
situation.
While waiting for my audience I talked with two of the Presidential
aides, both major officers in the army. They agreed that underlying the
present disturbance were the social and economic inequalities in the
country. However, the students had no rallying point except opposition
to the MFM in San José. Both confidently expected the present disor-
ders to subside quickly and opined that the President had no choice but
to exercise a firm hand.
Following the meeting with the President I passed by the office
of Rubio Melhado. Major Rubio asked why I was still in town and
not on vacation as planned. I said that the nature of the current cri-
sis indicated my continued presence here; Major Rubio agreed that
the situation was serious [text not declassified]. We agreed I would not
leave town until we were both certain that the situation was such as
to permit my absence.
7 Maj. Alfonso Rubio Melhado was Secretary General of the Presidency and a mem-
ber of the Central Committee of the Partido Revolucionario de Unificatión Democrática.

ES–19.
Telegram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)
to the Department of State1
San Salvador, September 10, 1960, noon.
With collapse yesterday’s strike efforts3 and progress in move
toward conciliation, situation here decidedly calmer. May have
passed crisis. Discussion with Esquivel, President Assembly, and
twelve Assembly members last night convinces me military, busi-
ness, church, wealthy and community leaders on second thought
now recognize necessity support Lemus through current crisis. While
many were ready assist in seeking solution, major move came from
Archbishop when he reluctantly issued message of conciliation under
specific instructions of Nunciatura. Once committed, Archbishop
immediately received support banking business and social commu-
nity resulting in a meeting yesterday and atmosphere evidently con-
convinced President still firm. Contemplated investigation will cover
not only police violence but also actions on other side.
Evident, however, that Lemus hold on government definitely
shaken and chances finishing presidential term appreciably reduced.
Open question whether Lemus hatred of and efforts to smear Osorio
by permitting airing of criminal charges against military and other offi-
cers for actions taken under Osorio (Torres Valencia and Palomo cases)
have so offended military to whom Osorio is darling that a coup will
be forthcoming. Conversations with some responsible leaders suggest
that perhaps day of reckoning may have been put off until a coup will
not be confused with communism. Army as regularly reported holds
key to any change now and in the foreseeable future. To date have
heard nothing to indicate other than that officers currently control army
gram was sent in two sections.
an evaluation and recommendations on the crisis in El Salvador and an analysis of the
a general strike in motion on September 9 failed after Lemus agreed to the conciliatory
4 It reported a radio announcement that in a meeting with cabinet officers including
Ortíz Mancía and Parker, and a public committee of businessmen and the Archbishop,
Lemus agreed to release students arrested but not charged with crimes; to determine by
investigation those responsible for the September 2 violence, and to suspend the state of

El Salvador  603
still supporting Lemus. Indeed evidence to support belief that Lemus
spurred to forceful action in crisis by army.
For full appreciation factors involved current situation see Embdes
part to extension of factors in play at that time. Foremost is increasingly
isolated position into which President has maneuvered himself and his
hesitancy to act when positive resolute action clearly indicated.
When current situation erupted August 167 it primarily communist-
Castro-­led. Public in general appeared favor strong action against
better known organizers and agitators. Instead of acting, President hes-
itated and then temporized giving subversive elements opportunity
extend agitation in university and whip students into defiant mood.
When President finally decided take action on September 2, rather than
being selective against agitation leaders, applied force indiscriminately
across board with heavy hand. Result, clearly promoted by purposely
planted false rumors re violations women, police excesses against
youth, et cetera, was antagonized public which with irresponsible press
encouragement, lost sight of real issue and perpetrators of disorders—­
communism and vanguard professional subverters.
Through entire period Lemus did not once seek advice or counsel
from Cabinet. Several who wished to give him support were unable
reach him. We reliably informed that when group Prud Party members
and business leaders attempted on September 1 offer support and assis-
tance in meeting with President, they were rebuffed and told that deci-
sions were his and he would make them. Not until September 6 were
members Cabinet brought into picture and then were requested sign
This egotism, aloofness and apparent obstinate determination to
go it alone further isolated Lemus and alienated many who were pre-
pared rally around him during crisis. This also prompted disgruntled
5 It reported that Lemus’ egotism limited his ability to govern, but he would
complete his term in office if he stopped favoring Rubio Melhado as his successor.
6 See Document ES–13.
on anti-U.S., pro-Castro demonstrations outside the U.S. Chancery and the Prensa Grafica
paper Tribuna Libre on September 6, printed an executive message appealing to the people
and foreign diplomatic mission chiefs in which he explained the Government’s resort
to force against provocative anti-Government demonstrations, Kalijarvi concluded that
the Government might not use necessary firmness again for lack of public support.

to start searching for an alternative and majority appear to be fastening
on ex-President Osorio. While reports of Osorio activities differ greatly,
some suggest his forces active throughout crisis attempting utilize it for
own partisan political ends. These same reports say Osorio is dressed
and waiting in the wings. General consensus is that if Lemus-Osorio rift
could be patched up tranquility could be rapidly restored. This voiced
from both sides and also from friends of both men. However, I believe
breach so great that conciliation between two is wishful thinking.
While original disturbances party directed against us “Yanqi
imperialism” this aspect disappeared after force and violence turned
public ire against President. Leaflets currently being distributed
return to this theme strongly suggesting communist leadership,
which disappeared during more vociferous disorders, has returned
to guide both students and CGTS.
Against this background, current period seems be interlude in
what will be continuing test of strength. Regardless Lemus faults,
Embassy strongly believes present government deserving of our moral
and material support and U.S. should render such as long as Lemus
remains in power and his government continues pursue policies the
aims of which coincide with our own. At present time, main forces
seem be directed toward maintaining Lemus government and avoid-
ing making of El Salvador another Cuba. Thus, while agree that we
should make our views known to subtle and direct way which we have
already done, do not believe we should publicly deport ourselves in
way which would add substance to charges, already being levelled by
communists, of intervention in internal affairs. Rather, we should speed
up action on pending aid requests, economic integration, social welfare
program, et cetera, which will give notice our support and confidence
in Lemus government.
Re press attitudes see Weeka 36.9
Kalijarvi

El Salvador  605
ES–20.
Telegram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)
to the Department of State1
port, [text not declassified].2 Liked idea of requesting IAPC investigation.
Agreed Lemus should take firm action, but felt that he should at same
time indicate readiness reconsider electoral and other recent laws, and change
his cabinet to get rid of Sub-­secretary Justice (Julio Fausto Fernandez, former
secretary Communist party). Needed to get government side to people.
President received me alone 12 noon. Lemus tired but relaxed. Said he
had been waiting for me. Agreed government confronted by grave problem.
While support indicated from many quarters he had received few tele-
grams of congratulation but not a single friend had come to say he
supporting Lemus. This discouraging. Reminded him presidents stand
alone, must take decisions regardless of professions of friendship and
support. Placing hand on statue Lincoln I had presented him he com-
mented, “Yes, I think of him often at this time. I realize fully what is
involved.” Suggested he might wish consider submitting memo to and
requesting investigation by IAPC. Liked idea and said would discuss
with Foreign Minister.
Recognized pattern street fighting yesterday importation from
abroad. Discussing yesterday’s ceremony said provocation [illegible in
the original]. At the end of procession of school children came disor-
derly procession led by University ex-Chancellors, Perla and [illegible
in the original] followed by 500 students and ten groups roughnecks.
Subsequently determined many of these from neighboring countries.
National Guard with fixed bayonets prevented roughnecks breaking
into gathered group and confined demonstrations to marching down
street singing International and crying support for Castro. Similar
group on opposite side park similarly contained. We both agreed a mir-
acle no incident occurred.
Suggested exiling agitators no punishment. Jail sentences would
have more deterring effect. President said unfortunately present laws
of country do not permit, but military tribunals under state of siege can
and will imprison disturbers. He recognized non-­democratic nature tri-
bunals but felt no other alternative for controlling situation.
2 Reference presumably is to a beating the Rector received at the hands of the police
who also arrested him during a raid on the University, September 2, 1960. Documentation
“El Salvador, 1960.”

Expressed appreciation for U.S. support and requested further
assistance [text not declassified] also concerning use tear gas and other
means controlling mobs. Said he had requested arms, but did not seek
U.S. military intervention. Agreed he needed strengthen press section
in Casa Presidencial to reach the people.
I said his government stands at crossroads, needs take firm action
control situation or face loss power. He still unable appreciate need take
action clearly indicated.
Visit seemed to give him lift and at no time did he give impression
he would resign.
Reports indicate he not sleeping. May explain apparent weariness.
I left today with distinct impression both Foreign Minister and Lemus
unable divorce emotions from their thinking. Neither seems have clear
sense of diversion in which he would like to go, let alone ability choose
word which would make him there.
Have cancelled follow-­up visit scheduled for tomorrow per
Department’s telephone call3 but believe it essential maintain as close
contact with both President and Foreign Minister as situation will allow.
Large measure psychology involved in situation and know President
would appreciate receiving any assistance Department may be in posi-
tion provide.
Kalijarvi
3 The telephone call under reference was not further identified.
ES–21.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in El Salvador1
109. For Ambassador from Mann. Would appreciate your analysis
most recent developments Salvador in context following questions:
1) Do you expect that Lemus regime will be able to survive present
crises and in the event your opinion is in affirmative for how long?
Distribution; Priority. Drafted by Mann and signed by the Communications Watch
Officer, John S. Whitt.

El Salvador  607
2) In the event Lemus regime should fall would some kind of mili-
tary junta be likely successor? If so, could we expect that such a regime
would be basically friendly to West and hostile to Communism and
Castroism? If not, what kind of regime would you expect to take over?
In reference to preceding questions would appreciate your views
re current attitudes of a) military establishment, b) 14 families and their
supporters, c) church, d) PRUD party, e) Osorio clique, f) labor, g) con-
gress and h) university groups.
Foregoing questions do not imply any change in U.S. position re
support of constitutional government in Salvador. We are however
increasingly concerned about ability of Lemus regime to survive and
wish to begin thinking in concrete terms of what we would be faced
with if government falls.
Department is pushing ahead on plans for Central American Bank
and is willing to consider any specific action in economic field that you
consider vital to our interests in Salvador. However whether this type
of assistance would have any material influence on situation would
seem to depend on length of time Lemus remains in power.
Dillon
ES–22.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of El Salvadoran Affairs (Gwynn)1
Washington, September 27, 1960.
SUBJECT
Political Situation in El Salvador
PARTICIPANTS:
Dr. Alfonso Rochac - Director, Inter-American Development Bank and former Minis-
ter of Economy of El Salvador
ARA - Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary
E - Mr. Turnage, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs
OAP - Mr. Gwynn, Officer In Charge, El Salvador
ARA - Mr. Pryce, Staff Aide
While calling on Mr. Mann today regarding another matter,
Dr.  Rochac commented at some length on the present Salvadoran

political situation. According to him, the situation appears to have
improved substantially. [illegible in the original] a growing realization
of the fact that an overthrow of the Government would be a major set-­
back for the country. Major developments tending to restore calm have
included the conciliatory efforts of the six prestigious cabinet members
who sought to mediate the Government-­student dispute during the
tense week following September 2 (sacrificing their own popularity to
do so); the replacement of a [text not declassified] military officer [text not
declassified] as the effective top police authority by a respected officer
(Lopez Ayare), who has surrounded himself with a higher-­type staff;
and the efforts at mediation of the other Central American University
Rectors, as a result of which several Government Ministers called on
the Rector of the University of El Salvador on September 20 to express
the Government’s regrets.
As regards the attitudes of various groups, Dr. Rochac indicated
that there were no indications of disaffection among the military; that
some of the 14 families, however, had “unfortunately” been urging
stronger action by the Government (at least prior to September 2); that
the non-Communist Labor group did not appear to be in opposition
to the Government; and that Osorio appeared to be maintaining a cor-
rect position, not intervening in the political disturbances (but that he
would be unlikely to allow the situation to degenerate into anarchy
without taking action). He thinks the Lemus Government’s chances
of survival are fairly good, provided he takes steps to (a) effect some
changes in his Government (where some of the advice he has been get-
ting has been bad): (b) be conciliatory in finding a solution to the cur-
rent unrest, and make some restitution; and (c) be impartial in domestic
politics. (In this last connection he indicated that two major underlying
causes of recent general resentment against the Government have been
the changes effected in the electoral law, which lend it to the suppres-
sion of not only Communist but all opposition, and the interference in
the conduct of this year’s elections.) Rubio Melhado would also have to
give up any aspirations he might have for the Presidency, in view of his
unacceptability to the Army.
The beating of the Rector was unpardonable, according to
Dr.  Rochac, and action was taken against people, like Canessa,2 for
example, who are clearly not Communists. In Rochac’s opinion Lemus
fell into a clever trap laid for him by those having a Communist phi-
losophy and backed by money from Cuba, at a time when some of his
sounder advisors (Ortiz Mancia, Carballo3) were out of the country.
3 Rafael Antonio Carballo, Salvadoran Minister of Justice.

El Salvador  609
ES–23.
Airgram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)
to the Department of State1
San Salvador, September 27, 1960.
government survival is directly dependent on the President’s capacity
to use the forces now rallying to-­his support, not as Lemus (because
in few short weeks I believe he has aroused strong animosity against
himself in El Salvador) but as the President of the Republic and as the
embodiment of law and order. For the moment he is able to count on
the Army, the security forces, the cabinet, the business community and
the church. The support is based on the concept that the best interest of
Lemus supporters lies in their trying to work with him and to maintain
him in power despite his idiosyncrasies and their personal piques.
However, there is a strong wave of public indignation and resent-
ment running against him, especially because of the beating of the
Rector. The advice of those immediately about him is faulty, and it is
not beyond the realm of possibility that it is deliberately poor.
On September 19 a meeting of 50 leaders in response to the call of
Ortíz Mancía at the Regalado home resulted, after frank and heated
discussion, in a decision to try to work with Lemus and to finance a
public relations program building support for the government and
educating the public about Communist tactics, aims and threats. The
consensus was that Lemus was his own worst enemy and that cabinet
changes were overdue, especially in the case of the Sub-Secretary of
Justice, Julio Fausto Fernandez, the supposedly reformed Communist
and ex-­Secretary of the Salvadoran Communist Party. Several subse-
quent meetings have only strengthened the basic decision and spurred
the creation of a new publicity agency backed with substantial funds.
The length of the Lemus government’s new lease on life is directly
dependent on Lemus’ ability to curb his egotism, abandon the determi-
nation to go-­it-­alone and to develop at least the appearance of gratitude.
To survive he must take counsel of others than those who currently sur-
round him and to be more accessible to many who are anxious and in
a position to help.
How long Osorio and his forces will remain withdrawn from the
scene will in a large measure depend on President Lemus himself.
Signs indicate that Lemus may not be helping his cause to any mate-
rial degree. The current publicity program emanating from the Casa
Presidential at first appeared vengeful and sensational rather than qui-
eting and calculated to restore normal order. Even more disturbing is
Downs.

the reported appointment to the Secretariat of Casa Presidential of Julio
Fausto Fernandez. Lemus seems unable to determine correctly where
his best interests lie.
The real test of whether Lemus is to continue in office promises to
come when the state of siege is lifted (indications are that the thirty-­day
period will be extended) although the Communist elements are now at
work and the government anticipates further trouble. Renewed efforts
at disturbances are appearing. A meeting, subsequently cancelled, was
called for the 23rd at Parque Libertad. A clandestine radio is operat-
ing from across the border in Honduras. It could, of course, be that
the above signs are the last actions of a dying cause. However, we do
not think so. Rubio Melhado asserts that arms are being shipped to
El Salvador from California, New Orleans and Miami. The President has
asked our help with a reported military movement against El Salvador
allegedly being hatched in Mexico.
My best guess is that at this moment there is a strong chance Lemus
will survive the next few months, an even chance that he will last a
year, but questionable if he can hold on to his office until the end of his
term. This guess could easily be upset by further Lemus blunders. Note
that the cabinet still remains firm. If Lemus survives the present cri-
sis, he could not survive a second, should one appear. These views are
also shared by some of the cabinet, one or two of whom are completely
pessimistic.
Impelled by Castro-­communist forces, whose influence on local
situation can only be underestimated at country’s peril, the current sit-
uation has evolved into one of many complex facets. It must be recog-
nized as well that basic forces at work here are centrifugal in nature
tending to pull apart the oligarchy consisting of the Army, Church and
wealthy class upon which the present government is based. In this
context, it is only possible to generalize re attitudes of the following
elements:
1. Military. With few individual exceptions the Army would prefer
see this government run its constitutional course. While Lemus is not
popular among officer corps, he symbolizes constitutionality and, of
all elements here, Army believed to be strongest backer this concept.
Army perhaps more realistic and better able to see where its own best
interests lie; to date we have had no tangible evidence that top echelon
is other than prepared to back Lemus government. Should government
begin to disintegrate from within, believe, however, that Army would
move decisively to take power into its own hands and that it would
succeed.
2. 14 families and their supporters. Current attitude this element gen-
erally as outlined above. While willing for most part to help Lemus, if
indeed he will permit himself to be helped, there is strong undercurrent of

El Salvador  611
dissatisfaction and resentment, and patience with him among this group
is beginning to run out. Most of those we have talked to see need for
social reforms, etc., but they want them to be instituted in planned con-
text, leadership for which Lemus government has thus far been unable to
provide. If it comes to alternatives, majority appears to favor Osorio and
we believe this element would throw its weight in his direction.
3. Church. Prodded by Nunciature and clearly more worldly wise
to revolutionary type threats, church here is far out in front in press-
ing for social reform and has evidenced impatience with Lemus gov-
ernment on this score. By its attitude it has widened breach between
itself and wealthy class, thereby weakening oligarchy’s foundation. Its
basic aim, however, appears to have been to spur Lemus government
into action rather than to contribute to its downfall. It has made public
its support of Lemus during the recent crisis and can be expected to
continue supporting the constitutional government.
4. PRUD Party. As a national party PRUD can be said no longer
to exist. It is rent with dissension and is a skeleton without real sub-
stance. Much of the blame for this rests with Secretary General Rubio
Melhado, who with high-­handedness has made many mistakes and
continues to make them, and is strongly disliked by all but a few cro-
nies. Historically, parties here have been formed around a man. Lemus,
by abdicating in favor of Rubio Melhado as party manager, sacrificed
his place as leader and it is doubtful that PRUD as it is now constituted
will be vary decisive factor in current crisis.
5. Osorio Clique. Ex-President Osorio still represents strongest
non-Communist political force in country. He has loyal adherents in all
strata and his reservoir of strength runs deep. Close friends quote him
as desirous of seeing Lemus complete term despite deep differences but
there is evidence that his lieutenants have been exceedingly active since
the present crisis began. We doubt Osorio will step forward until called
but believe his ear is cocked to catch weakest summons.
Osorio as a man is better known to several now in ARA than to us
here. Our impression, however, is that Osorio would have liked to have
been more reformist than he was during his term. He held back mainly
by more conservative wealthy elements on whose monetary support
he heavily depended. We do not believe the same situation will exist
again and that Osario would be inclined to be rather liberal in his out-
look and policies. This view reinforced by type people considered close
associates such as Jorge SOL Castellanos. We would not expect Osorio
to be openly antagonistic to U.S., or West. Neither would we expect him
to be as openly pro-U.S. or as amenable to suggestions from us as has
been Lemus government. While not favorable to Castroism we believe
he would attempt to apply some Castro-­type reform measures here.

6. Labor. Communist-­dominated CUTS with 3,000 members is
one prime movers current anti-­government drive. Non-[illegible in
the original]CGS with 20,000 controls large majority organized labor.
CGS is considered relatively free from Castro influences. To date it has
rejected the oppositionists’ appeal for general strike and we believe it
will continue to do so. CGS leadership not close to Lemus, however,
and complains of inability to [illegible in the original] him to discuss
programs. Perhaps significant that CGS has not during present crisis
publicly proclaimed support of government. Moreover current govern-
ment efforts unseat Secretary-General Saravia will probably result in
CGS schism, leaving majority under Saravia even less disposed work in
Lemus’ behalf. Despite this conflict, CGS leadership, including Saravia,
privately proclaim support for constitutional government. Saravia
known to be in close touch with Osorio group, however, and should
situation deteriorate further, possibility open swing to Osorio should
not be discounted.
7. Congress. Handpicked and representing hard-­core what remains
PRUD party, Congress can be expected to do Lemus’ bidding. Method
of election and mediocrity of membership have, however, left it with-
out much respect throughout country. Its deliberations for most part
go unheralded and its power as a political force considered minimal.
Assembly President Esquivel is friend both Lemus and Osorio; private
conversations lead me to believe he has preference for latter.
8. University. This institution has long been one of principal targets
of Communist infiltration and results achieved true cause for alarm. All
major student organizations are in hands Communist or pro-Commu-
nist elements and faculty itself includes several extreme leftist types.
Success in part, due practice keeping professional agitators and orga-
nizers matriculated as students for up to ten years. While this element
represents small minority total student body, its influence greatly dis-
proportionate to size. We are reliably informed that control over stu-
dents who had no desire take part current political activities gained
largely through intimidation and coercion. Only small minority student
body took part in disturbances at outset current crisis, with large major-
ity strongly opposed to involvement. Police action and clever handling
by student agitators were effective in turning majority against Lemus
and our information indicates that majority still considers him pub-
lic enemy number one. Past week has provided a cooling off period,
however, and signs beginning to appear that student body in general
tiring of being used and started to think of personal loss ensuing from
closed University. Number private groups also forming with aim pro-
viding anti-Castro/Communist students with rallying points and with
physical protection against coercive efforts if needed. Students here as
elsewhere have no positive program—­they are only against the exist-
ing order and in their search for a cause or philosophy they are prey to

El Salvador  613
highly obtained purposeful and, unfortunately, extremely versatile and
able student leaders in international communism’s pay. As a group,
they still do not appear to have been completely disabused of their illu-
sions with respect to Castroism and what it stands for. One thing is
clear: Lemus is anathema to the large majority and is unlikely ever to
re-­win students’ confidence or support.
9. Campesino. Thus far this overwhelming majority had taken no
part in current disturbances. The campesino has [illegible in the origi-
nal] some interest as a spectator but no propensity to include his voice
of his “machete” in current happenings. Embassy knows that travelling
pro-Castro/Communist teams have been proselytizing to the country-
side but as yet they do not appear to have succeeded in setting imagi-
nations afire. Lemus, as a President, is thought to be relatively popular
among this class, but as a man, Osorio is still reversed by the campesino
and the “little” man of Salvador. Thus, while dormant at the moment,
the campesino is not happy or content with his lot and a spark in the
right place could set this very volatile element afire. Moreover, should
the situation in the capital become chaotic at any time, the campesino’s
weight can be expected to make itself felt.
While the fall of the Lemus government does not appear immi-
nent, should it occur, it would in all likelihood take the form of a vol-
untary abdication or ouster. In case of the former, the Vice President
constitutionally would succeed to office, i.e., in the following order:
Costa, Esquivel, Alvarez, Escapini. None is a military man. While much
would depend on attendant circumstances, there is a strong chance that
the military would intervene and set up a governing Junta with the
results described below.
If Lemus were ousted, the Communists would not be in a position
to seize control. The Osorio strategy and tactics to [illegible in the orig-
inal] have been effectively hidden and would seem to indicate that he
would continue to remain in the background and refrain from imme-
diately taking over. However, the possibility should not be entirely
discounted.
The most likely development in case of an ouster would be a mil-
itary Junta. In such case the odds are that the power would shortly
thereafter be transferred to Osorio, who would seek to constitutionalize
his tenure, possibly through elections.
The advent of Osorio would still keep El Salvador oriented toward
the West and favorable towards the Osorio but by no means as friendly
as under the present government. I am not completely certain that
Osorio would return to his former strong anti-Communist position
although there is good reason to believe that in deference to the military
he would do so. The winds of nationalism are blowing more strongly
here than for some time. Criticism of the U.S. has been stirred from

Cuba and has been increasingly evident in student and labor publi-
cations and meetings. Castroism has its adherents. Osorio coming to
power against this background could not help but be responsive in
some measure to its pressures, some of which would be bound to react
unfavorably against the United States.
Therefore, as long as the present situation does not deteriorate, we
continue to hope that constitutional government can be preserved here
and believe that Lemus still has it within his power to save it.
To that end I recommend that we provide Lemus with short-­term
aid by immediate implementation on a crash basis of the program set
1960,3 and also by immediate implementation of the program discussed
in correspondence between Mr. Charles E. Higdon of ARA and the
Embassy including the letter of Mr. Downs to Mr. Higdon dated August
26, 1960. We should also press forward with long-term economic and
social assistance and with the Central American Bank. Lemus needs
to make new advances with economic and social programs, if he sur-
vives. If he does not survive, we need to consolidate our position with
a successor government through such programs as are not designed to
support any particular administration but to improve the country as a
whole. In either case the United States should provide assistance of a
longer-­term nature in the economic and social fields. We shall submit
separate recommendations accordingly.
Kalijarvi
2 See Document ES–17.
3 Under conver of despatch 62, Ambassador Kalijarvi transmitted an ICA survey
team report of August 24, which recommended the addition of an investigation advisor
A Public Safety Advisor, John C. Hazelett, was added to the ICA Public Safety Program
staff on December 31, 1961. [text not declassified]
ES–24.
Airgram From the Embassy in El Salvador to the
Department of State1
September 30, 1960
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 4 pages not declassified.

El Salvador  615
ES–25.
Editorial Note
and military, claiming the constitutional right of insurrection and act-
ing with the support of the armed forces, deposed the Government of
President Lemus. A Junta, consisting of three military and three civil-
ian members, assumed legislative and executive powers. In a bulletin
issued on October 26, the Junta announced that the Constitution and
laws remained in effect; guaranteed the rights of citizens; and promised
to hold free elections. (Telegram 220 from San Salvador, October 27,
Newly appointed Salvadoran Foreign Minister Rolando Déneke
wrote to Ambassador Kalijarvi on October 27, referring to the over-­throw
of the Lemus government and stating that the Junta wished to maintain
very close and cordial relations with the United States Government.
ES–26.
Telegram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)
to the Department of State1
233. Analyzing composition new junta and government it is diffi-
cult escape conclusion that there has been a decided shift to the left in
complexion government of El Salvador.
While most of those appointed to key posts on military side
thought basically friendly to the U.S. and democratically inclined, they
are, with two or three exceptions, young, of middle grade and wholly
inexperienced both in affairs of government and political intrigue.
Civilian side of government provides grounds for real concern. High
percentage of them have, at the least, questionable backgrounds. Four
civilian cabinet officers believed out and out Commies; four are very
leftist and at least two more known to be exceedingly liberal and revo-
lutionary minded. Even more ominous, however, are appointments to
second and third echelon posts now emerging, e.g., Salazar Rodezno
as Public Information Officer of Casa Presidencial. Disturbing number

those recently exiled and who were in forefront in leading cheers for
Castro now being given second echelon posts.
Turning to coup itself, evidence rapidly accumulating that it mas-
terminded by and executed under direction of ex-­president Osorio.
Substantial evidence also indicates that nerve center in Ministry of
Defense, with Generals Parada and especially Lopez Ayala utilizing
Guardia Nacional rather than army to carry out overthrow. Also good
reason to believe that Osorio, in planning coup, effected marriage of con-
venience with extreme leftist and other dissident oppositionist forces,
including General Quintanilla and Captain Buitrago, who confirmed
as actual Lemus abductors. There can be no arguing that coup master-
piece of planning and execution. No bloodshed, no disruption of pub-
lic services. Although impressive number high ranking army officers
given short period opt for or against junta and number those refusing
subsequently relieved, no resistance any nature offered. Considerable
evidence however that large sums of money changed hands, some of
which reportedly of Cuban origin.
In putting together this military-­civilian coalition, Osorio doubtless
reasoned that he could control it. He probably also reasoned that coop-
eration with left was necessary both in planning stages and now for
overthrow to be successful at this time. Inclusion this civilian element
probably intended as sop to students and PRAM elements in effort gain
their cooperation in stabilizing situation and gaining as wide accep-
tance of overthrow as possible until he prepared for next move. It may
be that he intends move in on pro-Commie elements then in Rakosi2-­
like salami tactic. Present indications, however, are that plan is to allow
junta to govern until regular election time in 1962 when Osorio will
emerge as favorite son candidate.
It seems to us that many dangers are inherent in this reasoning
and that situation as it stands today leaves many extremely important
questions unanswered:
1. Osorio has not yet shown his hand and while it is generally
assumed that he is man behind throne, is he in fact? Neither the public
nor we have any real proof.
2. If he is in fact the strong man, how deep does his control extend,
especially into the civilian side? Will he be able to control the Commies
in his government?
3. What commitments did he make in order to gain left-­wing
cooperation?
4. What are his real intentions with respect to life span of junta and
free elections?
5. Where did the money used in the coup come from?
2 Mátyás Rákosi, former Hungarian Communist leader.

El Salvador  617
We are convinced from pattern of coup, make-­up and early actions
of government, Communist tones of decrees and announcements, and
especially yesterday’s press conference by junta (EMBTEL 231)3 that
military element no match for civilian leftists and that as matters now
stand, we must regard coup as first step towards Fidelismo. For moment
announcements seem calculated to lull us but clearly next stage will be
struggle for power between Commies and more conservative element
and military with odds favoring former.
If remedial measures to be successful they will have to be taken
within next few days while army still has control of arms. Reports
reaching us indicate that while many viewed coup with approval at
outset believing Osorio was the man, their ardor has cooled consider-
ably after seeing make-­up of government. A counter coup effort, there-
fore, which our information indicates may be in making, may find more
public support outside leftist elements than could have been hoped for
earlier.
View all these considerations and many still unanswered ques-
tions, believe strongly that our traditional policy of recognition should
not be following in this instance. If our fears confirmed by subsequent
action, major and practically only weapon available to U.S., since inter-
vention renounced under international agreement, is recognition and/
or nonrecognition. Believe from talks with colleagues our action in this
respect will be closely watched and followed by number of other coun-
tries. I urge with all persuasiveness at my command the Department go
slow with recognition.
Kalijarvi

ES–27.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Mann) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, October 31, 1960.
SUBJECT
Coup d’etat in El Salvador
In the early hours of October 26 a bloodless coup d’etat occurred
in El Salvador which resulted in the sending of strongly pro-U.S. presi-
dent Jose Maria Lemus and his principal aide and heir apparent, Major
Adolfo Rubio Melhado into forced exile in San Jose, Costa Rica, and
the assumption of power by the following six-­man combined military
civilian Junta.
Military Members:
Col. César Yanes Urías—Deputy Chief of General Staff under
Lemus regime. Recently assigned to special staff responsible for main-
taining order in San Salvador during state of siege. Has been in the
U.S.; described by former U.S. Military Attaché to El Salvador (Col.
Ferguson) as reticent, non-­commital, retiring in personality; not partic-
ularly a leader.
Lt. Col. Miguel Angel Castillo— Director of the Treasury Police under
Lemus regime; former Director General of Telecommunications under
President Osorio; described by former USMA as friend of President
Osorio, a leader, and very friendly to U.S. (The Auxiliary Bishop of
Guatemala, who spent many years in El Salvador, describes both Yanes
and Castillo as “high-­calibre anti-Communist officers of the Osorio
stripe.”)
Major Ruben Alonso Rosales—­former Deputy Chief of key El Zapote
Fortress, commanding the capital city of San Salvador; described by
former USMA as being very friendly to a former member of U.S. Army
mission; close to General Parada, late Minister of Defense, known as
friendly to U.S.
Civilian Members:
Dr. Fabio Castillo—Medical Doctor and Vice Dean of the School
of Medicine at the National University; respected and popular with
University students; has studied in the U.S. and Europe; a known lib-
eral or leftist, who has been called “Communist”, a charge which has
not been substantiated.
5902 Memoranda.” Secret. Drafted by Gwynn and Higdon, and initialed for Mann by
Gwynn.

El Salvador  619
Rene Fortin Magana—Lawyer, aged 30. As a University student was
an active leftist, anti-U.S., an associate of Communists, and an alleged
“Communist.” A Salvadoran source here, however, whose judgment I
value, described him as young, honorable, violent, rich, and not left. In
view of my personal knowledge of the University of El Salvador, I am
inclined to the latter view.
Ricardo Falla Caceres—Lawyer, aged 32. An active leftist at the
University in recent years who has been consistently alleged to be a
“Communist,” but is described as liberal by other sources considered
reliable.
The individuals comprising the Junta and the new cabinet appear
to represent a cross-­section of Salvadoran political views. This is
undoubtedly deliberate, in an endeavor to attract widespread support
for the new Government. They are largely younger men who are rel-
atively unknown politically. A tentative appraisal indicates that the
new Government is nearer the “middle of the road” than to either
extreme, with a definite tendency towards the left on the part of the
civilian members. Ambassador Kalijarvi views a substantial proportion
of the civilian members as being to the extreme left. The Department’s
sources indicate many of them to be moderates, although preponder-
antly to the left.
The new Government’s first actions have been to release political
prisoners, lift the state of siege, cancel the law restricting the right of
assembly, and to announce that it would hold free elections as sched-
uled in 1962 and would govern by means of decrees during the tran-
sitory period of government. Also, it has declared its firm intention to
comply strictly with the political Constitution of 1950, to respect exist-
ing treaties and international conventions, to fulfill its obligations and
commitments, and to respect human rights. These latter assurances
have been given by the new Minister of Foreign Affairs in a note dated
October 27 to our Embassy in San Salvador.2
Among the principal factors leading to the overthrow of the
Lemus Government have been (a) his failure to carry out social reforms
announced following his inauguration in 1956; (b) his failure to accept
the advice of and delegate responsibility to the better-­qualified mem-
bers of his cabinet; (c) his vacillation in controlling the increasing activ-
ities of pro-Castro and pro-Communist agitators, first by failure to act
and later through strong-­arm suppression; and (d) his alienation of
the military by his apparent intention to make his aide, Major Rubio
Melhado, his successor to the Presidency.

The coup d’etat followed over two months of demonstrations by
anti-Government and student and labor groups, initiated on August
16 by a protest against the existing regime and the OAS Meeting of
Foreign Ministers at San Jose. President Lemus was finally goaded,
principally by the Salvadoran press, into using repressive measures
against the demonstrators, including the arrest and exile of agitators,
the enacting of a law restricting the right of assembly, excessive force by
members of the security units, and the establishment of a state of siege,
which soon alienated most of Lemus’ own supporters and created mar-
tyrs for continued anti-Government agitation. Temporary truces were
effected by a civilian group composed of representatives of the Church,
prominent businessmen, and representatives of the leading families,
which intervened in an effort to mediate the differences between the
Lemus Government and the demonstrators. These efforts, and less vio-
lent measures by the Security Forces, produced over a month of rel-
ative calm immediately preceding the unexpected coup d’etat, which
appears to have been carried out as a preventative measure to insure
that pro-Castro and pro-Communist elements would be unable to cap-
italize on the constantly deteriorating stability of the Lemus regime.
The files of U.S. intelligence agencies contain reports indicating
that the three civilian members of the Junta and a number of the mem-
bers of the new cabinet have been accused of being “Communists,”
pro-­Communist, and/or associates of Communists. Such accusations
have been levelled at one time or another against almost all “liberals”
or “leftists” in El Salvador who have advocated change in their still
largely semi-­feudal social order, opponents of the regime in power, and/
or students politically active in the affairs of the traditionally leftist-­
oriented, anti-­status quo, and anti-Government University. The term
“Communist” is frequently used synonymously with “leftist” in El
Salvador. As a result some of the best friends of the U.S., and some of the
most effective anti-Communist leaders in El Salvador (including former
President Osorio and several of his trusted associates), have been bit-
terly denounced as “Communists”. Therefore, ARA believes it would be
a grave error to consider, without further substantiating evidence, that
the new Government or its members are suspect for this reason, in the
absence of their identification with purely Communist objectives.
From information now being received from a variety of sources it
appears that able Ex-President Oscar Osorio is emerging as the domi-
nant personality behind the Coup. However, the political orientation
and likely policies of the new government, while controversial, indicate
a definite swing to the left in El Salvador. On the other hand, ARA
[Remaining is missing in source text]

El Salvador  621
ES–28.
Memorandum for the President by the Secretary of State.1
Washington, November 1, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recognition of the New Regime in El Salvador
The six-­man Junta which assumed power in El Salvador on October
26 is pressing for recognition by the United States.
There is some evidence that this is a government somewhat to
the left of that of former President Lemus and that a majority of the
members of the Junta and Cabinet are anti-Communist, although a
small minority are not particularly desirable from our point of view.
Moreover, there is a report that a counter-­coup may be attempted.
Nevertheless, the weight of evidence is that the majority of the Army
and the conservative oligarchy support the present government. It is
generally believed that the most prominent, if not the dominant, figure
in this movement is former President Oscar Osorio, President Lemus’
predecessor, who has a long record of cooperation with the United
States and of opposition to communist domination of El Salvador’s
political life. The Embassy of El Salvador in Washington has issued a
press release saying in part that the “Members of the Civic-Military
Junta had emphatically declared in a press conference that the revolu-
tionary movement they represent is strictly national and authentically
democratic, consistent with the basic principles of Western democracy
without any ties, whatsoever, with foreign powers or ideologies.”
The Governments of Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Ecuador,
Uruguay, Argentina, Spain and Mexico have already recognized, and it
is probable that other recognitions will follow swiftly. All the elements
required for recognition are present, and I recommend that we recog-
nize the new regime promptly in order better to enable us to cultivate
good relations with it and to influence it in the right direction.2
Christian A. Herter
William T. Pryce, Staff Aide, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. It was transmitted to
Secretary Herter by covering memorandum from Assistant Secretary Mann, November
1, 1960. In his memorandum, Mann elaborated the points made above in favor of recogni-
tion and recommended that the Secretary sign the present memorandum to the President.
2 President Eisenhower noted his approval on the source text.

ES–29.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
El Salvador1
169. Principal lines our reasoning on recognition issue have been:
1. Overthrow of Lemus regime was an accomplished fact.
2. Our principal objective should be to support promptly those ele-
ments who are willing and able to prevent a Castro-­Communist take-­
over and to guide evolution towards a constitutional regime oriented
toward West.
3. Osorio appeared to be best, if not only person around whom
Army and anti-­communist elements could unite to bring about such
transition. Corollary to this is our belief that division and drift at this
time in El Salvador would create a climate propitious for commie
take-­over.
Embtels 244 and 2482 are disturbing because they suggest Osorio
may be unwilling to prevent intensive propagation of communist pro-
paganda in El Salvador and that he has no plans to prevent communist
and Castroites from promptly organizing as a political force.
If you concur we suggest Downs approach Osorio promptly
and inform him that while Department has no desire to intervene in
Salvadoran political crisis we believe we have common interest in pre-
venting Communist-Castro take-­over. In view of esteem with which he
is held in U.S. we would appreciate knowing whether he agrees that a
failure to stand up to Communist and Castroites at this critical time will
create serious danger of chaos and confusion which will afford maxi-
mum opportunity for Communists and their Castro allies to take over.
You should also attempt discreetly to ascertain what his detailed views
are on this subject. If possible ascertain how he intends meet this aspect
of problem. You should also seek to ascertain what Osorio’s estimate is
of his ability control Army and if you deem this prudent his plans for
unifying Army. Depending on how conversation has gone up to this
point and whether you agree with approach suggested in paragraph
and signed by Mann.
Colonel Osorio apparently did not intend to attempt to prevent any party from partici-
pating in any election or to curb Communist propaganda and organizational activities.
the Department of State of a Communist-­line, anti-U.S. radio broadcast in San Salvador
on October 31, and reported that the government controlled station was dropping the

El Salvador  623
next following, you may also wish inform Osorio of plan to approach
key Army officers.
If in your opinion split among officer corps is serious, we sug-
gest an approach should also be made promptly to key officers in
both Osorio and Lemus camps. These officers would be informed that
while we have no desire to intervene in political affairs of Salvador and
in particular no desire to take sides as between military groups, we
believe that unity of armed forces in face of present Communist threat
is both urgent and essential. Colonel Alberto Escamilla or Major Ruben
Rosales or both may be best persons to approach in Osorio camp.
General Molina or General Cordova or both might be best persons to
approach in Lemus group. However, our information regarding mili-
tary is fragmentary and we leave to Embassy’s and Mil Attaches discre-
tion which officers should be approached and most appropriate person
in Embassy family to make approach. Cable Niact results these con-
versations with any additional recommendations Embassy may have.
Department suspending recognition until receipt your report.
Ambassador Kalijarvi concurs.
Herter
ES–30.
Telegram from the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs) to the
Department of State1
258. Department pass Army for ACSI; CINCARIB; CG USARCARIB;
Department of Air Force for AFCIN. Re Department telegram 169.2
At “Kye” Quinonez’s house and in company Colonel Matthews
spent one hour this morning with Osorio, and hour with junta mem-
ber Major Rosales alone, two hours with Rosales and Colonel Escamilla
together. Quinonez party to all discussions.
Made presentation as suggested reference telegram and Osorio
commenced with review of situation leading to coup which general in
nature and lacking in specifics. Lemus hated by everyone, army dis-
united and decaying, several coup plots in making, executive without
gram was sent in two sections.
2 See Document ES–29.

power to control situation and action imperative to save country from
anarchy.
With one exception, his replies to direct questions were extremely
vague and evasive. He denied most emphatically that single Communist
appointed to position in government. Some were anti-American but
this did not make them Communists. He does not agree that failure to
stand up to Communists at this time presents a danger. He does not see
a need to curb Communist activities, organizationally or propaganda-­
wise, and all parties will be given opportunity to participate in free
elections. Said he erred in exiling Communists when he was President.
Should have kept them here and channeled their activities. No more
than 25 real Communists in country at present time and plan now is
to “canalizar” their activities; they would be watched and made use
of. He implied without saying so directly that if need be proper action
could be taken at proper time. Questioned he said he thought he had
sufficient influence on junta to initiate control measures at proper time
if needed. Specific instances of present open Communist activities such
as the inflammatory program of Radio Universal were pointed out to
Osorio and his only comment was “this is natural.” When asked explic-
itly whether or not he anticipated that a 6-­man junta could efficiently
function or even last with inefficient operation for a period of two years
until forthcoming elections, he circumvented the question and gave an
explanation of how the military members of the junta had been permit-
ted to select 50 percent of the new government assignments and how
the civilian members of the junta had selected the remaining 50 per-
cent. What needed now was unity so that urgently needed social and
economic programs can be implemented. Changes had to occur within
three months or serious threat to government will emerge from people.
Support of extreme left as well as right needed for this and any restric-
tive action against former would disrupt unity and therefore could not
be entertained. He not taking a direct part in affairs of junta but provid-
ing his counsel and advice. He reiterated throughout that army united
and in control of situation but remarked on several different occasions
that situation very delicate. Osorio readily agreed to suggestion we talk
with selected army officers and suggested Major Rosales and Colonel
Escamilla.
Osorio said government would abide by international agree-
ment[s]. Asked about economic integration treaties said these could
go on but some of things agreed to would have to be changed. Could not
for example permit free flow of corn into this country. U.S. could pro-
duce it too cheaply and too many Salvadorans depended on it for a live-
lihood. Present situation this regard chaotic. Did not know enough about
proposal for new Central American bank to comment. Would have to be
studied.

El Salvador  625
We found Major Rosales straightforward, honest, pro-Western
and friendly but a complete babe in the woods. He admitted military
on junta consulting with Osorio and that civilian side probably not
under Osorio’s direction. Clear he has serious doubts about Doctor
Fabio Castillo; he asked whether we could confirm he had extreme
leftist leanings. Said decision junta taken by majority vote and no
one leader. Admitted that if disagreements occurred and could not be
resolved through discussion, they put aside for later. Saw dangers in
this arrangement but for moment junta working well together.
Questioning brought out he totally ignorant re developments
outside junta. When filled in he clearly taken aback and started tak-
ing notes. Said he did not know many of those appointed government
positions, clarifying that Salazar Rodezno nominated for Information
Chief Casa Presidential by junta member Falla Caceres. Asked whether
intention existed apply any curbs Communist activities he parroted
Osorio’s remark re strategy permitting open, unfettered operations until
Communists identified. When asked who first presented the strategy he
hesitated and then answered: “Rene Fortin Magana”. When pressed as
to plans for controlling Communist movement Rosales reaffirmed that
no plan existed. Said he was very inexperienced in this new assignment
and would welcome any suggestions we might have to solve problem
without being accused of curbing civil liberties. He stated that military
members of junta felt that economic measures improve lot lower classes
must be initiated immediately but that civilian members were standing
firm in their position that political orientation of government must take
precedence. He concluded that military members junta charged with
security while civilian members dealing with political situation.
Colonel Escamilla arrived and Rosales gave him straight forward
account our talk to that point, including our concern re Communist
infiltration and activities. Escamilla inclined at first brush these off say-
ing most effective way handle these was through economic deeds rather
than words or control measures. Turning to Quinonez he remarked that
he and people he represented should immediately join government in
these activities. Quinonez asked whether Escamilla aware type propa-
ganda now being put out by Communists. I called for tape recording
(Embassy telegram 248) and for first time Quinonez himself, Escamilla
and Rosales heard what Communists saying. Reaction electric with
much shaking of heads. All agreed this pure Communism rather than
nationalism and that action some sort seemed called for, but they con-
tinued expound difficulties taking any ­direct action under existing cir-
cumstances. I suggested good place to start was with Salazar Rodezno.
Rosales and Escamilla departed saying they would look into matter.
Quinonez who in interim between Osario’s departure and Rosales
arrival had made effort defend some of Osorio’s remarks made no

further attempt to do so upon conclusion three interviews. Impact
all that is happening seemed to dawn upon him for first time. Asked
directly whether in face all he had heard he would, if in my position,
recommend recognition this government, he replied he could not in all
honesty give an answer. He was not enough of a politician or diplomat
to be able to assess all pros and cons of extending or not extending rec-
ognition. One thing for certain, situation extremely critical and all help
and advice U.S. could give was urgently needed.
[text not declassified] If this could be done without recognition,
recognition now not overriding. On my way to Embassy intercepted
by emissary from Roberto Parker, He told me Parker had asked him
come to see me to transmit following message: Parker had visit yester-
day from Major Castro Moran, from Escuela de Guerra. Major Moran
told Parker that the military was very unhappy over the current sit-
uation. He said that he was speaking for the majority and that they
were thinking of doing something about it. Parker asked Moran why
he had come to him. He replied that he had come because Parker could
put him in touch with American Embassy. Parker replied he did not
want to become involved, but that he did have a very good friend in
the military, a Major Rodriguez Simo, in the Escuela Militar and that
if this man would come and see him he would talk with him. Simo
came to see Parker last night. He told him much the same thing that
Moran had, adding that their group now had the support of every army
unit with the exception of the national guard. Simo said, additionally
that Colonel Yanes and Captain Rosales in the current junta were also
unhappy and had expressed private regrets over the way the coup was
handled and how it was turning out. The emissary said that Parker had
also told him to pass on to me that when he had seen me two nights
ago he had thought that the U.S. should not recognize. He said he had
since talked to many responsible people plus these in the army and that
all now agreed emphatically that U.S. should not recognize this junta.
Parker said in addition he now sure good many people were not happy
with Osorio. He was told by his military visitors that Osorio did not
carry out some of the commitments that he had made with the military
prior to the coup. He said he is convinced from his recent talks that
when next coup comes, and which he now believes it will Osorio will
not be included therein. Separate telegram with our analysis follows.
Briefly put, we strongly of view that recognition should be deferred
indefinitely.
This may be considered joint Embassy/ARMA telegram.
Downs

El Salvador  627
ES–31.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of
State1
Washington, November 5, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recent Developments in El Salvador.
REF
NSC paper dated October 30 entitled “Coup d’etat in El Salvador.”2
In the past week it has become clear that currently the most prom-
inent if not the dominant figure in the revolutionary movement which
overthrew the Lemus Government is ex-President Oscar Osorio who,
while a complex individual, has a long record of cooperation with the
U.S. and of opposition to Communist domination of El Salvador’s
political life. In this coup he appears to have had the financial support
of some of the leading “14 families.” There is, however, a question as
to whether he is in full control of the situation with indications that the
influence of the extreme left may be growing rapidly and unchecked.
Also, there are reports of dissension in the military and plans for a
counter-­coup by dissident officers. The question of the recognition of
the new Salvadorian regime is being given urgent consideration in the
light of these reports as this paper is being prepared.
The most significant new indications of expanding Castro-
Communist influence include:
a) The appointment of more leftists to second and third echelon
positions in the Government, particularly in the Attorney General’s
office, the Ministries of Education and Labor, the Supreme court (two
to three seats in nine seat body), and in the Junta public relations office.
Among these are some extremists or Communists.
b) The commencement of a daily half-­hour radio program carry-
ing the straight Communist line, reportedly with the blessing of the
new Junta public relations office, and the cancellation of a USIS daily
prepared international newscast on the Government-­controlled station
(since reinstated).
c) The rapid resumption of activities by Communist-­dominated
groups, including the reappearance of manifestos making demands
on the Government apparently designed to foment unrest and keep
5902-Memoranda.” Secret. Drafted by Gwynn and Higdon.
Document ES–27.

it moving toward the left; the resumption of public student meetings;
efforts to intimidate University students and faculty members oppos-
ing the Communist student leadership in the recent disturbances; and
the arrest on a vague assault charge of an ex-­deputy who had pushed
hard for anti-Communist legislation before the fall of Lemus.
d) The reported return from exile of Cuban “Prensa Latina” staffers,
rumored plans for the re-­opening of the Cuban Embassy in El Salvador
and rumors regarding plans for the creation of a civilian militia.
The new Government appears to lack agreement on any real doc-
trine and it certainly contains anti-U.S. elements, with the inherent risk
that these, though in a minority at present, could possibly take over.
Col. Osorio admits that the situation is delicate. He appears to be influ-
encing the three military members of the six-­man Junta, but possibly
has less influence on the civilian members. While he has implied to
our Charge that proper action would be taken when the time came, he
apparently does not intend to curb Communist activities, organization-
ally or propaganda-­wise, at present. He feels this kind of a coalition is
necessary and desirable at this time.
On the question of recognition, Ambassador Kalijarvi, presently
here on consultation, and the Embassy recommend deferring recogni-
tion indefinitely. They consider that the complexion and trend of the
present Government is leftward towards a Castro-Communist take-
over; that the reported plans for a counter-­coup may make it short-­
lived; that recognition would cast a cloak of respectability about the
new Government in the eyes of other countries and peoples and encour-
age attempts to effect similar overthrows elsewhere in Central America;
and that immediate recognition would thus encourage and strengthen
forces hostile to the United States without any realistic prospect of our
being able to control the situation or to effect a change in the course of
the new government.
There is, of course, always a possibility that Communist-Castro
elements will succeed in getting an upper hand in El Salvador. The
question is, however, whether it is in the U.S. interest to work with the
new Government and endeavor, through the moderate elements of
the regime, and particularly Osorio, to achieve an orientation toward
the West, or whether, by failure to recognize or delay in recognition,
we should alienate the Government, weaken Osorio and help to cre-
ate a situation of uncertainty propitious for Communist and Castro
influence. On balance, recognizing there are risks in whatever we do,
I believe we can more effectively pursue U.S. objectives by working
with the present Government. This conclusion is based largely on the
hope that Osorio will remain influential, and the history of our rela-
tions with Osorio.

El Salvador  629
ES–32.
Memorandum of Discussion at the 466th Meeting of the
National Security Council1
Monday, November 7, 1960
[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1–4, concerning outer
space programs, Cuba, significant world events affecting U.S. security
(Sino-Soviet clash, Laos El Salvador), and Algeria. Portions printed
below are from the merged discussion of items 3 and 4.]
Dealing next with El Salvador, General Cabell said that the
Communists and pro-Castro forces were making a strong bid for
power. Ex-President Osorio, who had used these forces as a means of
getting back to power, had appointed pro-Communists and pro-Castro
individuals to the Cabinet and other posts. Osorio thought he could
control these elements but they have moved quickly to reinforce their
position. They have appointed Communists and pro-Communists to
second and third echelon positions in the government and were mov-
ing in on information and propaganda media. They are also demand-
ing removal of all Osorio’s supporters. Osorio hopes to rule El Salvador
indirectly until the 1952 elections. He says that he cannot consider plans
to restrict the extreme Left because he needs their support to get action
on certain reform measures. The army was apprehensive and a group
of officers had plans for salvaging the dominant position of the military.
They must act quickly, however, if their action is to be effective. General
Cabell suggested that control of El Salvador by pro-Castro elements
would pose a series threat to Guatemala.
[Here follows discussion of possible Soviet intervention in Algeria.]
Secretary Merchant went on to point out that the U.S. had not yet
recognized the new government in El Salvador although we are con-
sidering the matter on a 24-­hour basis. We had thought it unwise to
recognize the government in view of the possibility of a counter-­coup
by conservative elements in the army. This was a difficult choice. The
question was whether recognition would strengthen the reasonable
elements in the government despite the fact that Leftist elements were
honeycombing the government. Secretary Merchant expressed the
view that Osorio may well have been double-­crossed. He said that a
decision would be needed within the next 24–72 hours. If we waited
too long and there was no counter-­coup, we would lose our ability to
influence those who are our friends in the existing government.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Eyes Only.
This memorandum was prepared by Robert H. Johnson, Director of the NSC Planning

The President observed that it was frightening how a few Communist
elements could get in and take over a government while the others in the
government behaved like jellyfish. It was also alarming that we could not
get the OAS to be really concerned about such a situation because of the
political problems that these governments have at home. He observed
that we might have to go back to greater reliance on power politics.
Mr. Mann stated that a decision on recognition had to be made on
the basis of an estimate of whether the existing El Salvador Government
would be around long enough to make support worthwhile or whether
we should work for a counter-­revolution. The President suggested
that we ought to find out whether the Rightists in El Salvador believe
that it would be useful for us to recognize the regime or whether they
consider that withholding recognition would be helpful in stimulat-
ing a counter-­coup. Secretary Merchant observed that U.S. recogni-
tion could dishearten the opposition. The President asked whether we
were talking to the opposition. Mr. Mann said that we were and that
a majority of our friends in the governments were urging prompt rec-
ognition. However, he also acknowledged that friendly army officers
took the opposite view. Secretary Anderson said that he did not see
how could run a government with the second and third echelons in
the control of the Communists and the top of the government split; he
did not see how any government could long exist on this basis on our
side. Secretary Gates expressed the view that we should drag our feet
on recognition because recognition would create a UN problem; that is,
it would provide a basis for possible later UN intervention. He felt we
were entitled to a period of time for foot dragging. The President stated
that we did not want to let the situation sit and simmer; we needed
to decide the best way to achieve our objectives. Secretary Merchant
concluded this portion of the discussion by observing that there was no
doubt that Osorio was friendly to us; the only question was whether he
could control the situation.
The National Security Council:
3. Noted and discussed an oral briefing by the Acting Director
of Central Intelligence on the subject, with specific reference to Sino-
Soviet relations; the situation with respect to Algeria; and the situations
in Laos and El Salvador.2
[Here follow the NSC Action on Algeria and discussion and Action
on agenda item 5, Scandinavia.]
2 This paragraph constitutes NSC Action 2330, approved by the President on

El Salvador  631
ES–33.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 8, 1960.
SUBJECT
El Salvador
Attached as Tab A is telegram to our Chargé a.i. in San Salvador
approved by Tom Mann instructing him to inform the Foreign Minister
immediately that the United States has decided to recognize the new
government.2
Although drafted for my signature, Mr. Mann feels that this should
be approved before dispatch by you and the President.
Attached as Tab B is a memorandum from Ambassador Kalijarvi
opposing this course of action.3
At the NSC meeting yesterday morning raised this subject with the
President and outlined the pros and cons of recognition with an indi-
cation that the Department expected to have a recommendation for his
consideration within a day or two. Although the discussion was brief,
the main points were covered. Tom Gates expressed himself forcefully
as opposed to recognition at this time. The others were silent, and the
President gave no visible indication of judgment in the matter.
It is unnecessary to say that this is a very difficult decision with the
factors pro and con closed balanced. I have in my own mind reached
the conclusion that we should continue to delay according the junta
recognition. The controlling reasons for this are:
(1) Having delayed this long, it is difficult to represent that recogni-
tion now would be automatic and containing no element of moral judg-
ment. The passage of time itself will be construed as our having weighed
all the factors and finally having come down on the side of recognition.
(2) Recognition now with a counter-­coup still in the air would
inevitably be a discouragement to those contemplating such action.
Certainly a counter-­coup by moderate and anti-Communist army offi-
cers would be in our interest.
2 Not filed with source text. The telegram was evidently not sent.
3 Not filed with the source text. The reference is presumably to Kalijarvi’s memo-
randum of November 6, 1960, which concluded with the statement that “immediate rec-
ognition of the junta government in El Salvador would encourage and strengthen forces
hostile to the United States without any . . . prospect of our being able to control the
situation in El Salvador and to effect the course of its government.” (ARA/OAP Files, Lot

(3) On balance, I am dubious of our ability to exert effective influ-
ence in support of the moderates in the present junta, particularly with
no Ambassador on the spot. Moreover, it seems to me the withholding
of recognition, at least until the situation clarifies, in fact places some
leverage in the hands of friends in the junta since they can hold out the
prospect of recognition as an argument against further radical acts by
the radical elements.
To recapitulate, I recommend withholding recognition and con-
tinuing to watch and wait.
I also recommend that you meet with Mr. Dillon, Mr. Mann, and
myself as soon as convenient after your return for a further review of
this matter.
ES–34.
Memorandum for the President by the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 10, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recognition of Junta in El Salvador
As you know, we have delayed recognition of the Junta in El Salvador
pending further analysis of its stability, composition and political orienta-
tion. It is now clear that the new Government is one of coalition without
adequate leadership which, while seeking reform, has no clear idea of how
to deal effectively with subversive elements. This presents a situation of
danger and it may well be that we should recognize so as to be in the best
position to use our influence to strengthen the efforts of non-Communists
to orient government policy along democratic lines.
I recommend that you authorize me to extend recognition to the
Junta Government at such time as we consider our interests will best
be served by so doing. We are informed that Brazil has decided to rec-
ognize the Junta Government today. Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Panama, Ecuador, Paraguay, Israel, China, Austria and
Spain have already recognized. I anticipate that other countries will
soon follow suit.
Christian A. Herter
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Secret. A notation by
Brigadier General Goodpaster on the source text reads as follows: “President approved
orally. I notified State Dept.”

El Salvador  633
ES–35.
Letter from the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs) to the
Ambassador in El Salvador, Temporarily in Washington
(Kalijarvi)1
San Salvador, November 10, 1960.
Dear Mr. Ambassador:
I received your two letters2 and wish to thank you very much for
them and for the advice and counsel which I can read between the lines.
We have been exceedingly busy. What with the many discussions we
have been having with almost everyone around the place these days,
the telegrams that have had to be drafted and cleared and the other
myriad of activities which always seem to come upon one, I must admit
that I have had very little time for either eating or sleeping. It has, how-
ever, as you can probably gather from that end, been a very interesting
period. I believe that the pieces of the puzzle are beginning to fall into
place fairly rapidly these days and I must say that the picture which
is outlined is much as we had thought it would be in the early stages.
One thing seems clear: we are in for a very difficult period over the next
couple of months. From all we have been able to learn to date I am now
more convinced than ever that we will be making a very grave error
to put our money on Mr. Osorio. The latest we have heard is that he is
drinking very heavily and is now letting it be known among his very
close friends that he has indeed been double-­crossed. It seems to me,
therefore, that our best course of action for the present is to give every
bit of under the table assistance we can to the moderate forces in the
country—­both outside the government and where we can find them
inside—­and attempt to awaken them to the danger which is clearly
apparent and give all the help we can in organizing the fight against it.
This I think can be done without recognition on our part and I continue
to believe that we would be making a very grave error in recognizing
this Junta as it is currently composed.
I think you too would be amazed at the number of people who
have been seeking us out in the last week to tell us of their fears and
concerns. People who up to a week ago were insisting that we recog-
nize and give this government our full assistance. Among them, I am
sure, are a large number who contributed both financially and morally
El  Salvador, 1960.” Confidential. Kalijarvi enclosed this letter with a memorandum to
Herter, November 16, 1960, opposing immediate recognition of the Junta and recommend-
2 The letters under reference were not further identified.

to the overthrow of the Lemus regime. I think that they are now com-
ing to realize that they have a bear by the tail—­genesis Russian—­and
are now very much concerned about how to get rid of it. That it will be
gotten rid of, at least in the form of the present Junta, I am convinced.
Just how soon the very careful preparations that will be necessary for
success will be ready is anyone’s guess. I don’t believe, however, that
we will find the present situation existing at the end of this month. I
hope we will be able to convince our peers in Washington to hold off
for at least this long.
Most sincerely,
Donald P. Downs
3 Four dots appear in the source text.
ES–36.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1
Washington, November 11, 1960.
Mr. Gray said Mr. Gates was terribly concerned about recognition
of the new government of El Salvador. He was not in agreement with
State. He was strongly opposed to going ahead as were the Joint Chiefs.
He acknowledges that this was political and he understood that Allen
Dulles was also opposed. Mr. Gray said he could not speak for Mr.
Dulles but he thought this was correct information. He told Mr. Gates
that he had not been in on the matter except for what came up in the
National Security Council.2 He did not consider this to be an NSC mat-
ter and therefore had not inserted himself in the process, and he didn’t
intend to except to pass along his point of view which is the same as Mr.
Gates’. But this is an individual point of view because he would think
the President would look to the Secretary of State for primary advice.
However, [illegible in the original] would like to know how State felt
it should be done—i.e., how do the people at the top feel—and more
specifically how did Mr. Merchant feel about it.
2 Reference is to the NSC meeting of November 7; for the memorandum of discus-
sion, see Document ES–32.

El Salvador  635
Mr. Merchant said he would start with last [illegible in the origi-
nal] about last night. Mr. Merchant had [illegible in the original] Gates
through [illegible in the original] requesting that [illegible in the origi-
nal] El Salvador until [text not declassified] was [illegible in the original]3
[illegible in the original] to arrive in [illegible in the original] Friday.
Mr. Merchant [illegible in the original] so the situation has been held
up. Although the Secretary has the President’s approval or discretion-
ary [illegible in the original] recognize ES when it is timely and right.
State’s [illegible in the original] yesterday was to recognize the country
in a [illegible in the original] to watch developments. This decision was
[illegible in the original] on the basis of findings of private emissaries
[illegible in the original] advice from some of our top Latin American
friends [illegible in the original] on balance that a counter-coup by the
conservative elements in the army, contrary to our original hope was not
[illegible in the original] for some months. One argument against recog-
nition was that it would discourage any such movements by friendly
[illegible in the original] There was also the question of how [illegible in
the original] could best encourage and invigorate the friendly moderate
element who are still in the junta before they are gobbled up by the dan-
gerous elements. It is a delicate judgment.
Mr. Gray said that Defense and others against it are entitled to
make their strong views known, but he still felt it is the primary action
of the State Department.
A further development, Mr. Merchant continued [illegible in the
original] of just a few minutes ago. The USIB met this morning, and it
is the unanimous view of the intelligence community that this is pre-
dominately a very bad crowd. That is no news to State. The Secretary
and he are getting a memo from Hugh Cumming,4 who attended the
meeting; and that judgment, which was concurred in by Allen Dulles,
would be taken into consideration by Mr. Herter and himself. It will
come down to a close and difficult question of psychological and polit-
ical consideration.
Mr. Gray thanked him for the background information.
that Robert H. Knight, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security
Affairs, called him on behalf of Secretary of Defense Gates, asking for delay of recognition
pending receipt of information on the following day which might bear on the decision
4 See Document ES–37.

ES–37.
Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and
Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 11, 1960.
SUBJECT
Considerations of Intelligence Community Regarding Recognition of El Salvador.
I have been informed that a decision has been made to extend rec-
ognition to the government which has been formed in El Salvador fol-
lowing the overthrow of President Lemus on October 26. While this
decision is beyond my scope, I do feel very strongly that it is our duty
to put forth our considered judgment of the results that may flow from
such recognition.
Since there is no time for a National Intelligence Estimate in this
case, Mr. Dulles, The Director of Central Intelligence, suggests that
we incorporate in one paper the view of representatives of the intelli-
gence components of the Department of State, the Central Intelligence
Agency, the Department of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the
Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.
The government formed in El Salvador following the overthrow of
President Lemus on October 26 continues to exhibit an increasing trend
toward the left. A growing proportion of the Junta appointments to the
cabinet and other important government posts are going to confirmed
or suspected Communists. The individual responsible for engineering
the coup was former President Osorio who had enlisted the support
of military and wealthy civilian elements in addition to many leftists.
It now appears that Osorio is unable, or perhaps unwilling to contain
the growing power of the leftists who are becoming entrenched in the
new regime. Although there are Junta and Cabinet members who show
signs of concern over the situation, they have not demonstrated the
capability of coping with their more politically skilled leftist colleagues.
A counter-­coup by disgruntled but disunited military elements remains
a possibility. The leftist trend of the Junta in El Salvador has been indi-
cated more by the nature of government appointments than by actions
or declarations. Also a considered danger is that several more impor-
tant Communist and leftist appointments and removals of moderate
elements are pending the receipt of recognition by the United States
Government.
Although the Junta has lifted the state of siege, the dissolution of
Congress and the elimination of pro-Lemus elements, friendly to the

El Salvador  637
United States, and the vague promise of holding free elections two
years hence, does not give an assuring picture of what future course of
action the Junta will take.
United States Government recognition at this time would discour-
age the hopes of non-Communist opposition to carry out a counter-­
coup against the Junta. Recognition would provide the Junta with the
respectability they now desperately are searching for. This would allow
the leftists the needed time to consolidate their gains and to seek out-
side support from other leftist oriented governments, such as Cuba.
After they become well entrenched, El Salvador would probably serve
as a base for similar movements in neighboring countries. This perhaps
is the major risk involved to the political stability and future security of
Central America. A leftist dominated El Salvador could serve as a vital
wedge, resulting in an extension of Castro-­type Communism from Cuba
to the Central American mainland. Castroism would then be provided
with a West Coast opening—­a base for seaborne Communist access to
Central America. The current unrest and instability of Guatemala and
Honduras are such that even the presence of a leftist government in El
Salvador would provide the necessary spark needed to topple these
shaky governments. Nicaragua also would not long be able to resist the
presence of leftist governments in three neighboring Central American
countries. The effects of such developments on Panama and the security
of the Canal Zone are self-­evident. A further problem would be posed
to the U.S. Government in giving additional support to bolster coun-
tries thus threatened. As a final consideration, recognition of the pres-
ent government of El Salvador by the U.S. would be widely interpreted
throughout Latin America as well as inside the country, as approval of
what could quite easily result in another Castro type regime.
The foregoing has been jointly drafted by senior representatives of
the intelligence community and the conclusions approved by all of them,
including The Director of Central Intelligence. 2
memorandum and strongly urged that the United States “proceed forthwith to recognize

ES–38.
Telegram From the Embassy in El Salvador to the
Department of State1
November 15, 1960
1 Source: Department of State, 3 pages not declassified.
ES–39.
Telegram from the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs) to the
Department of State1
San Salvador, November 23, 1960, noon.
326. For Mann. Following from Stewart:2
After two hour meeting with Osorio, two hour session attended
by all six members of Junta and about 15 interviews Salvadorans,
Americans and others these are my observations:
1) Osorio was key figure in overthrow. He and civilian elements
were in accord sometime before overthrow.
2) Osorio admits there will probably be counter attempts in armed
forces and plotting is in evidence but based on my information Osorio
has enough support in armed forces to keep present Government in
power. Osorio has receded into background and provides occasional
advice but three military members of Junta are his men and Minister
Interior3 is strong type loyal to Osorio. Therefore, Osorio is key man
in country.
3) Civilian members of Junta are well-­intentioned but inexperi-
enced. I feel they are anxious to cooperate with U.S. If there were any
doubt, however, Junta setup provides excellent check and balance with
military members, backed by Osorio, exerting deciding influence. My
meeting with Junta members was marked by frank exchange of ideas,
especially on appointment people of doubtful ideology to Government
Limit Distribution.
2 C. Allan Stewart, Counselor of Embassy in Venezuela, visited San Salvador,
visit, was enclosed with a letter from Stewart to Higdon, December 2 1960. (ARA/OAP
3 Col. Alberto Escamilla.

El Salvador  639
posts. They are aware of background these people and reached unani-
mous decision appoint them after long debate. After conversing many
serious Salvadorans I conclude there are sharply diverging opinions
about whether doubtful individuals are Communists. In any event,
Junta is aware our concern for some appointees and Osorio welcomed
memorandum [text not declassified]4 When translated “Osorio suggested
it be given to Minister Interior Escamilla.
4) Osorio and Junta are for free elections. They think Democratic
forces can overwhelm Leftists at polls, and Osorio starts organizing
new party to attract bulk of PRUD on Friday, with big convention
around December 15. Civilian Junta members told me they discussed
two types overthrow in first stages of plotting, namely à la Castro or
à la Betancourt. Decided on latter because by Democratic forces in
Venezuela won out later in free elections. Said this formula also had
been successful in Guatemala and Honduras. Osorio said PRAM and
CGTS will be controlled. Close friend one of military members Junta
and of Minister Interior said these two strongly confirmed this fact to
him. However, same source, evidencing his own concern, added that he
had asked his friends if they sure they not being used.
5) Junta admits its functions as caretaker Government while
Congressional elections prepared is not enough and must make start
on social program. Osorio said he had ideas along this line.
6) Reaction among Salvadorans with whom I talked is regret for
departure constitutional process but strong to mild feeling Lemus bun-
gled student disturbances so badly his removal was logical aftermath.
Return to constitutional Government is avowed unanimous desire.
7) Consensus opinion is that any succeeding Government would
be rightist military Junta. Some observers viewed this with alarm, say-
ing it would not be accepted by liberal elements and masses, with con-
sequent trouble.
8) I am most impressed with attitude of intelligent Salvadorans
who realize dangers of present situation and wish cooperate with Junta
in finding solution along peaceful lines. Meanwhile working class con-
tinues at tasks without interruption. Cumbersome six-­man Junta may
be streamlined but I believe only after satisfactory agreement between
civilians and military.
9) Osorio made plea for recognition and Junta members were most
eager get over point they wish to work with U.S. and need our support.
Downs
4 The paper entitled, “Cuban Subersive Activities in E1 Salvador,” was not found in
Department of State files.

ES–40.
Memorandum for the President by the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 26, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recognition of Junta in El Salvador
Junta Government of El Salvador at any time when I considered our
interests would best be served by so doing. In view of doubts voiced
by our intelligence community and others regarding the possible conse-
quences of recognition, we sent a ranking Foreign Service Officer, who
had until recently served as Director of the Office of Central American
and Panamanian Affairs, to El Salvador to make an impartial survey of
the problem. On the basis of numerous talks he held with persons in
El Salvador, including American and Salvadorans with whom he had
long been acquainted, the six-­man Junta and former President Osorio,
he has reported that Osorio seems to be the key figure behind the pres-
ent Government and that the latter is attempting to maintain its inde-
pendence of Castroist or Communist policies and personnel.2 Mr. Allen
Dulles and the Department of State's Director of Intelligence3 on the basis
of this officer's report and their judgment of current developments in El
Salvador, no longer have any objection to recognition. I therefore pro-
pose to extend recognition on or about November 30, 1960 unless you
perceive objection.4
Christian A. Herter
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Secret. Drafted
by Coerr and Higdon. A memorandum from Herter to Goodpaster, November 25, 1960,
suggested that he not put this matter before the President until Monday afternoon,
November 28, to give the Department of Defense “an opportunity to register their dis-
sent should they feel as strongly as they did in the past.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman
File, Dulles-Herter Series)
3 Hugh S. Cumming, Jr.
4 According to a notation on the source text, President Eisenhower approved the
memorandum on recognition, December 1, 1960.

El Salvador  641
ES–41.
Letter from the Secretary of Defense (Gates) to the
Secretary of State1
Washington, November 30, 1960.
Dear Chris:
Attached is the latest information available in Defense about the
situation in El Salvador.2 The Defense intelligence holdings indicate a
considerable Left activity by the Junta government, with confirmation
of facts which have caused our previous concern. The confirmation
includes information just received from General Alva Fitch3 who is in
San Salvador now and who is well acquainted with Central American
affairs.
I wanted to be certain that this information was available to you.
Since the question of recognition primarily is one of political judg-
ment, I will leave this up to you. However, we are so concerned at
the prospects of Communist take-­over, whether or not recognition is
afforded the Junta, that I suggest the State Department, the Defense
Department and CIA get together to determine what feasible actions
can be taken to insure against the take-­over.
Sincerely yours,
Thomas S. Gates
2 The attachments were a paper and a memorandum. The paper, entitled “The
Leftist Trend of the Government of El Salvador,” claimed that Communist influence had
risen in the Salvadoran Government, student organizations, and labor movement, and it
concluded that any action which strengthened the Junta would contribute to the rise of
Communist influence on the future course of the Government. The second attachment,
a memorandum of a telephone conversation between General Fitch and Lt. Col. Luther
F. Long, General Staff, Chief, Western Hemisphere Section, Office of the Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, on November 30, 1960, concerned efforts by the Communist-­
controlled CGTS to organize campesino committees throughout El Salvador
3 Maj. Gen. Alva R. Fitch, Deputy Assistant Chief Staff for Intelligence, Department
with numerous persons he had known during his assignment as military attaché in El
Salvador 1948–1950.

ES–42.
Memorandum of Conversation with the President,
Prepared by the President’s Staff Secretary (Goodpaster)1
Washington, December 1, 1960.
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretaries Dillon and Irwin
General Goodpaster
Mr. Dillon and Mr. Irwin met briefly with the President to discuss a
difference of view regarding recognition of the government which took
power in El Salvador as a result of the recent coup. Mr. Dillon said he
realized that Defense had receded from its position of offering objec-
tion, although he understood Defense still disagreed with the action.
He said that the State Department view is that if the United States does
not recognize the new government, we will be “throwing in the towel”
so far as sending good people into the area to try to influence the situa-
tion. He said that State considers that if we extend this recognition, we
will be able to hold off the Communist effort there.
He added that other Latin American countries have recognized the
new regime, including Argentina, Brazil and Chile. He said that before
extending recognition, we will ask the Salvadorans to make a statement
whether they support OAS commitments. If so, we will recognize them.
He added that the CIA supports this action, but that Defense takes the
stand that the government there is more Communist-­influenced than
State believes is true.
Mr. Irwin said that Defense has thought that there might be a
counter coup in the area. However, it has not developed. Defense has
considered that we should avoid tying our hands in El Salvador as in
Laos through hasty recognition of a regime which will come under
Communist domination. He added that Defense is concerned that
recognition of Communist-­oriented governments hurts our friends in
other countries. However, Defense considers that the points have been
brought out and they withdraw on the matter on the grounds that the
question is one of State Department responsibility.
The President gave his assent to going ahead with recognition on
the basis described by Mr. Dillon.
[Here follow discussion on Yugoslavia.]
A. J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, “DE Diaries.” Secret. This memoran-
dum was prepared on December 7, 1960.

El Salvador  643
ES–43.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in El Salvador1
to FONOFF on or about December 3 following note of recognition on
part of United States of new Government of El Salvador:
“I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s
Note No. D-5039, dated October 27, in which you requested me to
inform my Government that a Junta of Government has now been
established in El Salvador. Your Excellency’s note states that the new
Government has declared its intention to continue to comply strictly
with the Constitution of 1950, which remains in force, to observe inter-
national treaties and conventions, to fulfill its obligations and commit-
ments, and to respect human rights.
In view of the assurances set forth in your note and of the offi-
cial affirmations made public concerning the holding of free elections,
my Government has instructed me to state that it welcomes these
assurances, and that it is pleased to extend recognition to the Junta of
Government as the provisional Government of El Salvador.”
Please inform Department promptly of any changes in Note for
accuracy and of time and manner delivery.3
Priority. Drafted by Whitman and Higdon, and signed by Mann.

ES–44.
Message from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Mann) to Colonel Oscar Osorio1
Washington, December 2, 1960.
Dear Friend:
I believe you will be pleased to know that the United States will
soon recognize the provisional Junta Government of El Salvador.2
I wanted to express my appreciation for the time which you so
kindly gave to Allen Stewart and to let you know that our delay in
recognition was not based on the belief that the highest officials of the
Government are anti-­democratic. Rather, it was based on our concern
that the confusion in so many minds between genuine reform and
Communist dictatorship might permit a gradual increase in the politi-
cal power of Communists, through organization of the campesinos and
the like, to the point where constitutional, democratic government in El
Salvador would no longer be possible.
I know that you share this continuing concern. You can count on
us for whatever assistance we can appropriately render, consistent with
our international obligation, to help the Salvadoran people achieve
a stable democracy within a framework of economic progress and a
greater degree of social justice.
With every good wish,
Sincerely yours,
Thomas C. Mann
to Mann dated November 30, attached to the source text, Merchant stated that “if the
President approves prompt recognition of the junta in El Salvador, I feel strongly that
whoever communicates to the junta our decision should see Osorio and tell him that . . .
we have done so on certain assumption, i.e., that elections will be held within x months,
that necessary steps will be taken to prevent the government falling under the control of
Communists or Castro elements, and that the junta is interested in preserving tradition-
ally friendly relations with the United States Government.” Mann’s letter did not convey
the essence of Merchant’s request, but Osorio had already given the requisite assurances
to Allan Stewart in San Salvador on November 21, according to Stewart’s memorandum
to Mann, dated December 2, reporting on his visit to San Salvador; see footnote 1. A
partially legible notation on Merchant’s memorandum possibly refers to that meeting.
The source text for Mann’s letter is an unsigned carbon copy. No record of its deliv-
ery was found in Department of State files.

Guatemala: U.S. Relations with Guatemala
GT–1.
Editorial Note
General Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes, candidate of the right-­wing
Partido Reconciliación Democrática Nacional (Redención), won a
plurality of 190,972 votes in the Guatemalan Presidential elections of
January 19, 1958. Colonel José Luis Cruz Salazar of the Movimiento
Democrático
Nacionalista
received
138,488;
Mario
Méndez
Montenegro, candidate of the left-­wing Partido Revolucionario,
132,824 votes; and Colonel José Enrique Ardón Fernández of the
Partido Unión Liberal Nacionalista, 5,834 votes. The Guatemalan
Constitution provided that the Congress would elect the President
from the two leading candidates when no candidate received an abso-
lute majority vote. Parties supporting Colonel Cruz had a majority
January 7, 1958).
According to the memorandum of discussion at the National
Security Council meeting of January 22, Director of Central
Intelligence Allen W. Dulles said that “the United States would prob-
ably manage with either the right-­wing candidate or the middle-­of-­
the-­road candidate, whom we had favored; but our fear is that the
election of the rightist would provoke a strong leftist reaction and
more disorder.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records).
In order to avert the threat of mob violence if Ydígoras was not
elected, Cruz agreed on January 27 to respect the choice by the
Guatemalan Congress of the candidate with the plurality of votes.
General Ydígoras, promised to choose “collaborators” from the
opposition parties, apparently an expression of willingness to accept
a coalition government.
As recorded in the memorandum of discussion at the NSC
meeting of January 30, General Charles P. Cabell, Acting Director of
Central Intelligence, “noted that the danger of post-­election violence
in Guatemala had been reduced by an agreement between Ydígoras
and Cruz, an agreement motivated by the realization that only in this
way would violence be avoided, since Ydígoras would use force to
counter any decision in favor of Cruz in the Guatemalan Congress.”

(Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records). In telegram 342
from Guatemala, Ambassador Edward J. Sparks reported that as
instructed, he had met with Cruz on February 11 to stress that “his
statesmanlike sacrifice had been in the interest of national security.”
The Guatemalan Congress elected Ydígoras President by a vote of
term on March 2. Documentation on the Guatemalan elections is in
Department of State decimal file 714.00.
GT–2.
Editorial Note
In a memorandum of February 15 to President Eisenhower,
Acting Secretary of State Herter recommended inviting President-­
elect Ydígoras of Guatemala to Washington because “it would be
most useful to our future relations with the Ydígoras administration,
would serve to strengthen the President-­elect’s pro-United States
attitude, and could well have a beneficial effect on the orientation of
his administration’s policies.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File,
Administration Series).
President-­elect Ydígoras made an informal visit to Washington,
lunch with Secretary of State Dulles, and met with Roy R. Rubottom,
Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. On February
25, he had breakfast with President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles at
the White House.
A briefing memorandum of February 22 for Assistant Secretary
Rubottom on points to discuss with President-­elect Ydígoras is in APA/
OAP Files, Lot 60 D 647, “Ydígoras Visit.” Memoranda of President-­
elect Ydígoras’ conversation with Vice President Nixon and President
Eisenhower are printed herein. A memorandum of his conversation at
ther information, see the Department of State Bulletin, March 17, 1958,
page 417.

Guatemala  647
GT–3.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, February 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Visit of President-Elect Ydígoras Fuentes on Vice President Nixon.
PARTICIPANTS
Vice President Nixon
President-Elect Ydígoras of Guatemala
Other present who did not participate in the conversation:
Assistant Secretary of State Roy R. Rubottom, Jr.
Chief of Protocol Wiley T. Buchanan, Jr.
Ambassador Join Davis Lodge (invited by Vice President Nixon at time of call)
Chargé D’Affaires Asensio-Wunderlich
Señor García Bauer
Señor Bapez Herrarte
Señor Alejos
Members of President-Elect
Ydígoras’ Party.
The Vice President expressed his great pleasure at being able to
receive the President-Elect in his office in the United States, recalling
his happy and unforgettable experience in visiting Guatemala in 1954
[1955].2 General Ydígoras responded with a warm greeting and expres-
sion of pleasure at being in the United States.
The Vice President inquired as to what the President-Elect con-
sidered to be his number one problem in Guatemala. The President
responded promptly, “communism”. He said that his country, after ten
years of rule by Arévalo and Arbenz, had been hurt by communism
and that he was going to attack it by trying to offer the people better
work opportunities, better food, better housing and better clothing. The
Vice President interjected that that sounded like a positive, straight-
forward campaign which should produce results rather than the usual
campaign of being simply “against” something. The President-Elect
referred to Guatemala as being like a young lady who has been ill
with smallpox and is left with her skin pitted by scars. He said that
Guatemala had many small scars left from the Arévalo-Arbenz regime
and that these would take time to heal. He said that Castillo Armas had

succeeded in “trimming” the Communist inroads, but that the problem
would now have to be attacked at its roots.
The President-Elect referred to the role of the Archbishop of the
Catholic Church,3 in the last election when Church support allegedly
had been given to the Christian Democratic Party. The President-
Elect opined that in spite of Church support, which would have been
expected to give the women’s vote to Cruz-Salazar who had the sup-
port of the Christian Democratic Party, a large number of his approx-
imately 190,000 votes had been from the women. He paid particular
respect to the women market workers who had supported him and
conveyed their message of greetings to the Vice President and to Mrs.
Nixon whom they recalled from their visit to the market in 1954 while
in Guatemala.
The Vice President alluded to the fine movement of solidarity
against communism effected by President-Elect Ydígoras Fuentes and
one of the defeated candidates for President, former Ambassador Luis
Cruz-Salazar. The President-Elect acknowledged the compliment and
said that while they had been bitter enemies in the campaign, he had
“tried to shoot either over Cruz’ head or short of his feet in order not
to destroy him and his party since he recognized that he needed their
support”. The President-Elect referred to the difficulty of having his
own supporters accept the solidarity move by Cruz-Salazar, but hoped
that this would be accomplished.
The Vice President said that President Eisenhower was look-
ing forward to meeting the President-Elect at breakfast tomorrow
morning. He commented that, since both of them had military back-
grounds, they would undoubtedly find much in common, especially
in their approach to political problems. The Vice President observed
that our President had become great in office after an outstanding
military background and he felt sure that the Guatemalan President-
Elect would have the same experience. General Ydígoras said that he
intended to drop his uniform and hoped to have the Guatemalan mili-
tary act only as defenders of the country, thereby removing them from
politics.
Vice President Nixon and General Ydieoras then departed from
the office to the Capitol steps where photographs were taken with the
Capitol dome in the background.
3 Mario Rossell y Arellano.

Guatemala  649
GT–4.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, February 25, 1958.
SUBJECT
President Eisenhower’s Breakfast for President-Elect Ydígoras
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Dr. Mariano López Herrarte
President-Elect Ydígoras of Guatemala
Assistant Secretary of State
The Secretary of State
  Roy R. Rubottom, Jr.
The Secretary of Defense
Ambassador Edward J. Sparks
Chargé d’Affaires Asensio-Wunderlich
Dr. Milton Eisenhower
  of Guatemala
Mr. Samuel Waugh, President of
Señor García Bauer
  Export-Import Bank

Mr. George Allen, USIA
The guests gathered in one of the drawing rooms. The President
entered and, following introductions and greetings, led the guests into
the family dining room.
Secretary Dulles invited the attention of the President to the fact
that he (the Secretary) and President-Elect Ydígoras had both attended
the Versailles Conference in 1919. The President during the course of
the conversation recalled that he had known some of our military offi-
cers who had been connected with the Guatemalan Military Academy
which had always maintained a high standard. The President also
recalled several of his experiences while serving in Panama and later
in the Philippines.
The President-Elect took the occasion to mention several of the
problems which he faces in assuming office in Guatemala, including
that of raising the health standard of his people. The Secretary also
engaged in conversation on the same subject with Dr. Mariano López
Herrarte, an outstanding Guatemalan physician who was trained in
the United States. Attention was called to the very serious problem of
parasites, especially hookworm, which affects most of the Guatemalan
population, reducing the blood count of the individuals affected on the
average by 40 to 50 percent. Both the President and the Secretary asked
that prompt attention be given to this problem through the Health
Servicio under the Technical Cooperation program, since it seemed to
be something that could be attacked vigorously with our assistance.
Dr.  Lopez acknowledged the great progress that had been made in
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential.

overcoming the effects of malaria in his country and elsewhere in the
world. Despite progress made against yellow fever, he said he under-
stood that the disease was creeping up through the Americas again,
primarily due to the infection of monkeys in the Brazilian jungle.
The Secretary and Dr. García Bauer, the prospective Foreign
Minister in the new government, engaged briefly in conversation
regarding the Law of the Sea Conference scheduled in Geneva. (Mr.
Rubottom had discussed the subject with Dr. García Bauer and the
President-Elect on the previous afternoon.)2 Dr. García Bauer stated that
Guatemala was interested in trying to cut down on Mexican encroach-
ment on Guatemalan fishing beds. The Secretary referred to fishing
problems which we had had with Mexico.
The President and the Secretary, as well as the Secretary of
Defense, referred briefly to the program taking place in Washington
today to inform the public regarding the Mutual Security Program. The
Secretary indicated that he was speaking on this subject this morning
at 9:15, and the Secretary of Defense added that he would be speak-
ing later this morning. The President mentioned that “mutual security”
was a proper term with respect to the military aid portion of the pro-
gram, but that “economic aid”, which speaks for itself, should not be
referred to as part of “mutual security”. While engaged in this subject,
the President gave general assurances to General Ydígoras regarding
the desire of the United States to assist Guatemala where possible.
Dr. García Bauer told the President that they were looking for-
ward to the planned visit of Dr. Milton Eisenhower and Mr. Rubottom
to Guatemala later this year. The President acknowledged that this
trip was in prospect and requested his brother to obtain first-­hand
2 No memorandum of President Ydígoras’ conversation with Assistant Secretary
Rubottom on February 24 was found in Department of State files. At the Secretary of
State’s staff meeting on February 25, the following note was taken: “Mr. Snow reported
on a two-­hour meeting yesterday with the Guatemalan President-­elect during which
Ydígoras stressed: 1) the need for additional electric power in his underdeveloped coun-
try; 2) his belief that Communists should be allowed to return to Guatemala where they
could be kept under surveillance; 3) his desire for naval craft to prevent poaching by
Mexican shrimp boats; and 4) his fear that Mexico might revive its territorial claim against
British Honduras. Mr. Snow said that $10 million in grant aid for Guatemala from FY 56
is still in the pipeline, that an additional $10 million is now being programmed, and that
Ydígoras seemed satisfied with this level of assistance.” (Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot
Ydígoras wrote that he raised certain subjects but got no positive response. The subjects
included the possibility of U.S. import quotas for coffee; a request for Guatemalan pur-
chase of two frigates; establishment of a Central American defense organization with
U.S. membership to defend the Caribbean; and a suggestion for U.S. support of the
Guatemalan claim to Belize. See Ydígoras, (Englewood Cliffs, n.[illegible in the original],
to Assistant Secretary Rubottom by President-­elect Ydígoras on February 24 is in ARA/
OAP Files, Lot 60 D 647, “British Honduras (Belize).”

Guatemala  651
information regarding the health program and what the United States
might do to be of assistance to Guatemala.
Mr. Rubottom and Ambassador Sparks engaged Secretary McElroy
in discussion regarding the oil problem, particularly the matter of off-­
shore procurement of certain types of fuel for the Defense Department
needs. Mr. Rubottom told the Secretary that he was going to Venezuela
tomorrow to consult with the Government there on the oil problem.
The Chargé d’Affaires, Dr. Julio Asensio-Wunderlich, expressed to
the President appreciation on behalf of the Government of Guatemala
for the invitation to General Ydígoras to come to the United States with
his party. He also thanked the President for making the President’s
Guest House available as the group’s residence while here and
expressed their appreciation for the cordial reception given them by
the President at breakfast this morning.
At the conclusion of the breakfast, the President led his guests
to the portico of the White House where photographs were taken by
assembled newsmen.
GT–5.
National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, April 29, 1958.
THE OUTLOOK FOR GUATEMALA2
THE PROBLEM
To estimate the outlook in Guatemala over the next few years, with
special reference to political trends and to Communist prospects.
CONCLUSIONS
is authoritarian in background and outlook, but will probably endeavor
1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. According to a note on the
cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the
Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff participated
in the preparation of this estimate. The Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in
this estimate on April 29, 1958.
1957, as pertains to Guatemala. [Footnote in the source text.]

to maintain a middle-­of-­the-­road course. He now lacks assured sup-
port in Congress. We are unable to estimate whether he can develop
effective congressional and popular support for his moderate program
2. The moderate National Democratic Movement (MDN) will prob-
ably dissolve as an effective political force. The leftist Revolutionary
Party (PR) is likely to become the principal party in opposition to the
3. Under the leadership of men who were prominent in the Arévalo
administration, the PR exerts a strong attraction as the clearest spokes-
man for the political, social, and economic objectives of the Guatemalan
Revolution of 1944. It repudiates association with communism, but has
taken no steps to check Communist penetration of its lower echelons.
4. The clandestine Communist Party (PGT), recently more active, is
not formidable in numbers. It is endeavoring to exert influence through
penetration of the PR and the labor unions. Although the Communists
will probably meet with some success in these efforts, they are not likely
to gain control of these groups within the next few years. (Paras. 17, 31)
5. Should Ydígoras fail to muster sufficient party and popular
support to cope with growing leftist opposition in Congress and in
the country, he will probably resort increasingly to more authoritarian
methods. He would probably do so reluctantly and with no greater
repressive force than he judged the circumstances to require, but he is
a strong man determined to rule and he would resort to outright dicta-
torship before he would permit political control to pass from his hands.
The more repressive his regime becomes, however, the more popular
disaffection will grow. (Para. 32)
6. Ydígoras’ tenure of power will ultimately depend on the con-
tinued support of the armed forces, which he will make every effort
to ensure. The armed forces would act to displace him only if popu-
lar opposition had reached such a pitch that serious civil disorder was
7. The economic situation will probably remain favorable during
1958. In the event of a further decline in coffee prices, or of a substantial
decline in foreign aid after 1958, maintenance of the present high rate
of public investment would confront the government with a growing
budgetary deficit and an acute foreign exchange problem. (Paras. 25, 26)
8. Good relations with the United States will continue to be the car-
dinal element in Ydígoras foreign policy, if only because of the impor-
tance of continued U.S. assistance to the success of his administration.
While adopting a more independent attitude toward the U.S. than did
Castillo, Ydígoras will probably cooperate on most international issues.
However, his agitation of the Guatemalan claim to British Honduras

Guatemala  653
could be carried to a point which would be contrary to U.S. policy inter-
DISCUSSION
Recent Background3
arrested the trend toward Communist control of Guatemala and drove
the remnant of the Guatemalan Communist Party (PGT) into exile or
underground. In general, Castillo pursued a middle-­of-­the-­road policy,
subscribing to the doctrines of the Revolution of 1944, but substantially
moderating the application of the labor and agrarian reforms of Arévalo
and Arbenz. Relying primarily on the support of the armed forces,
Castillo firmly controlled the political life of the country. Through con-
trol of the electoral process, he created a dominant pro-­government
party, the National Democratic Movement (MDN).
10. The assassination of Castillo, in July 1957, ended this period of
relative stability and moderation. In compliance with the constitution,
the first presidential designate took over on an interim basis and sched-
uled a presidential election for October. Two parties emerged to contest
this election with the MDN. One of these was Redención, the reactivated
personal political vehicle of General Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes. The gen-
eral, having run for the presidency against Arbenz in 1950, had consid-
ered himself the proper alternative to Arbenz and had resented Castillo
as an interloper. Another was the newly formed Revolutionary Party
(PR), composed of labor, agrarian, and intellectual elements which had
regarded the Castillo regime as reactionary.4 The MDN interim govern-
ment excluded the PR from presenting a candidate, on the ground that
it was communistic, whereupon the PR threw its support to Ydígoras.
When the government declared the MDN candidate to have been
elected, Ydígoras charged fraud and, with PR and Communist assis-
tance, brought out the mob. A military junta thereupon ousted the first
presidential designate and installed the second presidential designate
after which the Congress annulled the election of the MDN candidate.
11. A second election, in which the PR was allowed to participate,
was held in January 1958. Ydígoras received 39 percent of the vote, the
MDN candidate, José Luis Cruz Salazar, 28 percent, and the PR can-
didate, Mario Méndez Montenegro, 27 percent. No candidate having
3 For a brief summation of the general background and of significant political devel-
is not printed.]
4 The PR is not identical with either the PRG or the PAR, former leftist parties which
flourished under the Arbenz regime, although it includes former members of these par-
ties. [Footnote in the source text.]

received a majority, it devolved upon the MDN-­controlled Congress to
choose between Ydígoras and Cruz. Again Ydígoras threatened mob
violence if he were denied the presidency. Thereupon, in effect, Cruz
withdrew from the contest in return for Ydígoras’ promise to take the
MDN into his government.
The Political Situation and Trend
12. The 62-­year-­old president comes of an upper-­class family and is
basically authoritarian in point of view. He is a professional soldier and
graduate civil engineer whose governmental experience was gained as
a departmental governor and as highway director under the Ubico dic-
tatorship (1931–1944). He has been out of the country most of the time
since the Revolution of 1944, in honorific exile as Minister in London
(1945–1950) under President Arévalo and as Ambassador in Bogotá
(1954–1957) under President Castillo, and in ordinary exile plotting
against the Arbenz regime (1950–1954).
13. Ydígoras’ political appeal is essentially personal. He is strongly
supported by various organizations representative of property interests
(large landholders, manufacturers, and businessman) who count on
him to rule firmly, to maintain sound financial policies, and to suppress
Communists and labor agitators. However, his party, Redención, has no
effective political organization outside of Guatemala City. Ydígoras’
popular support is attributable to a widespread desire for a strong ruler
who would maintain stability and order and to his success in persuad-
ing ordinary voters that he would adhere to the basic tenets of the 1944
Revolution.
14. Ydígoras is handicapped by lack of assured party support in
the new Congress, where Redención holds only 16 out of 66 seats, as
compared with 17 held by the MDN, six held by the PR, and 27 held by
independents and minor parties. Effective collaboration with the MDN
in accordance with his pre-­election agreement might have relieved him
of this difficulty, but, once in office, he proved unwilling to concede to
any party an effective voice in his administration. His cabinet includes
only one MDN member, and is composed essentially of personal adher-
ents who are, for the most part, individually capable but politically
unknown.
15. Disappointed by Ydígoras' failure to carry out his pre-­election
agreement, the MDN in Congress has asserted its independence of the
administration. Meanwhile, in the country side, its members are gravi-
tating to the PR at a rate which has alarmed the MDN party leadership.
The moderate MDN will probably dissolve as an effective political force.
Some members are likely to be drawn to support the administration,
for reasons of patronage or in the interest of stability and order. Others
are likely to adhere to the PR, out of resentment toward Ydígoras or in

Guatemala  655
the belief that the PR is the only effective representative of the ideals of
the Revolution of 1944.
16. In the midst of growing public concern regarding the conserva-
tive composition of Ydígoras’ government, the PR is vigorously cham-
pioning the still widely popular social and economic program of the
Revolution of 1944. It is rapidly gaining new adherents and is likely
to become the focus of opposition to the Ydígoras regime. The party is
still a heterogeneous agglomeration, however. It needs time to organize
and consolidate its strength. Fearing suppression by Ydígoras, its lead-
ers, many of whom were prominent in the Arévalo administration, are
pursuing a policy of moderation in order not to provoke him while they
prepare for the 1959 congressional election. The PR publicly repudiates
association with communism, but has not yet acted effectively to check
Communist infiltration of the party’s lower echelons.
17. The clandestine Communist Party (PGT) probably has no more
than 400 members and 2,000 sympathizers, but since the assassina-
tion of Castillo it has been working to reestablish its influence at the
grass roots. Although many Guatemalans are now more aware of the
Communist danger than previously, there is still widespread apathy
with regard to communism. While there has been some reaction against
excesses practiced in the name of anti-­communism, there has been no
marked increase in sympathy for Communists. The PGT’s present
capabilities are limited. Its most prominent leaders are still in exile.
There are no known Communists or sympathizers among the leaders of
legal political parties or in influential positions in the administration or
the armed forces. The party’s efforts will be directed primarily toward
further infiltration of the PR and toward regaining its former control of
organized labor. The Communists are not likely to achieve control of
the PR within the period of this estimate, but may gain control of some
of that party’s more extreme elements, particularly if many more of the
pro-Arbenz exiles are permitted to return to Guatemala. They have a
better prospect in the field of organized labor, because of their experi-
enced labor leaders and organizers, and because of latent rank-­and-­file
support in unions which they formerly led, but are not likely to regain
their former control of the labor movement.
18. The PR will offer stiff competition to the Communists in the
labor field. The party is now making a determined bid to win over key
unions such as those of the railroad workers and United Fruit Company
employees. In this situation, the labor policy followed by Ydígoras
will have an important bearing on the future strength and character of
the leftist opposition and consequently on the stability of his regime.
He will be confronted by wage demands, particularly from unorga-
nized workers, who have so far gained little from the increase in eco-
nomic activity. Ydígoras cannot meet the demands of the unorganized

workers without adversely affecting the interests of his principal sup-
porters. In general, labor is pessimistic regarding its prospects under
his government.
19. In the face of rising leftist opposition, Ydígoras will probably
try to pursue a middle course calculated to limit the political appeal
of the left, even at the risk of alienating some of his rightist support.
Despite his authoritarian background, he would probably be reluctant
to resort to unusually repressive measures.
20. Ydígoras tenure of power depends ultimately on the continued
support of the armed forces, which he will make every effort to ensure.
The principal ground force commanders favored his election. Although
the commander of the air force favored the MDN candidate, he is a
strong proponent of constitutional order. Ydígoras’ character as a pro-
fessional soldier and his strong personality will facilitate his retaining
the backing of the military.
The Armed Forces
21. Guatemala has a 9,000 man army with an integral air force con-
F–51 fighters obtained from the U.S.). Under a 1955 bilateral military
assistance agreement, the U.S. has undertaken to provide grant aid in
the amount of $500,000 for the equipment and training of one infantry
battalion. Most of this equipment has been delivered. The air force has
also received some reimbursable military aid from the U.S.
22. The essential function of the Guatemalan armed forces is to
protect the incumbent regime against internal or external revolutionary
action. It has no other capabilities of consequence. Although constitu-
tionally prohibited from engaging in political activities, the military are
nevertheless a political factor of decisive importance in that, in criti-
cal circumstances, the continuance or withdrawal of their support can
determine whether an incumbent government will stand or fall. Aware
of this, every government seeks to ensure the continued support of
the armed forces by the appointment of reliable officers to positions
of command and by favorable treatment in terms of pay and perqui-
sites. Normally the armed forces will support the incumbent govern-
ment, up to a certain point. That point is reached if and when popular
antagonism toward the government reaches such a pitch that serious
disorder is clearly impending. In such circumstances, the armed forces’
responsibility for the maintenance of order is conceived to be over-
riding, and the proper means of preserving order is conceived to be a
change of government. The armed forces thus cease to be the defense of
the regime and become the active agent in its overthrow. In such a case,
in conformity to longstanding tradition, the obligation of the military
to the outgoing president is reduced to responsibility for assuring his

Guatemala  657
personal safety. A military junta customarily assumes power, but with
the purpose and obligation of establishing a new constitutional govern-
ment at the earliest practicable date.
23. Going beyond the usual measures for ensuring the support
of the military, Ydígoras has appealed to their professional pride and
patriotism by declaring that Guatemala will recover British Honduras,
“if not by reason, then by force,” and by proposing to organize para-
chute and ranger units for that purpose. These utterances are not so
much a threat to the United Kingdom as assurances to the military that
the government will take seriously the development of the professional
competence of the armed forces and will devote resources to that end.
The Economic Situation and Trend
24. Guatemala’s economic growth was stimulated during the
Castillo regime by the encouragement of private investment as well as
by large scale foreign grants, loans, and technical assistance, and by the
use of government funds. Guatemalan citizens increased their domes-
tic investments sharply during the period, reversing the heavy flight
of capital which had occurred during the Arbenz regime. New foreign
private investment also increased, amounting to $12,000,000 in 1957
into highway construction. In addition, the IBRD disbursed more than
57. Simultaneously the Guatemalan government increased its budget
for capital improvements, spending $40,000,000 of its own resources in
1957. These stimuli coincided with bumper coffee and corn crops to raise
Guatemalan GNP to about $180 per capita in 1957 prices. During the
expansionary period Guatemala maintained a sound currency, avoided
undue inflation, and almost doubled its foreign exchange holdings.
25. The favorable economic situation will probably continue during
1958. The Ydígoras administration will be greatly assisted by continu-
ing U.S. grant aid, expected to reach $16,000,000 in 1958, and a further
IBRD loan installment of about $6,000,000. Local business confidence,
which was shaken by the political turmoil following the assassination
of Castillo and by declining coffee prices, has been appreciably restored
by the inauguration of Ydígoras and a steadying in the coffee market.
With the new administration, foreign investment is expected to resume
its importance as a force for expansion. At present the country has high
foreign exchange reserves and the government enjoys good domestic
it in three enterprises: The United Fruit Company plantations, the International Railways
of Central America, and Empresa Electrica (a subsidiary of American and Foreign Power).
[Footnote in the source text.]

credit. Those favorable factors can mitigate the effect of lowered cof-
fee receipts; but coffee remains of critical importance to the economy,
accounting for about 75 percent of exports and over a fifth of govern-
ment revenues. Moreover, it contributes to the prosperity of the urban
business community from which Ydígoras draws significant strength.
26. Over the longer term, the prospect is problematical. The pres-
ent population (3,500,000), which is growing at a rate of about three
percent a year, is largely engaged in subsistence agriculture. It may rap-
idly shift to urban employment if jobs become available. To keep pace
with population growth and to sustain the present level of economic
activity, the government must continue to promote economic expan-
sion. Careful planning will be required to prevent urban development
from becoming a burden on the agricultural sector, as it has elsewhere
in Latin America.
In the event of a further decline in coffee prices, or of a substan-
tial decline in foreign aid after 1958, maintenance of the present high
rate of public investment would confront the government with a grow-
ing budgetary deficit and an acute foreign exchange problem. The one
development which might relieve this situation would be the discov-
ery of oil in commercially exploitable quantities in northern Guatemala
(Petén). Major U.S. companies are now engaged in intensive explora-
tion of the area.
External Relations
27. Good relations with the U.S. will continue to be the cardinal
element in Ydígoras foreign policy, if only because of the importance of
continued U.S. assistance to the success of his administration. The pres-
ident will seek advice and assistance from the U.S., possibly including
increased military aid, but will do his utmost to avoid being charged
with subservience. While adopting a more independent attitude
toward the U.S. than did Castillo, Ydígoras will probably cooperate on
most international issues. There is little chance that diplomatic relations
will be established with the Soviet Bloc, or that currently negligible eco-
nomic ties with the Bloc will be expanded.
28. Ydígoras will endeavor to develop closer relations between
Guatemala and its neighbors, and to enhance Guatemala’s prestige
through more active participation in the Organization of Central
American States (ODECA), the Organization of American States, and
the United Nations. In the current climate of Central American politics,
the trend toward improved relations begun under Castillo is likely to
continue.
29. For domestic political reasons, Ydígoras is likely to intensify
Guatemala’s demands for recognition of its claim to British Honduras.
The discovery of oil in northern Guatemala would give additional

Guatemala  659
impetus to this campaign, since the natural outlet for oil exports would
be through the port of Belize. Ydígoras could count on considerable Latin
American sympathy and support on this issue, but it would embroil him
with Mexico, which also has a contingent claim to part of the territory, as
well as with the United Kingdom. He is not likely to press the issue to the
point of precipitating a crisis, but he might impulsively take some provoc-
ative action which would be contrary to U.S. policy interests in the area.
The Outlook for Political Stability
30. The stability of the Ydígoras regime is not likely to be seriously
threatened during 1958. It remains uncertain whether, before the 1959
congressional elections, he will be able to develop effective congres-
sional and popular support for his moderate program. By that time a
strong and vociferous political opposition centered in the PR will prob-
ably have developed.
31. The leaders of the PR, if permitted to develop an effective party
organization, will probably take steps to minimize, and if possible elim-
inate, Communist influence. The degree to which they will succeed in
this effort is uncertain. The Communists will almost certainly not have
gained control of the PR prior to the next congressional election, although
its opponents will accuse it of Communist tendencies in any case.
32. Should Ydígoras fail to muster sufficient party and popular
support to cope with growing leftist opposition in Congress and in
the country, he will probably resort increasingly to more authoritarian
methods. He would probably do so reluctantly and with no greater
repressive force than he judged the circumstances to require, but he is
a strong man determined to rule and he would resort to outright dicta-
torship before he would permit political control to pass from his hands.
The more repressive his regime becomes, however, the more popular
disaffection will grow.
33. The armed forces will almost certainly support the Ydígoras
government in whatever measures it finds necessary to maintain sta-
bility and order. They would turn against him only if popular resis-
tance had reached such intensity that serious civil disorder was clearly
impending. In that case, they would probably see him safely out of the
country and set up a military junta to supervise a return to constitu-
tional government. In the event of Ydígoras’ death, the army would
probably support the interim administration of the presidential desig-
nate and the holding of new elections within the constitutionally pre-
scribed four-­month period.6
6 A map, which accompanied the source text, is not printed.

GT–6.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Guatemala1
618. Guatemalan Ambassador2 informed Dept today GOG had
info from two good sources in Mexico and Belize that Guatemalan
exiles from Mexico were planning invasion of Guatemala through
British Honduras. Said exiles planned land at Punta Gorda, British
Honduras, and from there would attempt enter Peten through Fallabon
and possibly move also against Puerto Barrios.
Ambassador said that because of these reports GOG was consider-
ing moving troops to Puerto Barrios and Fallabon areas as precaution-
ary measure, and that he hoped Dept would understand reasons for
troop movements when made. He inferred landings of exiles would be
made with connivance of British authorities. DEPT discounts possibility
British connivance.
Dept has no info to confirm Guatemalan reports and consid-
ers this official démarche by Guatemalan Ambassador to be further
indication Ydígoras intends continue policy of arousing nationalism
of Guatemalan people and exacerbating relations with UK by delib-
erately creating situations conducive to incidents over Belize. Dept
deeply concerned this policy of Ydígoras may lead to eventual clash
with British, and believes Ydígoras being strongly influenced by
Garcia Granados.3
Unless you perceive objection, you are instructed to seek immedi-
ate interview with President, inform him of Guatemalan Ambassador’s
action here and state that
1) U.S. so far has no information to confirm that British are abetting
reported passage of exiles through British Honduras and while matter
not discussed with British believe they would cooperate prevent any
such attempt by exiles,
2) movement of troops to British border might well be considered
provocation by them,
3) U.S. is deeply concerned at possible threat to peace of area if
presence of troops on border should provoke incident,
4) Even if in unlikely event exiles should be able invade Guatemala
at any point, OAS and UN offer effective machinery for handling this
kind problem,
King and signed by Rubottom.
2 Col. Carlos S. Antillón Hernández.
3 Jorge García Granados, adviser to President Ydígoras.

Guatemala  661
5) U.S. takes such a serious view of this problem that you are being
ordered to Washington for consultation concerning this among other
problems.
Ambassador should submit his report soonest together with his
comments and evaluation, including any info re troop movements.
Mexico and Belize informed.4
Dulles
GT–7.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory)
to the Department of State1
547. Department pass Army [text not declassified]. After review-
ing points Department telegram 6182 from written notes, President
Ydígoras had me hanging on reins while he galloped all over field for
one hour twenty minutes before I could get him to the fence.
Specifically re possible troop movements border British Honduras,
President said Colonel Santiago Munoz, Military Attaché in Mexico,
had come to report that an exile movement had been preparing stor-
age of arms on Southern Mexican border. Plan withdrawn according
Ydígoras because of his invitation to Ruiz Cortines3 to meet him on
border for highway opening and resultant subsequent realization of
good relations between chiefs of state. However, a high-­ranking offi-
cer of the Mexican Army has been working with exiles along northern
border of Petén abutting Yucatan and in territory of Quintana Roo.
When this appeared frustrated, apparently due to Intelligence activi-
ties, it was indicated that the exiles might attempt something through
Belize.
Ydígoras then went into exposition of forty minutes about his
relations Belize starting 25 years ago and coming up to present making
2 See Document GT–6.
3 Adolfo Ruiz Cortines, President of Mexico.

significant statement that Belize activities fostered by Governor4
against Guatemala were for purpose of countering Guatemalan pro-
paganda. Implication was that Governor Belize (sic) welcomed exile
activity against Ydígoras. President said it would not matter if an exile
attack were made on Guatemala from Belize or if they were able to
get in Guatemala and then attack Belize thereby involving him and
putting fat in fire. He had accordingly told Colonel Antillón to men-
tion subject in Washington. If the above does not seem make much
sense, I agree.
At end of long conference where maps were reviewed in
detail, I finally pinned the President down repeating I expected go
Washington and what should I tell State Department about move-
ment of troops. He said he would not send troops unless he were
menaced. He promised that there would be no troops moved without
first letting me know. (Army Attaché5 in discreet inquiry, including
visits to troop units today unable find any evidence of prepara-
tions for troops movements). I thanked him and said this was fine
and I hardly thought it would be necessary; that speaking without
instruction, I felt he could be assured that were there any indication
of possible attack from Belize the U.S. could influence Her Majesty’s
Government to contain it.
Comment: On the several occasions on which thus general subject
of Belize has been disserted upon by Ydígoras, this was longest and
most detailed and revealed deep resentments of long standing. Such
resentments have in no way been attenuated and he now is person-
ally both angered at Governor for treatment given at time his visit to
Benque Viejo and by English action sending Canberra bombers on visit
Princess Margaret. Incidentally, I had to correct him rather directly on
this when he felt Department in response to British message on subject
virtually accused Guatemala of bad intentions.
I had hoped President’s reply today would dispel necessity for trip
to Washington. But in view Department’s mention other matters and
President’s gnawing concern with Belize question feel it may be desir-
able consult and will proceed unless receive telephone call to contrary
tomorrow morning June 7.
Mallory
4 Sir Colin Hardwick Thornley, Governor and Commander in Chief of British
Honduras.
5 Col. John T. Berry.

Guatemala  663
GT–8.
Summary of Discussions in Guatemala during Milton
Undated.
In Guatemala Dr. Eisenhower had discussions with the President,
the Cabinet, government officials, bankers, leaders of commerce and
industry, labor leaders, women of the market, etc.
President Ydígoras expressed his gratitude for the extent of assis-
tance which the United States had rendered to Guatemala since its
liberation from Communist domination. He spoke of a sum of $70 mil-
lion that had been given, but said that in view of the difficult situa-
tion which had been inherited from the Communist-­dominated regime
things were not yet satisfactory. There were serious shortages in hous-
ing, welfare and education. He hoped that the U.S. aid would continue
at present levels. The President brought up the subject of coffee and
the detrimental effects on the Guatemalan economy of present low
prices. He also explained that the Guatemalans had difficulty in estab-
lishing markets in Germany because of a still unresolved dispute with
Germany concerning German coffee plantations nationalized as enemy
alien property during World War II. He mentioned that when he had
been in Washington in February 1958 he had spoken about possible
establishment of quotas for the coffee-­producing nations, and it was
with some satisfaction that he saw the Coffee Study Group leaning in
this direction.2
The President then discussed the Communist situation in
Guatemala and said he was reluctant to “squeeze” them any further
as this would only drive them underground and make them more
dangerous. The President said that following the Liberation of 1954
the working-­class Communists had been left leaderless by the flight
of their leaders and no new ones had appeared. He spoke of divisions
within the Railroad Workers’ Union (SAWP) indicating a weakening of
the Communist position. He said that he feared Communist infiltration
“Eisenhower, Milton: Guatemala, 1958.” Confidential. The source text is an unsigned
carbon copy. Between July 12 and August 1, President Milton S. Eisenhower of Johns
Hopkins University made a three-­week factfinding trip, as Personal Representative of the
President, to Panama, Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala. He
was accompanied by Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs; Tom B. Coughran, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, Dempster McIntosh,
Manager, Development Loan Fund; and Samuel C. Waugh, President, Export-Import
Bank. For further documentation on the trip, see Document ES–2, footnote 1. Detailed
reports and memoranda of conversations held by him and members of his group, were
2 For documentation on U.S. participation in the Coffee Study Group, see Document
CO–30, footnote 2.

in intellectual circles far more, particularly among the University stu-
dents who where resentful of cramped old-­fashioned quarters in the
University. The equipment in the laboratories was old. If something
could be done to provide more modern equipment, to go ahead with
construction of the University city, and to provide adequate scholar-
ships on a repayment basis over 20 years, this would do a great deal
towards stemming the spread of Communism in University circles.
President Ydigores discussed the question of scholarships at some
length and indicated he would like to have an organized program with
a fixed number available each year. He spoke several times of the desire
not to have these as charity, which would cause resentment, but to put
them on a paying basis, requiring the beneficiary to repay the amount
of the scholarships over 20 years.
The President said he would like to establish a system of cooper-
ation with the governments of the other republics of Central America
in keeping track of and controlling the movements of Communists.
He was setting up an agency in Guatemala for this purpose and then
intended to seek regional cooperation. He could not include Mexico as
he did not trust that country.
The president then expressed his support for the idea of greater
Central American unity. He felt this could best be achieved first in
the economic field, but felt that local vested interests and national-
isms might make political unity something which only our children or
grandchildren might see.
At the Rotary luncheon expressions of gratitude were forthcoming
for the U.S. share in making possible the new vocational school which
will be devoted to the development of special skills among Guatemalan
workers.
At a meeting with representatives of agriculture they stressed the
importance of coffee in the Guatemalan economy, pointing out that this
provided three quarters of the value of all Guatemalan exports. A great
deal was said about the fact that lower coffee prices might result in a
drop in farm wages and stimulate a recrudescence of communism The
agricultural representatives indicated that they are approaching a posi-
tion of agreeing to the principle of withholding a portion of production
providing other coffee-­producing countries would agree to do likewise.
They felt that such an idea could only he effective if African producers
also agreed to cooperate. They expressed fear that African coffee grow-
ers because of lower labor costs might take over a part of the traditional
Guatemalan market in the U.S. These representatives of agriculture
also expressed agreement with the program of the Government aimed
at diversification of agriculture in order to be self-­sufficient in food.
They were thinking in terms of a loan of unstated size to help out in
this process of diversification to other crops such as rubber and cocoa.

Guatemala  665
In the meeting with the representatives of industry and commerce,
the Guatemalans pointed up the lack of incentive for industrial devel-
opment under existing legislation and a shortage within the country of
long-­term credit. It was indicated to the Guatemalans that it was hoped
that an official of the Export-Import Bank would be able to visit the
countries of the region at least once a year.3 Again the matter of the price
of coffee was brought up, and it was indicated that two years ago it sold
for 70 cents a pound, whereas now it was selling for 40 cents a pound.
Some thought was expressed that the U.S. might be discouraging
oil prospecting in Guatemala, it was made quite plain to the Guatemalans
that there was no such U.S. policy.
At a meeting with the President and members of the Cabinet a for-
mal program for continuing the social and economic development of
Guatemala was presented. The President referred to the summary table
which shows direct aid projects suggested for financing by currently
available but unallocated ICA funds. This table lists $655,000 for agri-
public health programs; $1,600,000 for highway programs. This makes
a total of $8,405,0000. Unallocated ICA funds total some $9 million.
The Guatemalans are seeking to obtain the $8.4 million without being
required to put up the matching funds for which there is no provision
in the 1959 budget. Reference was then made to Guatemala’s long-­term
credit needs which were indicated as amounting to $95.7 million which
would be divided as follows: agricultural development $9 million;
lion; hospitals $6 million; industrial development, loans, $17 million;
Guatemala City water supply $18 million; development of province of
Petén, $10 million.
Inter-American Highway
The Inter-American highway was discussed, and it was indi-
cated that the total cost of the highway would be $40 million of which
the U.S. is contributing $24 million and Guatemala $16 million. The
Minister made a plea for the inclusion of maintenance costs in order
to be eligible for Bureau of Public Roads financing. In view of BPR’s
policy of not financing the paying until the entire highway was opened,
it was difficult for Guatemala to protect that part of the road already
3 In a letter of August 12 to Ambassador Mallory in Guatemala, Waugh stated that
he found the amount of credit requested by Guatemala “staggering.” He added that
the Export-Import Bank would like to increase the $2.6 million it had loaned to private
A. Hoyt, Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, August 12, Waugh
restated the Eximbank’s willingness to make loans to Guatemalan industrial firms, but
he had “no suggestions to offer” on President Ydígoras’ request for some $100 million in

constructed. In view of the BPR’s choice of route the highway will
be subject to unusual maintenance. With regard to the area of special
difficulty on the highway, known as the Tapon, it was estimated that
another $2 million would be needed before it could be completed and
opened to traffic. The importance of this highway was pointed out to
the Guatemalans in that it could lead to a great influx of American tour-
ists with consequent economic benefit to Guatemala. The President of
the Bank of Guatemala commented that Guatemala would need assis-
tance over the next three or four years. Thereafter activities and pro-
grams would ease the balance of payments problem.
At a meeting with members of Congress the claim was made that
the Wrigley Company discriminates against Guatemalan chicle, paying
a substantially higher price for Mexican chicle in spite of the fact that
the Guatemalan product is of better quality.
Members of the Railway Union complained of the practices of the
International Railways of Central America. They pointed out that the
prevailing wage of $1.50 for an eight-­hour day is insufficient to provide
a decent living. They hoped that the United States could bring pressure
on the IRCA to reach a settlement of the current dispute as this would
have a great importance on the development of attitudes in Guatemala
towards the U.S.:4
Guatemala students spoke of the need to “return” Belize to
Guatemala or at least grant its independence. They also mentioned the
fact that the University had been trying to seek a $15 million loan in
the U.S. to complete the University City. Then the students spoke also
of the need to develop the province of El Petén.
The market women who called on Dr. Eisenhower spoke of the
difficult conditions of the poor of Guatemala and the need to make sure
that U.S. assistance filtered down to the poor and the working class.
A delegation of the Central African Unionist Party called in an
attempt obtain a U.S. declaration that it looks with favor on the re-­
establishment of a Central American federation.
At a press conference, Dr. Eisenhower was asked to comment about
a Pro-Communist student communiqué which mentioned alleged U.S.
tutelage of Guatemala. He replied that he regretted the fact that tech-
nical assistance, grant aid and loans might be interpreted by some as
4 Guatemalans attributed the railroad’s policies to the United States because U.S.
nationals owned and headed the company. An agreement, based on Guatemalan court
decisions, ended the dispute effective March 1, 1959, in favor of the company’s posi-
tion. In despatch 487 of March 11, the Embassy pointed out that grievances persisted
and “the men willing to exploit them are prepared to do so when the time seems ripe.”

Guatemala  667
constitution tutelage. The U.S. never aspired to nor had tutelage over
any people.
Conclusions
Guatemalans felt that the period of Communist-­dominated rule
entitles them to a special position. They frankly express their hope for
a continuation of U.S. aid at approximately the same levels. The study
presented in Guatemala appeared to be well coordinated and integrated
and concisely presented. The program was presented as whole at a
meeting with the Cabinet rather than in a series of separate requests.
It was evident that in Guatemala as in some other Central American
countries, there was considerable confusion as to the purpose and poli-
cies of the various lending organizations in the U.S. as well as a lack of
understanding of the potential of private investment. No mention was
made of attracting home large amounts of Guatemalan private capi-
tal held abroad. While perhaps more mention was made of the possi-
ble benefits of tourism in Guatemala than in other Central American
countries, nevertheless it did not appear that the full potential that
might be derived from the industry was realized. Considerably more
seemed to have been done in Guatemala than in the other countries of
the area towards evaluating properly the potentials of Guatemala in all
fields. The effects of the Klein-Saks mission in the field of advising the
Government on public administration was evident.5
The Government of Guatemala has very ambitious plans for the
development of the country, and evidently feels that large-­scale U.S.
assistance will continue (no grant aid is being requested for Guatemala
in the Mutual Security Appropriation Bill for FY 1959). It has the largest
population of any country in the area, and its potentialities are great
(land, timber, possible petroleum, agriculture, light industry, some
minerals, etc.). This appears to have made the size of the requests for
assistance considerably greater than elsewhere encountered during
the mission.
Because of Guatemala’s past association with Communist-­type
policies, and the Government’s tendency to try to regulate non-­
agricultural enterprises more and more, some many possible private
investors may have been discouraged from placing their money in
Guatemala, although the country’s official policy is to private invest-
ment, both foreign and domestic.

GT–9.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory)
to the Department of State1
Guatemala City, August 11, 1958.
No. 69
REF:
SUBJECT:
FY 1960 Program Presentation (MSP and ICA).
[Here follows an analysis of aid programs in Guatemala for FY
1960.]
VI. The above having been submitted, I should like to make some
observations and recommendations about which I feel more definitely
and strongly than about the details above and which refer more to how
the money is spent than in the amount of expenditure.
A. U.N. Agencies. It can be stated without fear of contradiction
that in Guatemala the United States receives no recognition, no credit
and generally there is complete unawareness of our contributions to
organizations of the U.N., such as World Health, UNESCO, ICAITI,
UNICEF, FAO, etc. During Fiscal 1958 there were 27 UN technicians
with a U.N. contribution of $238,000. (See EmbDespatch No. 50,
doubted they are going to assist in the major struggle against com-
munism. I recommend strong de-­emphasis of the many UN organi-
zations doing a multiplicity of things mostly by other nationals often
unsympathetic to us.
B. American Companies. Not within the direct question of bud-
get presentation, but, nevertheless, impinging upon it as damaging to
our policies is the attitude of certain American companies. Within the
industry section of ICA/W and in so far as consultation and advice
may be given to American companies abroad, it is hoped that advice
and counsel may be furnished to the end that the work done in the field
and the money being expended by the U.S. Government be not negated
2 It requested an analysis by the Chief of Mission of the objectives and role of aid
4 It concerned the approved program of technical assistance by the United Nations

Guatemala  669
by private American activities. ICA and the Government as a whole
undoubtedly have a right to speak in fairly decided terms in this matter
to those companies which seek assistance from the U.S. Government in
the form of investment guarantees.
Two American companies in Guatemala have been objects of con-
tinued and effective public attack: The international Railway and the
Empresa Eléctrica, a property of American and Foreign Power. A third
major company, United Fruit, saw the light and improved its public
relations.
Compared with the job done by public utilities in the United States
of building public acceptance or confidence, it can be said with truth
that here nothing is done. Rather, continued refuge in a “legal” position
has served to convince labor and the public of the validity of charges
hurled.
The companies’ attitudes and lack of action seriously counter
efforts to improve relations or advance our cause. The subject has been
raised with them here with negative results.
The problem is serious in Guatemala and must exist elsewhere.
It is hoped the question can be attacked positively on a base broader
and more effective than can be done locally. I recommend that compa-
nies involved in the various countries be invited to send senior repre-
sentatives to a conference where policies of the United States may be
explained, the role of American companies emphasized, and the bene-
fits of positive public relations made clear. (In the case of Guatemala, as
matters now stand, our position would be better were the companies
owned in some other nation.)
At the suggested conference a strong effort should be made to make
American companies operating in this area understand and cooperate
with our labor policy. Even the United Fruit Company, whose public
and personnel relations have greatly improved, has a dangerous short-­
sighted attitude toward unions.5
C. Unfair Charge of Development Aid Supervision to TCA. The
TCA budget for Guatemala contains a heavy amount for supervision of
Development Aid. Not only development aid, but likewise it is under-
stood supervision of Development Loan Funds are chargeable to TCA.
It would be possible to have a considerable TCA budget in a country and
no technical assistance at all. The distortion to the general aspect, of this
is bad enough but more important, it would appear, is the disruption
within field organization and a proper askance by Congress. Moreover,
there should be no covering up of the total cost of Development Aid or
Loan Funds by charging part of the cost to TCA—­let their supervision

be included in their own budget. See also Sheet 5 of Annual Introduction
to the 1960 Program Submission.6
D. U.S. Posture and Attitude. We are making a serious error in
our approach to the use of aid as an instrument to further the foreign
policy of the United States—­which is supposed to be its object. The
uselessness of much of our expenditures is perhaps not so serious as
are the lost opportunities, the loss of face, the contempt earned and
the wounded pride of the recipients. This grows out of the assump-
tion that persons of other cultures, other backgrounds, other faiths
and other political beliefs hold the same attitudes that we do. They
don’t. Most Americans would agree in principle that we should utilize
aid abroad in such manner as to best fit the local scene. This we find
almost impossible because to do so goes against the very warp and
woof of our beliefs. Beginning with Congress, and especially there,
is a whole chain of justification finally down to the sincere technician
in the field who goes abroad because it is a “good” thing. Much of
our ICA program appears motivated by a kind of do-­gooding char-
ity to help our distant brothers. This is wonderful for us at home.
It is a magnificent way to feed our individual and collective egos—­
often at the expense of wounding the pride of the recipient—­but it
wins low battles abroad. This broad American legacy of New England
Protestantism I can question because I was born in Maine of a long
line of hard-­shelled Baptists. While our struggle with the forces of
Communism may be very important 25 or even 20 years away and
when the increased productivity, the better education and well-­being
of these countries might through our help be better able to withstand
subversive forces, it is to be recalled that the danger is not 25 years
away. It is now.
I imagine that at every budget hearing before Congress the items
must be justified as to whether or not they are worthwhile, whether
they will do good, etc., etc. Whenever there is a Congressional visit
abroad, either by member of the House of Representatives or the
Senate, a first consideration is not whether we are getting any mileage
in our struggle against Communism, but rather whether the program
is proof against any criticism that it is not doing good, that it isn’t of
benefit, etc.
This same motivation appears to exist in the Executive Branch of
Government. It exists to a lesser degree, but still strongly in the field.
6 Not found in Department of State files.

Guatemala  671
I submit we should look at the whole question as those in the other
country do. If they feel they are really getting something because they
must bargain for it—­then let us bargain. The Russians apparently don’t
make the mistake of free-­handed gifts in Asia—­they attach some condi-
tion and are thereby respected. We in much of the area are looked on as
easy marks, often with contempt.
Here in Guatemala, and, as I understand it, from persons with
whom I have spoken in other similar countries, it is recognized that
we have engendered a very substantial feeling that we should sup-
port Guatemala out of some sort of undefined duty to the people and
that if we do not do so, political blackmail will result. This I submit
is not the purpose for which the aid was started. It is a very unhappy
result.
To counter this situation, there are two remedies. First, we need
to forget our charity a little and adopt a pragmatic attitude, and, sec-
ond, we should get away from grant aid and emphasize loans. The
size of the loans, the freedom with which they are given and the rate
of interest would appear less important than in having the purposes
understood. Fostering the idea of some self help, some local pulling
of the boot straps, some honesty and responsibility are important.
Getting acceptance of the concept of the United States as a helper
or partner is important—­getting away from the idea of Uncle Sam
as someone to work as an easy mark is equally so. The latter sparks
no effort at all to work against Communism—­it just lays us open to
propaganda attack.
If U.S. policy towards the underdeveloped countries were reduced
to its bare bones, it could be defined as preventing the entrance of or
to reduce the presence of Communism. As soon as we try to make that
frame carry other burdens, or obscure its simple design by soft-­hearted
accretions, we start to lose. Let’s keep it simple and direct; let’s work for
our survival and not our conscience.
The announcement of a possible Inter-American Development
Institution may be the way out of our present approach in Latin America.
It is to be hoped it can be framed in partnership and not paternalism.
L. D. Mallory

GT–10.
Memorandum for the Files, by the Officer in Charge of
Guatemalan Affairs (King)1
Washington, November 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Summary of Discussion at Development Loan Fund Regarding Loans for
Guatemala
PARTICIPANTS
DLF - The Hon. Dempster McIntosh
Mr. William Ryan
Mr. Hart Perry
Mr. Gonzalez
ICA - Mr. Rollin S. Atwood
Mr. Grover Kincaid
Mr. Oscar Powell, USOM Guatemala
STATE - Mr. Herbert B. Leggett
Mr. Bayard King
Mr. Harry Conover
Mr. Samuel Bogley, ICA Hosing Consultant
Ambassador McIntosh opened the meeting by saying that he
believed loans to Guatemala were justified. Guatemala is a key country
and should be helped. He asked Mr. Bogley, a private mortgage banker
who had recently, at the request of ICA, made a three weeks’ survey
in Guatemala, to describe how the money for the housing loan would
be disbursed. Mr. Bogley explained that the funds would be lent to the
Bank of Guatemala which in turn would discount mortgages of private
individuals accepted by private banks in Guatemala. The mortgages
would be carefully screened and guaranteed by an FHA-­type organiza-
tion for which Guatemalan legislation was now being sought. Without
such an arrangement, the Guatemalan individuals would be unable to
borrow money to build badly needed housing for themselves, as there
was a scarcity of capital in Guatemala and prohibitive interest rates
were the rule. For such loans, the house purchaser would pay about 7
1/2% interest. Mr. Bogley said he was very much in favor of such an
arrangement which he thought would be workable.
Mr. Atwood strongly endorsed Mr. Bogley’s favorable view of this
proposed loan ($12 million), and said he felt that it was necessary to give
this kind of assistance to Guatemala for political and other reasons.
memorandum was routed through Rubottom, Snow, and Stewart. Rubottom noted on
the source text: “Important, yes, but will need continued backing from ARA, E. & W.”

Guatemala  673
Ambassador McIntosh said he knew that many in Washington felt the DLF
should not make housing loans in Latin America, because the need for housing
all over Latin America was so great that the lending resources of the United
States could never fulfill these requirements. He said the same argument could
be used against making loans for highways, where need was also great. However,
Mr. McIntosh said he did not believe this was a valid argument against making
such loans, that each case should be considered on its own merits, and that in the
case of Guatemala he was in favor of making a housing loan.
There followed a discussion of the rubber, industrial bank, and land
purchase loan applications. Except for land purchase, Ambassador McIntosh
was in favor of helping Guatemala in these fields as well. Although the DLF
could not lend money to the GOG for land purchase, it was agreed that
it might be possible to assist in the field of rural resettlement, possibly by
lending Guatemala money for budgetary relief in the public works field
or for construction of facilities on the lands to be acquired.
Mr. Powell said it might be possible for ICA to reprogram some
$8 million of pipeline funds toward purchase of land for resettlement.
Ambassador McIntosh said he thought the DLF should lend Guatemala
about $16 million in the near future from funds already appropriated to the
DLF, and he tentatively suggested the following allocations:
Housing
$6 million
Industrial Development
2 or 4 million
Compensatory Funds
for Rural Resettlement
to be determined; possibly
$3 million
Rubber Development
5 million
Mr. Conover said that he fully recognized the political necessity
for making loans to Guatemala. In response to Ambassador McIntosh’s
queries as to the merits of these particular applications, Mr. Conover
said that, in economic terms, he felt housing construction was less sig-
nificant for economic development than prospects which more directly
and immediately contribute to balance of payments improvement.
Ambassador McIntosh agreed with this economic assessment, but felt, the
political considerations were overriding.
Ambassador McIntosh said he wished to go ahead on these loans as soon
as possible. He designated Mr. Ryan to go to Guatemala within a week
to look into the pending applications and to work out with the USOM,
the Embassy, and the Guatemalan Government, properly drawn-­up
loan applications which would meet DLF criteria. This, he said, would
constitute the first step and would show the Guatemalans that we were
really taking an interest in their loan applications.

Mr. Perry said that to make $16 million available now to Guatemala would
require a cut-­back in loan proposals for other areas. Ambassador McIntosh said
such a cut-­back should be made in order to accommodate Latin American needs
which he felt had been neglected by the DLF.
GT–11.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, December 9, 1958.
SUBJECT
DLF Staff Request for Board Guidance on Loan for Housing in Guatemala.
I am informed that the DLF staff has requested by close of business
Tuesday, December 9, guidance from the DLF Board as to whether an
application from the Government of Guatemala for a loan of $12 mil-
lion to be used for the purchase of housing mortgages should be placed
under DLF review. The application has been summarized in DLF–IC/P–
stems from the circumstance that the DLF Latin American loan officer,
Mr. William Ryan, is now in Guatemala City attempting to clarify and
assess the intent and significance of four applications submitted by the
Government of Guatemala for DLF loans totaling $33.5 million, of which
this $12 million housing application is one. The staff paper emphasizes
that consideration of this application would represent a departure from
previously expressed views of Board members with respect to advisabil-
ity of using DLF funds to finance housing construction.
I am grateful to the DLF staff and to Ambassador McIntosh for the
expeditious action which they have taken to facilitate consideration of
the Guatemalan loan applications in line with my memorandum to you
of November 14.3 Your support of the recommendation contained in
that memorandum is greatly appreciated. The political and economic
Drafted by Harry Conover, Deputy Director, Office of Inter-American Regional Affairs.
2 A copy of the referenced item, a memorandum to the Board of Directors of the
DLF, is attached to a memorandum from William V. Turnage, Deputy Director, Office of
International Financial and Development Affairs, to Dillon, December 8, 1958. A notation
by Turnage on his covering memorandum indicates that Dillon approved the recommen-
dation “that we would be prepared to consider on their merits modest loans to partici-
pate with local capital in sound proposals for establishing savings and loan Institutions
3 Not found in Department of State files.

Guatemala  675
importance of extending DLF loan assistance to Guatemala at this time
suggests the advisability of sympathetic consideration of an alternative
to this present application.
As currently cast, the housing loan application of Guatemala does
not appear to me to merit DLF Board approval. It looks to the extension
of a $12 million 30 year loan to enable the Central Bank of Guatemala
to purchase first mortgages now held or scheduled to be field by pri-
vate banking institutions. No evidence is presented that this action per se
would stimulate further savings or investments within Guatemala in the
housing field. While it would presumably make possible the financing
of 3000 additional houses, this volume would appear only marginal in
relation to the total volume of housing foreseen by the Government of
Guatemala as likely to stem from governmental and privately sponsored
housing activities in the next 5 years. It would not, therefore, appear
likely significantly to contribute to Guatemala’s economic development.
At the same time, it would saddle the Government with a substantial
dollar repayment obligation and might establish an unfortunate prece-
dent complicating DLF efforts to fend off voluminous loan requests for
housing construction in other countries in Latin America and elsewhere.
For these or those reasons, despite the high priority attached to this loan
application by the Government of Guatemala primarily on political
grounds, we would not favor favorable action on this present request.
On the other hand, we would strongly recommend sympathetic
consideration by the DLF Board of a loan to Guatemala of a sum approx-
imating $2 million which might serve as a catalytic medium to foster
greater housing construction and the accumulation of savings to flow
into this field on a continuing expanding basis. Such a loan, matched in
equal amount by the Government of Guatemala, might be used to create
a mortgage credit institution. Such an institution would have features
akin to the combined functions of the Federal Housing Administration
and the Federal Home Loan Bank in the U.S.: the guarantee of mort-
gages on insurance principles and the provision of a credit pool upon
which building and loan associations and insurance companies and sav-
ings banks might draw as occasion warranted to prime private hous-
ing financing. To the capital of such an institution these private lending
agencies might also be called upon to contribute in an amount equal to
the DLF-Government of Guatemala subscription. The primary purpose
would be two-­fold: the creation of a more orderly, secure market for
mortgage money and of institutions to attract savings to such a market.
The precise pattern for such an institutional arrangement and related
details require more discussions and study both here and in Guatemala.
These have already been initiated. Experts of ICA’s Housing
Division, the FHA, HHFC and FHLB hurriedly convened last Friday
referred to the favorable experience with such institutions in the U.S. and
Puerto Rico and are prepared to shape up a detailed program for DLF

Staff and Board consideration. Should this be approved in principle, they
might then be despatched to Guatemala City to assist in an on-­the-­spot
discussion and draft of an application. Such action would signify to the
Government of Guatemala our sympathetic interest in resolving its polit-
ical concern for improved housing along sound economic lines.
At this point I would merely recommend that you attempt to dis-
suade other Board members at this time from taking so rigid a position
on DLF financing in the housing field as to preclude further consider-
ation of the limited but potentially significant approach briefly outlined
above. This approach is designed to take account of the fact that while
the financing of housing construction primarily is a subject for local
action, it may be initiated and spurred by U.S. guidance, expression of
confidence and relatively small loan assistance in the same way that the
currently huge mortgage market in the U.S. initially was stimulated by
temporary Federal Government loans4.
4 In a letter dated December 24 to Ambassador Mallory in Guatemala, Assistant
Secretary Rubottom stated that DLF policy apparently ruled out housing and rural reset-
tlement loans for the present, but he hoped for DLF approval of a $5 million rubber proj-
GT–12.
Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Guatemalan
Affairs (King) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, December 30, 1958.
SUBJECT
Ambassador Antillón informed me yesterday that he is shortly
going on a trip to Guatemala, and that he wished to have a talk with
Antillón Hernandez: Guatemala, 1958.” Confidential.
2 According to the memorandum of their conversation of December 30, Assistant
Secretary Rubottom told Ambassador Antillón that the Development Loan Fund would
approve part of the $33.5 million in loans requested by Guatemala; “he authorized the
Ambassador to tell President Ydígoras that the Department and the U.S. Government
were supporting the GOG, were cooperating with it, and were trying to be helpful in

Guatemala  677
you before his departure. An appointment, subject to your approval,
was arranged for this afternoon.
Although I pressed him for details of what he wished to discuss
with you, Ambassador Antillón said that he had nothing special in
mind and wished merely to exchange views with you on a variety of
topics. I believe it likely that he may raise one or more of the following
subjects:
1. Pending, DLF Loan Applications.
I have had a talk with Mr. William Ryan of the DLF, who recently
returned from a study mission to Guatemala. Mr. Ryan informed me
that Hart Perry, Deputy Managing Director for Loans of the DLF, had
informed him that only $5 million dollars of presently appropriated
funds could be spared for loans to Guatemala. Mr. Ryan said he was
favorably impressed by the rubber loan application, and that he was
prepared to recommend putting the $5 million into this. Naturally, Mr.
Ryan’s recommendations would require approval by his superiors and
the DLF Board. Mr. Ryan felt that possibly more could be loaned to
Guatemala out of new appropriations for the DLF. If the Ambassador
inquires regarding status of the loan applications, you might tell him
what you told the Minister of Education on December 223—­that you
were sure something would be forthcoming for Guatemala in the mat-
ter of DLF loans, but that it was as yet unfortunately impossible to say
for what or how much.
2. Training Planes for the Guatemalan Air Force.
Sometime ago the GOG requested permission to purchase ten
T-34 training planes for the Guatemalan Air Force.4 This request was
approved by State and Defense, and the Guatemalans were informed
that the price of each aircraft would be between $23 and $27 thousand
dollars. The Ambassador has told me that these prices are far too high
for Guatemala to pay and has presented a note formally asking for
a reduction in the prices and special consideration for Guatemala in
this purchase.5 In the note he alludes to the fact that we have a Mutual
Defense Assistance Agreement with his country.6 He has told me that he
cannot understand how we can charge such high prices for the trainers,
3 No record of Assistant Secretary Rubottom’s conversation with the Guatemalan
Minister of Public Education, Col. Marco Aurelio Merida Sáenz, on December 22, was
found in Department of State files.
5 Antillón’s note was not found in Department of State files.

when only a few months ago we sold Guatemala several F–51 fighters
for $1,090 each. RPA advises that while the F–51’s were obsolete and
surplus, and that token prices could be quoted for them, the T–34’s are
currently used by our armed forces and those requested by Guatemala
must be released from our active stocks. Should the Ambassador raise
this matter, it is suggested that he be told that his note is now being
translated and that the Department will be glad to study it to see what,
if anything, can be to be helpful to the Guatemalans in this matter,
although nothing can be promised as Defense apparently has little or
no leeway in negotiating token prices for sales of T–34 aircraft at this
time.
3. Coffee Prices.
A favorite theme of Ambassador Antillón is the economic and
financial difficulties that Guatemala is experiencing because of the drop
in coffee prices. He is well aware of what the United States is trying
to do to be helpful in this situation, but tends to use the fall in coffee
prices as a reason for requesting us to make all kinds of concessions to
Guatemala.
4. U.S. Support for the Ydígoras Governments.
Ambassador Antillón may express to you his view that there is
need for the United States to make promptly some tangible and public
gesture of support for the Ydígoras administration, such as granting
loans or reducing the prices on the trainer planes. He seems to think
that we have deliberately withheld support from the GOG. You might,
whether or not he raises this subject, make a statement to the effect that
we are cooperating with and supporting the Ydígoras Government.
You might cite the fact that earlier this year we waited until Ydígoras
took office before releasing and programming the $10 million dollars
in special assistance that Congress appropriated for Guatemala for
FY 1958,7 and that the programming of these sums was done in close
cooperation with the GOG. You might say also that we have, wher-
ever possible in conformity with our own laws and regulations and
our capabilities, tried to comply with requests of the Guatemalan
Government. President Ydígoras himself has repeatedly expressed to
our representatives gratitude for U.S. assistance.
5. Lead and Zinc Quotas.
The Ambassador may raise the question of Guatemala being
assigned a specific quota for export of lead and zinc concentrates to
the United States, instead of being included in the 10 per cent general
7 Reference is to the Mutual Security Appropriation Act, 1958, approved September

Guatemala  679
quota for smaller producing countries. We understand that in January
a review will be made of the first quarter operation of the quota sys-
tem, and as the Guatemalan Director General of Mining was informed
during his visit to Washington last month, consideration will be given
at that time to Guatemala’s request for a specific lead and zinc quota.
Guatemala is the largest of the producing countries included in the gen-
eral quota. However, Guatemalan lead and zinc mining operations have
been virtually closed down for several months, and it was the projected
reopening of these mines that prompted a request for a specific quota.8
The Ambassador’s call might be a good opportunity to remind him
of our disappointment over the Guatemalan position that the George B.
Soto claim is a closed matter. You might say we are preparing a reply to
the latest Guatemalan note on this subject. It is suggested that you ask
the Ambassador to convey to his government, during his forthcoming
trip, reiteration of our hope that the case may be reopened and a set-
tlement negotiated between the GOG and Mr. Soto’s representatives.9
8 Documentation on the question of quotas for Guatemalan exports of lead and zinc
to the United States is in decimal file 411.146.
inal] Soto, George B.
GT–13.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Guatemala1
263. Following is text informal translation of telegram received by
President Eisenhower from President Ydígoras:
Guatemala, December 31, 1958.
The President
The White House
Washington
I am pleased to extend to Your Excellency cordial New Year greet-
ings and best wishes for your own and your wife’s and family’s health,
Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bayard King and signed by John A. Calhoun.

desiring at the same time-happiness and well-­being for the great peo-
ple of the United States and expressing my fervent wish that 1959 will
be filled with success in Your Excellency’s noble undertaking to achieve
peace and tranquility among all the countries of the world.
I take advantage of the occasion to call dramatically to your atten-
tion the situation confronting my country at year’s end. A year ago we
sold 100 pounds of coffee abroad for 60 U.S dollars, which meant an
income of approximately 78 million essential dollars for our economy;
also each quintal of coffee exported produced 14 quetzales in export tax.
With the drop in the price of coffee, dollar income is reduced by 26 mil-
lions and the State receives only $6 (in tax) per quintal.
This urgent situation obliges me to address myself to Your
Excellency to request you expeditiously to arrange the granting of the
credit requests that we delivered to your distinguished brother, Dr.
Milton Eisenhower. The common enemy, communism, will not invade
us from outside but flourishes among our hungry people. Khrushchev
is waiting at the door.
I present Your Excellency, with sentiments of high consideration,
the assurances of my loyal friendship.

Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes, President of
the Republic of Guatemala
Ambassador requested deliver following reply to President
­Ydígoras from President Eisenhower:2
January 19, 1959.
His Excellency

General Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes

President of the Republic of Guatemala

Guatemala City
I appreciate your kind New Year’s greeting. It revived the pleasant
recollections I have of your visit to Washington last February, and of the
talks we had at that time.
You may be sure that the United States Government continues to
devote careful and sympathetic attention to the questions which affect
our two countries and to the problems which confront Guatemala. The
requests which your Government has made are being studied here, and
I hope it will be possible soon to inform your Government how, within
2 In a memorandum to Goodpaster, January 9, John A. Calhoun of the Executive
Secretariat recommended that the White House authorize the Department to have
Ambassador Mallory acknowledge President Ydígoras’ telegram, but in a note to
Dulles, January 13, President Eisenhower stated he wanted to send a personal message.
(Eisenhower Library, Whiteman File, Dulles-Herter Series).

Guatemala  681
the limits of our own capabilities and resources, we in the United States
can be helpful.
With warm regard,

Sincerely,

Dwight D. Eisenhower
White House desires text this message not become public.3
Dulles
3 No publicity was given to this exchange of messages because no decision had
yet been reached on the Guatemalan loan applications. (Memorandum from Dulles to
GT–14.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Guatemala1
relations Guatemala and Mexico,3 and in accordance with U.S. policy
of withholding shipments armament particularly aircraft, to LA areas
where such tension exists, Dept plans to suspend temporarily further
action on delivery of six B–26 bombers to Guatemala.4 This does not rpt
not constitute cancellation of approval of sale given prior to December
31 attack on Mexican fishing boats by GAF planes. Normal processing
of request merely suspended until tension subsides when Dept would
expect that negotiations with GAF be resumed.
Priority. Drafted by King, signed by Rubottom, and repeated for information to Panama
City for CAIRC and Mexico City.
2 It proposed the flight of a Guatemalan mission to the United States to inspect and
3 Mexican President Lopéz Mateos severed diplomatic relations with Guatemala
on January 23 over an incident involving Guatemalan strafing of Mexican fishing boats
off the Guatemalan Pacific coast on December 31. The two countries resumed diplomatic
relations on September 15, following a settlement of the dispute. For documentation, see
2 Whiteman 87.
4 Ambassador Antillón had requested six B–26 planes in a message to Dulles,

Suggest Emb in its discretion could explain foregoing frankly to
GAF Chief Urrutia. If Emb believes such approach to Urrutia inadvis-
able, GOG should be informed that certain administrative delays in
processing Guatemalan request have been encountered, and that GOG
will be advised when B–26’s are available for inspection.5
5 At the Department of State’s request, the Department of Defense suspended action
on delivery of B-26 bombers to the Guatemalan Air Force. (Telegram 336 to Guatemala,
State informed the Guatemalan Embassy of the reason for the delay. (Telegram 350 from
GT–15.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory)
to the Department of State1
322. As reported, there has been rapid deterioration in Guatemalan
political situation. Much of basic cause has been worsening economic
situation with more apparent and immediate cause general unrest
Caribbean area and poor job President has been making of adminis-
tration. He has pulled stunts such as Mexican shrimp war, purchase of
merchant marine without Congressional approval, etc., had momen-
tary public successes, but more lasting adverse reactions. The inevitable
changes of allegiances and disenchantments which arise after a year of
a new government are evident but one of strongest adverse factors has
been venality of closest and most trusted advisers [text not declassified].
Recently a moderately sharp ear could detect plots against gov-
ernment in all groupings of political spectrum. Press started attack and
with reopening of Congress apparent much dirty linen will be exposed.
It has become clear administration needs be cleaned up else it cannot
last. We had hoped this would occur without necessitating too much
prompting but that if not, thought it better speak frankly with President
Ydígoras. Now a middle course has in fact occurred. Presidential con-
fidants have talked with me or with member Embassy in recent days
Limited Distribution. Repeated to U.S. delegation in Acapulco for Rubottom’s informa-
tion. He was there for the meeting between President Eisenhower and President López,

Guatemala  683
apparently either sent by President or wishing have discussions as
excuse go back and carry some word to him.
New Cabinet for March 1 rumored past few days. Also Roberto
Alejos, Cabinet Coordinator, informed member staff he felt he should
leave March 1. Yesterday British Minister2 informed me confidentially
President’s son-­in-­law, Ian Munn, will probably be going Europe soon
probably to stay. Yesterday President’s private secretary,3 talked with
me suggesting need for pretty thorough house-­cleaning in govern-
ment. And hoping I could tell President. I had talked with Minister
Public Health4 over weekend whom I supported in suggestion for new
Cabinet and to whom I also suggested idea of outstanding incorruptible
person as Cabinet Coordinator. How much is chicken and how much
egg is unimportant, but buildup of pressures has caused very consider-
able nervousness with President and within his immediate family and
brought about decision make Cabinet changes.
Today President called me to his office and talked at great length.
In brief he said Guatemala has not been ready for his kind of dem-
ocratic government, he being attacked on all sides, mostly unjustly,
and feels he may have crack down in dictatorial manner. Said he had
decided accept resignation of Cabinet but would reappoint members
recently joined. He will try have fairly broad Cabinet. Said Coordinator
of Cabinet had come in unjustly for attacks and he had decided let him
go although decision not yet made known. He then stopped.
I congratulated him on Cabinet decision and said with respect
Alejos that one had to recall truth in old saying that one might as well
hang dog as give him bad name. I said this respect I wished be very
personal and frank with President and point out there was another
person who had sufficiently bad name that he might as well be hung.
President apparently was waiting for this one and asked me directly
whom I meant. I replied [text not declassified]. I expanded on general
unrest in area citing exalted spirits of opposition and mentioned there
were number of plots being talked about. These plots I opined did not
individually have much chance success but should groups ever get
together, might prove serious. They were caused I though by deteri-
orating economic conditions and also by lack of calm and confidence
on part of public. I said it was most important for President under-
take course of action to restore confidence and that business generally,
including foreign investors, needed reassurances. Such action as he
took with respect Alejos could probably be helpful in this regard even
though Alejos might have operated with purist motives.
2 Thomas Wikeley.
3 Carlos González Segui.
4 Mariano López Herrarte.

President brought up and asked for advice and information with
respect number of approaches which he is having concerning U.S. lob-
byists who state only way get assistance from U.S. is through them and
that reliance upon Department and similar agencies useless. I made
suitable defense.
In summary there can be some hope situation can be redressed
here but measures may well be inadequate and we will have to follow
developments closely.
Mallory
GT–16.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Guatemalan Affairs (King)1
Washington, March 25, 1959.
SUBJECT
Guatemalan Economic Situation; Development Loan Fund Rubber Loan to
Guatemala
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Roberto Alejos, Former Coordinating Minister in Guatemalan Government
Lic. Perez Galeano, Guatemalan Representative to Inter-American Banking Institu-
tion Meetings
Col. Carlos S. Antillón, Ambassador of Guatemala
ARA - Assistant Secretary R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
OAP - Bayard King, Officer-­in-Charge, Guatemalan Affairs
Mr. Rubottom welcomed Mr. Alejos, who was spending a few days
in Washington and New York enroute to Europe. The conversation
was devoted largely to economic and financial problems confronting
Guatemala. Mr. Rubottom said the United States has tried to be as help-
ful as possible, within the limits of its capabilities, to the economies of
the other American Republics. He said he felt that considerable progress
had been made in this endeavor during the past year. For instance, the
Inter-American Development Bank was nearing reality, and plans were
going ahead for the setting-­up of a common market in Central America
to which the United States hoped to be able to lend financial assistance.
The United States had played a leading role in the Coffee Study Group,

Guatemala  685
and was trying to be helpful to our Latin American friends in the cot-
ton marketing problem. The Department was supporting the adoption
of measures and procedures that would avoid the very wide fluctu-
ations in the prices of commoditize produced in Latin America and
consequent damage to Latin American economies. Mr. Rubottom said
that while it would probably be impossible to avoid some fluctuations
in the prices of these commodities, the object would be to hold them
within reasonable extremes.
$5 million loan for rubber development recently offered to Guatemalan
by the Development Loan Fund. He said that this interest rate was too
high and was higher than ordinary commercial loans. It would mean,
he said, that the rapper planters would have to pay 8% for funds from
this source, and that only the wealthy planters who had other sources
of income could afford to pay this interest rate for perhaps seven years
before getting any return from their rubber trees. Mr. Rubottom said
He said that he personally had strongly supported Guatemala’s appli-
cation for the rubber loan, and that he could not help but be disap-
pointed at Mr. Alejos’ remarks about the interest rate.
Mr. Alejos said that while in Washington he planned to try to nego-
tiate a lower interest rate on this loan with the Development Loan Fond.
However, if he was unsuccessful, Guatemala would accept the loan at
the primary policies of the Government of President Ydígoras was to
help the poorer classes in Guatemala, and better their lot, thus making
them less susceptible to communist pressures. This the Government
could not, under present economic and financial conditions, afford to
do adequately, and outside capital was essential. Mr. Alejos indicated
that he was planning to discuss loans with commercial banks in New
York, as well as seek development capital in Europe. He emphasized
the necessity for the Guatemalan Government to do something soon far
the poorer classes in Guatemala, and that these classes could not exist
indefinitely on unfulfilled promises.
Mr. Alejos referred to the comparatively large amounts of ICA
money in the Guatemalan pipeline. He said this was not being spent,
and it was doing the country no good as it was. He said that in his opin-
ion there had been an overemphasis on rural development and resettle-
ment in Guatemala, and that this program was now stalled because of
lack of suitable land. He said that the Guatemalan Government wanted
to have the pipeline funds re-­allocated to other more urgent projects,
such as housing, and mentioned that the Guatemalan Congress was
about to pass a law authorizing the establishment of an FHA-­type
organization.

Mr. Rubottom said the U. S. Government had Guatemala’s hous-
ing needs under study, and again disagreed with Mr. Alejos remarks
regarding the interest rate on the DLF loan.2 Mr. Alejos said that he
would discuss the question on the pipeline funds with Mr. Atwood of
ICA, with whom he had an appointment.3
million of the loan. For information regarding disbursement, see Agency for International
found in Department of State files. The incomplete disbursement of the loan was due to
the assigned rate of interest.
3 No record of Roberto Alejos meeting with Atwood was found. In instruction A–56
to the Embassy in Guatemala on November 5, 1959, the Department stated that the DLF
had formally communicated to Alejos disapproval of Guatemalan loan applications for
GT–17.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Guatemalan Affairs (King)1
Washington, April 3, 1959.
SUBJECT
Suspension by Department of its Approval of Purchase of Six B-26 Bombers by the
Government of Guatemala.
PARTICIPANTS
His Excellency Colonel Carlos S. Antillón-Hernández, Ambassador of Guatemala
Mr. Herbert B. Leggett, Acting Director, Office of Central American and Panamanian
Affairs
Mr. Bayard King, Officer-­in-Charge, Guatemalan Affairs.
Ambassador Antillón came to the Department by request to dis-
cuss certain pending applications of the Guatemalan Government to
purchase military equipment from United States sources.
Mr. Leggett, referring to the Ambassador’s interview with
Mr. Rubottom on April 1,2 said he wished to assure the Ambassador that
ARA was actively following up the Guatemalan requests to purchase
2 Rubottom had told Antillón that prompt replies would be given to Guatemalan
requests for military equipment, (Memorandum of conversation by King, April 1, 1959;

Guatemala  687
equipment. He said that in the matter of the two Bailey bridges, which
had been pending since January, it was hoped that an early and favor-
able response to this request would be forthcoming. The Ambassador
was informed that the Department understood that the two bridges
would cost in the neighborhood of $120,000.
Mr. King then raised the recent request of Guatemala for the use, on
a loan basis, of a large sea-­going dredge,3 said to be in the possession of
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in the Panama Canal Zone. Mr. King
said this was a rather unusual request and it would be necessary to
ascertain from the Department of Defense whether the United States
Army Corps of Engineers had such a dredge available, where it was
located, and whether it was feasible to move it by sea to Guatemala.
The Ambassador said the Guatemalan Government would assume all
expenses of moving the dredge to Guatemala, and returning it to the
United States Army. Mr. King said the Department hoped to have fur-
ther information in this connection for the Ambassador shortly.
Mr. Leggett said he wished to raise another request of Guatemala
which the Ambassador had not discussed with Assistant Secretary
Rubottom on April 1.
This was for six B–26 surplus bombers, Mr. Leggett reviewed the
present tense situation existing in almost all Caribbean countries, and said
that the United States, in the interest of relieving this tension, was not, at
the present time, authorizing the shipment of certain combat equipment
to the area. He said that the B–26s were considered in this category. Mr.
Leggett emphasized that withholding approval of shipments of airplanes
and certain other military equipment was merely a temporary measure
dictated by the present situation in the Caribbean, and that it was hoped it
would be possible at an early date to authorize resumption of shipments
of military equipment legitimately needed. He said the Department felt
it would not be helpful to relieving tension in the area if planes and other
equipment were made available to the Caribbean countries at this time
from United States sources, and that the United States chief interest in
this matter was contributing to restoration of calm in the area.
The Ambassador indicated that he appreciated the Department’s
view regarding this matter, and inquired whether this policy applied to
other countries as well as to Guatemala. Mr. Leggett said that it did, and
that it in fact would normally apply to all countries in an area of tension.
The Ambassador asked whether suspension of approval of sale of the
B–26’s applied also to a number of training planes that Guatemala had
requested. Mr. King said that he understood what had held up the train-
ing planes was that the Guatemalan Government had found that the
prices asked by the Defense Department were too high. The Ambassador
3 Guatemalan request was not found in the Department of State files.

asked whether the policy described by Mr. Leggett was a permanent
one, and Mr. Leggett again assured him that it was temporary. He added
that all requests for arms from Caribbean countries would continue to
be studied by the Department on a case-­by-­case basis.
The Ambassador asked whether, in view of the foregoing, it would
be inopportune for a team from Guatemala to come here at this time
to inspect the places. Mr. Leggett said that under the circumstances it
would seem desirable to postpone the visit of the team. The Ambassador
said he would inform his Government accordingly.
Mr. King then raised the request of Guatemala for a number of
jeeps and military trucks for the Guatemalan Armed Forces.4 He said
this request, which had only been received by the Department towards
the end of March, was now under active study, and that it was hoped
favorable action would be taken soon. The Ambassador expressed his
gratification and his hope that Guatemala would be able to obtain these
vehicles at an early date.
4 The Guatemalan request was not found in Department of State files.
GT–18.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central
American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Washington, June 12, 1959
SUBJECT
Consultation with Ambassador Mallory.
During his consultation in Washington,2 Ambassador Mallory’s
discussions of the problems that he faces in Guatemala will probably
center on three or four general themes:
J. Mallory: Guatemala, 1959.” Secret. This memorandum, drafted by Gorrell, bears the
following notation by Rubottom: “A very good paper.”
sultations, he wrote a 16-­page situation report, June 12, in which he reviewed events in
Guatemala and requested guidance on whether or not to help Ydígoras stay in office. The
covering memorandum bears Rubottom’s notation: “An excellent paper. Read during
versation on Mallory’s June 16th meeting with Rubottom was found, but see Document
GT–19 for a report by Mallory on the meeting.

Guatemala  689
1. The question of how to help maintain President Ydígoras in
office for his full term and of how, in so doing, to ensure his succession
by elements friendly to or willing to work with, rather than against the
United States.
2. The leftist swing of popular sentiment in Guatemala, and the
problem of growing communist and pro-­communist activity.
3. The “Arevalo Problem.”
4. Inter-American Highway
1. YDÍGORAS:
Ydígoras has not forgotten nor been allowed to forget we were luke-
warm toward his plans to reach the Presidency of Guatemala in 1954,
1957 and 1958. He was somewhat placated during his post-­electoral
visit to the United States and our relation ran fairly smoothly until a
few months after the visit to Guatemala of the Dr. Milton Eisenhower
mission. Despite all the efforts made to forestall such a development,
Ydígoras wanted to believe and did believe that we would heed a large
part of his requests for $95 million dollars in loans. Perhaps this belief
was encouraged by the fact that his submissions were prepared with
the assistance of Americans whom the Guatemalans consider “quasi
official”, i.e. Klein & Saks experts.3
It now becomes apparent that in announcing that Guatemala
wanted to shift from grants to loans Ydígoras did not mean quite what
he said. He was playing up to growing nationalist sentiments and
expected us to play along with him. His subsequent resentment over
the “relatively high” interest rate assigned to the rubber development
loan indicates he had hoped for token interest rates that would have
turned grants only technically into loans. It must be recognized that
Clemente Marroquin Rojas’ loud complaints that United States aid is
a “national shame” have wide appeal even to persons who feel that
United States aid must be continued.)4 These people therefore look for
ways to remove the stigma attached to aid (i.e. the supposed
3 A report on Guatemala by the consulting firm of Klein and Saks is in decimal
June 10, Assistant Secretary Rubottom pointed out that more than $30 million of the
Guatemalan request for loans was for assistance to a housing program, and “overall pol-
icy made it impossible to satisfy Guatemalan hopes in this connection, but that other
ways have been and are being sought to help Guatemala find a solution to its housing
4 In a note to Foreign Minister Unda Murillo, May 11, Mallory asked if Marroquín’s
statements of May 8, expressed the views of the Guatemalan Government. (Enclosure to
met with Unda Murillo who gave him a copy of a note in reply and then said that
the statements of the Minister of Agriculture of May 8 did not reflect the views of the
Government. (Memorandum of conversation by Mallory, May 13, 1959; ARA/OAP Files,

subservience that it imposes on Guatemalan governments), as mini-
mum interest rates and the transfer to Guatemalans of major authority
for the administration of such aid.
Our inability to go along with such an approach had made
Ydígoras susceptible to the intrigues and murmurs of a weird assort-
ment of [text not declassified] counselors who include (for different rea-
sons and with varying motives) the Gonzalez Siguí brothers, Roberto
Alejos, the Colombian Luis Morales Gomez, Jorge Garcia Granados
and the American Felix McBride, of Washington.
Ydígoras’ recent actions suggest that, since loans he had hoped
to obtain from such sources as DLF and the Eximbank are likely to
be subject to what he considers high interest rates, he has been led to
believe that he can do as well on the private money market and there-
fore is testing it, in the hope that simultaneously he can demonstrate
his credit abroad, raise hopes for settling the country’s economic prob-
lems, and flaunt his independence of the United States Government.
Nevertheless, the cold reception given to one Ydígoras emissary
(Alejos),5 the colder one due another (Morales Gomez) and possibly
to a third (a Venezuelan, Carlos otto) raise the probability that their
failure to satisfy Ydígoras desires will be attributed, not to their own
shortcomings, but to Departmental intrigue.
Ydígoras is rumored to have said that he will do anything to pre-
vent the Department from handling him “as it did Arbenz”. He is quite
capable, if led to believe that such a fate is imminent, of turning over the
Government to the forces he believes would give us the hardest time
in Guatemala. One group that seems to be candidate for succession in
such an event (and would no doubt the characterization of “difficult”
from our point of view) includes the Gonzalez Sigui brothers6 and the
Arevalista (to put it mildly) Col. Carlos Paz Tejada. However, he does
not seem to have made up his mind definitely to throw the game to
the nationalists and/or leftists. While toying with the idea, he also is
assuming anti-Communist postures, as in calling ODECA Ministers of
Government together to discuss the communist problem and in (pre-
sumably) inspiring Consul General Urrutia’s warning to the Wall St. Journal
on June 3 that, if the pro-Communist left wins the November congressional
elections and subsequently the presidential elections, it will all be our fault.
Ydígoras is volatile and if ways could be found to support tangibly
our assurances that his advisors are wrong in claiming the Department
seeks his downfall, it might well be possible to work fairly peacefully
6 Carlos González Siguí, Private Secretary to the President of Guatemala; and Col.
José Rubén González Siguí, Guatemalan Minister of National Defense.

Guatemala  691
with him while he remains in office.7 His “economic development”
plans cover the field from housing, industrial development through
electrification. To bolster national pride and armed forces support, he
wants six B-26s, at least. For political reasons, he wants to put on a big
show of developing the Peten region. We should think of what can be done
for him within this framework. In discussing the overall question of aid,
Ambassador Mallory no doubt will have strongly in mind the recent
fracas between Clemente Marroquin Rojas (Minister of Agriculture and
“La Hora” Editor) and USOM Director Oscar Powell. The Ambassador
and Mr. Powell have somewhat different views on the future of aid pro-
grams, their usefulness, and the general political picture.8 Marroquin’s
insistence that Powell and most of his staff be removed has reduced our
flexibility for maneuvering.
We should keep in mind that Ydígoras’ resentment toward the
Department is currently reflected in his attitude toward other things
American. Recent new regulations imposed on oil companies patently
reflect suspicion that the companies are plotting to hide oil discoveries
from him and so deprive his Government of the means for resolving
all its problems. If he goes militantly nationalistic, it seems probable
that the first to suffer will be American enterprises, beginning probably
with the Empresa Electrica, and so on down the line.
2. SWING TO THE LEFT:
The Embassy has reported a marked swing to the left in Guatemala
and Ambassador Mallory has urged that we view this in its overall
aspects, guarding, against any inclination to see it in terms of individu-
als on whom hopes and fears can be pinned.
The objective to be pursued would seem to be the development of a mod-
erate left capable of promoting a healthier social, political and economic
climate than has been possible under the traditional ruling classes.
Unfortunately, liberal elements in Guatemala seem to be almost as
badly split (although perhaps not so violently at odds) as the right. The
one element responsible for attempting to hold them together (for the
time being) is the communist.
7 During a farewell visit of Ambassador Antillón of Guatemala on June 10, Assistant
Secretary Rubottom told the Ambassador that “he confirmed fully the expressions
of admiration and friendship for President Ydígoras that he voiced in December.”
(Memorandum of Conversation by Gorrell in Rubottom Files, Lot 61 D 279, “Guatemala,
1959”)
8 Powell and Mallory had a disagreement over the administration of the ICA pro-
gram, and Powell had questioned U.S. support of Ydígoras, but Mallory felt the United
States should continue to support him. (Letter from Mallory to Stewart, May 27, 1959;
ARA/OAP Files, Lot 61 D 473, “Guatemala”)

The Guatemalan left generally tends to be intensely nationalis-
tic, or at least to value greatly the political uses of hyper-­nationalism.
American business in Guatemala seems likely, in certain cases, to play
into the hands of demagogues and keep the nationalism issue alive,
making our efforts to sponsor a moderate left more difficult.
Ydígoras’ approach to the communists has been a source of grave
concern to us. However, we must recognize that it has not been entirely
devoid of merits. It has enabled him to boast of respecting individual
liberties and has reduced tensions. It has also helped to sort the goats
from the sheep, which was an almost hopeless task under Castillo.
The return of some prominent, fondly remembered Arbencista exiles
has deprived them of martyrs’ crowns and revealed some as ordi-
nary human beings who are somewhat out of step with the times. The
great defect in Ydígoras’ handling of the communist problem has been
his unwillingness to clamp down on clearly identified agitators and
organizers.
3. AREVALO:
The Embassy’s views about Arevalo are that we must recognize
that he is alive, that we cannot confidently hope that he will be run over
by a truck and that, at the present time, he is the only sure-­fire rallying
point for the bulk of Guatemalans—­either because they love him or
because they believe his return is inevitable. The Department recorded
will probably serve Ambassador Mallory as a point of departure for
some phases of his discussions.
4. INTER-AMERICAN HIGHWAY:
Ambassador Mallory will probably bring us up to date on the prob-
lems connected with completion and surfacing of the Inter-American
Highway in Guatemala. It might be interesting to discuss with him
ways and means of diverting to this purpose some of the unexpended
grant-­aid money that is now earmarked for projects that do not interest
Ydígoras, because they are identified with Castillo and might be cred-
ited to the MDN if carried through.
9 The referenced instruction set forth two objectives: “(1) To minimize the threat to
our interests if Arévalo, a man with a long anti-American record, should reappear on the
Guatemalan political scene in the near future, and (2) to postpone, if possible and as long
as possible, Arévalo’s return to Guatemala and utilize the time available before a succes-
sor to the Ydígoras Government must be chosen to ensure the most satisfactory possible

Guatemala  693
GT–19.
Memorandum from the Ambassador in Guatemala
(Mallory) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, June 24, 1959.
SUBJECT
Reconsideration of Assistance to Guatemala.
At a meeting held in your office on Tuesday, June 16,2 it was
decided that the policy of supporting President Ydígoras of Guatemala
and his Government should be actively pursued. It was decided that
on my return to Guatemala I should fully assure the President of the
interest of the Government of the United States in supporting him. It
was also decided that I should seek an appraisal of requests for loan
assistance and an appraisal of the existing aid program to the end of
presenting an assistance package on such terms as would appear most
attractive. I have consulted with appropriate officers of ARA, with offi-
cials of the Development Loan Fund, the President and officers of the
Export-Import Bank, and with officials of the International Cooperation
Administration. Subject to your approval, the following package has
been agreed to.
1. The DLF will complete details on the $5 million rubber loan to
be administered through the Bank of Guatemala.3 In this connection,
[illegible in the original] is in agreement that rubber technicians may
be maintained on the staff of USOM/G for the purpose of providing
technical advice and assistance to the Bank of Guatemala.
2. The Eximbank is completing consideration of the request of the
Government of Guatemala for a loan of $5 million for industrializa-
tion projects to be made to the Bank of Guatemala. The Eximbank has
authorized me to state to President Ydígoras that consideration of this
loan is well advanced, that there are certain functional information,
and request that Dr. Mirón, head of the Bank of Guatemala, come to
Washington opportunely for this purpose.4
3. It has been agreed that an offer be made to President Ydígoras
to re-­program the special assistance funds remaining unspent, that is,
Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 No memorandum of this conversation was found.

the so-­called pipeline. It is realized that as a practical matter such will
remain unchanged but there is an amount of perhaps up to $2.5 mil-
lion which can be removed from present projects and other projects,
whether new or old, which will provide some political attraction to the
President.
4. In this connection, I intend to inform the President, although it
may not be entirely in accordance with the facts, that the Department
of State has been helpful in not having a repossession of funds made on
the virtually non-­operative Rural Development Program.
5. Respective the technical cooperation program, ICA is anxious
for the termination of the agricultural portion which has been under
fire by the Minister of Agriculture of Guatemala. We intend, therefore,
to re-­examine this program in detail and propose substantial modifi-
cations. The major modifications appear at this time to be abrogation
of the agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture.5 We will offer at the
same time to maintain certain specialized technicians in a strictly advi-
sory capacity when their services may prove useful in furthering the
purposes of the two Governments.
6. Upon return to Guatemala, detailed review of the program,
their status, finance, etc. will be made and the proposals immediately
submitted to ICA/Washington before final action. This final action
appears desirable during the week of July 6 to 10 inasmuch as we
have word that President Ydígoras is going to Panama on July 11.
This will require close timing both in Guatemala and in Washington.
If it cannot be done that quickly, it will have to be delayed until about
July 22 which, in view of the strong interest which obtains concern-
ing the future of the agricultural program, would appear to be rather
long.
7. I have seen Ambassador-Designate Remirez and given him a
broad outline of as much of the above as I think he ought to know.
He expressed himself as grateful with the assistance and I hope that
he will promptly report to President Ydígoras before my return as we
need to make this look as good as possible. [text not declassified].
5 By notes to Guatemalan authorities, July 8, the United States terminated the follow-

Guatemala  695
GT–20.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory)
to the Department of State1
Guatemala City, July 9, 1959.
No. 14
REF.:
SUBJECT
Revision of United States Aid to Guatemala.
[Here follows two paragraphs on Ambassador Mallory’s consulta-
tions in Washington.]
Upon the Ambassador’s return to Guatemala3 and with officials
USOA/G, the details of the “package”4 were prepared in the form of
talking notes to be taken up with President Ydígoras.5 It was desired
to go over these notes with Mr. Rollin Atwood, Regional Director of
the Office of Latin American Operations of ICA, who was to arrive
in Guatemala on July 2.6 President Ydígoras, in the meantime, had
requested that the Ambassador call on him on July 2, but it was possi-
ble to delay the appointment to July 3. A copy of these talking notes is
attached.7
The appointment of July 3 with the President was kept. The discus-
sion lasted two hours. The President was in general agreement with the
many points raised and went over each item of the program in detail.
It is clear that he has now been aware of just what is involved in each
2 None printed; these telegrams and despatches dealt with the revision of the U.S.
aid program and with Marroquin’s attacks on the program. The respective file numbers
3 Upon returning from consultations in Washington, Mallory resumed charge of the
Embassy in Guatemala on June 30.
4 Reference is to the revised program of aid to Guatemala submitted by Mallory in
his memorandum to Rubottom, June 24, printed as Document GT–19.
6 Atwood was in Guatemala in July 1959, to assist in the revision of the U.S. aid
program.
7 Not printed.

1959, in the Casa Presidential of the President and Ministers concerned,
etc., to discuss reprogramming.
On the technical assistance side, the President demurred over the
cancellation of SCIDA, saying that this would look like censure. I told
him it was necessary to clean the slate. After about three attempts on
his part, he got the point.
With respect to the industrialization loan of the Export-Import
Bank, he stated that Dr. Mirón could go to Washington for this purpose.
During the discussion, the President was given a copy of the
talking notes. He asked if he might keep them, to which assent was
given. This, it appeared, would be helpful in any thinking or review
he might make before the meeting, which it was felt reasonably sure
he would do. While his English is very adequate, he does like to read
slowly by himself.
Notice of termination of United States support of the Agricultural
Servicio was prepared. It took the form of simultaneous letters to
the Minister of Agriculture and to the Personero del Presidente8 from
the Director of the USOM/G. In order that there be no possibility of
misunderstanding, copies of these letters were forwarded, on July 8, to
the Foreign Minister under cover of a first person note. Copy of the note
and its enclosures is enclosed.9
The meeting set up with the President and heads of government
entities concerned was held in the Casa Presidencial at 3:00 p.m., July
8. People were seated about the dining table which accommodates
40 people and there was a solid bank of about that many more close
around. The various Ministers concerned, plus the head of the Agrarian
Department, the Bank of Guatemala, the Foreign Minister and their
deputies, advisers, etc., were present. The President began the session
by stating that the meeting was for the purpose of considering possible
changes in the aid program. He pulled out the talking notes referred to
above and asked if the Ambassador wished to go through them. This
opportunity was taken. A review was made of the President’s wish to
adapt the program more to present-­day conditions and to the situa-
tion faced by the Government in the country, the Ambassador’s trip to
Washington and the results thereof. (See enclosures, especially talking
notes). After running down a series of items on special assistance and
noting the amount of funds remaining in each as of June 30, discussion
was invited as to each of the items and question was raised as to what
8 Adolfo Colmenares, Coordinator for the Guatemalan Government, and
Government Deputy for Technical Cooperation Affairs.
9 Not printed; see footnote 5 to the memorandum from Mallory to Rubottom, June

Guatemala  697
changes the President and his Government might wish to make in the
program.
The most extensive discussion occurred under the heading of
Rural Development. This likewise has the largest amount of funds
remaining, amounting to over $7 million. The President spoke at very
considerable length contending that land distribution, or the promise
thereof, is a principal weapon of the Communists or leftists, that noth-
ing in this respect had been done by his immediate predecessors and
that some vitality must be given the program even at the expense of
handing out small parcels of land. He maintained that land ownership
was a principal deterrent to Communist ideology. He agreed that the
kind of land distribution or land resettlement with which the United
States has assisted is important in the long run and in raising the pro-
ductive level of Guatemala. However, he felt that urgent distribution of
small tracts was needed on a political basis. After he had finished and
before the head of the Agrarian Department could reply, the Minister
of Agriculture took the floor and by the clock spoke for 18 minutes.
This discussion has been aptly described as a sustained tirade damning
the rural development program, American technicians, the direction of
U.S. aid in Guatemala, improper budgetary practices of the Guatemalan
Government, a defense of Indian farming practices and practically
everything else in the book except a defense of oxcarts. His statement,
if such it may be called, was greeted by others present with a mixture
of curiosity and amazement. He finished without any comments by the
President or anyone else present. Attempt was made to progress to the
next item on the agenda when Colonel Peralta, head of the Agrarian
Department, only after some insistence, was able to get the President’s
permission to speak in defense of the Rural Development Program.
This he did at some length refuting many points brought up by Lic.
Clemente Marroquin Rojas, the Minister of Agriculture. When this was
over, the President still made no comment. Before the day was finished,
it looked as though the President was acting as umpire between the
unruly members of his family, including a slightly weak-­minded mem-
ber thereof.
With respect to other projects under the subject of special assis-
tance, such as housing, malaria eradiation, environmental sanitation,
education, public safety, community self-­help, the various Ministers
spoke in turn. Each expressed himself as very much satisfied with
the program and demonstrated resistance to giving up any of their
funds for the use of any other project. Certain worthwhile and reveal-
ing discussions ensued, for example, the desirability of combining
work in environmental sanitation with water supplies in the Ministry
of Communications and Public Works in order to avoid any duplica-
tion of effort. Following the discussion of these several programs, the

Minister of Finance10 delivered himself of a rather thoughtful, but at
the same time very vigorous, attack on all heads of projects, stating
that they had failed to provide him with data as required, that he did
not have material for the budget, that he had found Guatemala was far
in arrears on its contributions, that they should assist the Ministry of
Finance, etc., etc., No one escaped this castigation which apparently is
well merited. The Minister went so far as to state that in the past when
the Ministry of Finance had need for data on the aid program and joint
expenditures that he had to take the embarrassing route of asking the
Americans for it.
The Ambassador then turned to the technical assistance program,
stating that this operates on an annual basis rather than as part of any
longer term or pipeline fund, such as might be true of special assis-
tance. With respect to the several ministries involved, he thought that
the programs could continue along the same general lines as they
appeared to be desirable and to meet needs. With respect to agricul-
ture, however, it had become apparent that this program no longer
met the purposes of the two governments. He thought it better that
all activities be handled unilaterally by the Ministry of Agriculture
and, therefore, notice of termination of U.S. participation on SCIDA
had been given, to be effective August 31. The Ambassador said that
in order not to be too negative concerning these matters on which
Guatemala might need technical assistance, that it were possible, if
requests were made, that a few technicians might be maintained
on the staff of USOM to assist in an advisory capacity. These might
include, for example, some rubber technicians to assist the Bank of
Guatemala which was the agency receiving a loan for rubber develop-
ment from the Development Loan Fund. Similarly, a few technicians
might be maintained to help complete the work already started in
the rural development program, such men as extension advisers. Dr.
Miron, of the Bank of Guatemala, indicated his desire for the rubber
technicians and also asked if the United States could not also continue
to make available the services of a pathologist in connection with the
establishment of the production of Kenaf fiber and a bag factory. It was
indicated that this might be possible. Colonel Peralta indicated that
the Agrarian Department would be interested in some assistance from
extension technicians.
The Ambassador then again referred to the presence of Mr. Rollin
Atwood, Regional Director of ICA for Latin America, who is here to
assist in connection with revision of the program. It was pointed out
that the 1960 budget would have to be approved soon, that work could
proceed rapidly if decisions were made during Mr. Atwood’s visit, but
10 Julio Prado García Sales, Minister of Finance and Public Credit.

Guatemala  699
otherwise considerable delays might ensue. The suggestion was then
reiterated that the President and his Ministers state what changes they
wished to have in the program. There being no direct requests made at
the moment, it was agreed that individual Ministers and program chiefs
would meet early the following day with Mr. Atwood, Mr.  Powell,
and Mr. Colmenares, Coordinator for the Guatemalan Government, to
review the programs in detail.
The meeting was useful as it provided a substantial clearing of the
air. It provided an opportunity of placing the responsibility for future
conduct of the program, or changes thereof, squarely on the President
and his Ministers. It settled the question of the Agriculture program in
the best possible form.
It is not expected that very substantial changes will occur in the
aid program, except for agriculture. There may be some shifting about
to make it appear more attractive to the present Government as both
an administrative end a political exercise. This all appears to have been
necessary and substantially worth-­while. Any significant changes will
be reported.11
assistance for fiscal year 1960: $313,000 for the Army Mission including military assis-
tance; $2,400,000 for ICA technical cooperation; $70,000 in ICA special assistance for
the Public Safety Program; and $3,500,000 for the construction of the Inter-American
GT–21.
Editorial Note
In reply to a note of September 22, 1959, from Guatemalan
Ambassador Ramírez, the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs, Thomas C. Mann, wrote on October 1 that the Guatemalan
request for a 10,000 ton quota for sugar export to the United States in
a conversation on October 23, José Luis Arenas, a friend of President
Ydígoras, showed Mann a letter of October 19 in which Ydígoras thanked
Arenas for information that Mann intended to help obtain an annual
quota of up to one million tons of sugar for Guatemala. (Attachment
Mann called Arenas’ attention to the fact that there had been no men-
tion of obtaining this quota for Guatemala. He reiterated his previous

statements to Arenas and the Ambassador that no action could be taken
until Congress passed new legislation. (Ibid.)
GT–22.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Guatemalan Affairs (Gorrell)1
Washington, September 28, 1959.
SUBJECT
Visit of Guatemalan Foreign Minister
PARTICIPANTS
His Excellency Lic. Jesus Victor Unda Murillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guatemala;
His Excellency Col. Arturo Ramirez Pinto, Ambassador of Guatemala; Assistant Sec-
retary R. R. Rubottom, Jr.;
Mr. Juan L. Correll, Officer in Charge, Guatemala Affairs.
Foreign Minister Unda Murillo said he had been requested by
President Ydígoras to transmit through Mr. Rubottom, the President’s
warm salutations to President and Mrs. Eisenhower. The Minister also
asked that Mr. Rubottom communicate his own personal salutations to
Secretary Herter.
President Ydígoras, the Minister said, had also asked him to
inquire of Mr. Rubottom the proper channels for extending an invita-
tion to Governor Muñoz Marin of Puerto Rico to visit Guatemala, and
the most effective way of doing so. Mr. Rubottom said he would secure
this information and transmit it through Ambassador Ramirez Pinto.
The Minister stated that Guatemala is suffering from the drop
in coffee prices, which has created financial problem that prevent its
dynamic President from doing all the things he would like to do. He
expressed satisfaction at the efforts that have been made to stabilize
the coffee situation. He mentioned in passing that Guatemala would
like to become a sugar exporting nation but understands the difficulties
involved in trying to have a quota assigned to it at the present time.
Mr. Rubottom expressed interest in hearing the Minister’s views on
the political situation in Guatemala. The Minister stressed the tension
Memoranda: Guatemala, 1959.” Official Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon
copy.

Guatemala  701
attendant on the throwing of bombs, some of which, he said, have
been tossed by the extreme Leftist PR, others by the extreme Rightist
MDN, in efforts to create confusion. Some, he said, have hoped to force
Ydígoras to set up a dictatorship but the President has refused to do so
because he is determined to upload democracy. However, the Minister
continued, by their tactics the PR and MDN have unwittingly become
tools of an international plot being stage-­managed by Betancourt of
Venezuela and Fidel Castro of Cuba, in the interest of securing the
return of Arévalo to the head of the Guatemala Government. Their pur-
pose, the Minister stated, is to set up a network of Governments similar
to their own, and Betancourt is the creature of Arévalo, who is serving
as close advisor to him, as well as close friend. If elections were to be
held next year in Guatemala, the Minister added, Arévalo would be
elected by an overwhelming majority, with dire results for the country
and great embarrassment for the United States.
The Minister expressed indignation at the speech given in the
UNGA by the Cuban Foreign Minister, Roa, especially at his having
coupled Guatemala with Hungary and Tibet.2 He said he had felt that
the Guatemalan Foreign Office could not reply to these remarks, but
that the task had been undertaken by the Guatemalan Consul General
in New York, who had made a strong reply, making it clear there had
been no foreign intervention in Guatemala’s Liberation.
Stating that he was doing so at the Secretary’s request, Mr.
Rubottom told the Minister that in the Camp David conversations the
“dead line” for settlement of the Berlin issue had been dropped and the
way apparently opened for a Summit meeting.
Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourteenth Session, Plenary Meetings
GT–23.
Telegram From the Embassy in Guatemala to the
Department of State1
Guatemala City, October 9, 1959.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 5 pages not declassified.

GT–24.
Airgram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory) to
the Department of State1
Guatemala City, November 11, 1959.
G-23
Called on President Ydígoras today2 noon for purpose saying
goodbye and taking up contents Department’s Instructions A-55 and
A-56.3 Conversation lasted approximately one and a quarter hours.
President began by informing me recent intelligence received from
Assistant Chief National Police Mexico whom he once assisted in exile
of information on possible interventionist activities Caribbean Legion
from Cuba. President said plans laid for three invasion attempts: one
Guatemala, one Nicaragua and one Dominican Republic. He related
general subject Juan José Arevalo stating his information Arevalo to
receive $150,000 from Cuba with hope expressed by Raul Castro that
money would not be primarily for political purposes but for military
adventures. He said that the Caribbean Legion is supposed to have
three MIG fighters in Costa Rica. I said I did not believe it. He said he
didn’t either.
As a forerunner to his discussion of invasion threats from Cuba,
the President referred to the new Cuban Ambassador4 who he said is
in contact with subversive elements. He said this occurred to the extent
that the Venezuelan Ambassador5 who presumably had been closer to
the Cuban here than anyone else had discussed with him some anxiety.
He said the Venezuelan is a career Army officer and therefore deserv-
ing of attention and belief. He referred to an article to be published in
2 November 10. The airgram was prepared on that day.
in Guatemala as follows: “It would appear desirable, therefore, to plant in Ydígoras the
thought that there is little basic difference between the ideals and programs voiced by
him and by the P[artido] R[evolucionario] leadership, and that it would be in the mutual
party and national interest to enter into a tacit working relationship, in anticipation of the
In airgram A–56 of November 5, the Department of State instructed Ambassador
Mallory to assure President Ydígoras of U.S. readiness to cooperate with his Government
in elaborating and implementing programs intended to place Guatemala firmly on the
4 Antonio Rodríguez Echazábal.
5 Brig. Gen. Rafael Virgilio Vivas.

Guatemala  703
El Espectador of this afternoon which apparently will point the finger of
accusation against the Cuban Ambassador.6
President having thus laid groundwork for discussion re
Department desires, I dilated extensively on Arevalo, pointing out his
arrival physically or to political power in Guatemala would be nothing
short of disastrous. From there discussion developed into activities of
MDN, of PR and splinter parties of left with President stating flatly
Arevalo on arrival would not only take over entire far left, but most of
PR and a considerable portion President’s own Party Redencion, who
would go out of fear.
President said he had been endeavouring obtain at least tacit coop-
eration all MDN leaders and is meeting with them again tonight.7 His
purpose is to have some sort of cooperation of anti-Communist politi-
cal groups to which both he and MDN dedicated in contrast PR which
is not anti-Communist. He did not offer estimate his chance of success.
Admitted MDN leadership so continually divided as to be ineffective.
He has however offered them in addition to present Minister of Finance
and Under Secretary Communications one additional Cabinet post. He
told them their hopes upcoming Congressional elections not realistic in
expecting they can capture 14 seats. He willing endeavor assist them
four or five seats providing they will cooperate in government.
Both before and after taking up Department’s instruction, President
brought up and I consciously stimulated considerable discussion of
the moderate left PR. President said he is not only trying, but to cer-
tain extent is working with Galich, to take over leadership PR Party
as Galich is old friend, anti-Communist, able, moderate and not tarred
with brush of violence which is true of Mendez because of brutality
practiced while Chief of Police under Arevalo. When I asked him for
estimate chances of Galich’s ascendency and strength he might exhibit
in event of resurgence of Arevalo, President offered no direct answer,
only indicating he could work with Galich, but Arevalo’s return would
6 The referenced article, which appeared in the November 11 issue of El Espectador,
The Guatemalan charges of Cuban support of efforts to overthrow the Ydígoras
Government were aired in a special meeting of the Council of the Organization of
American States on December 5, 1959. For text of the note to the Chairman of the Council
of the OAS from the Representative of Guatemala, read by the Representative of Guatemala
at the Special Council meeting on December 5, see OEA Ser.G/VC–d–781 (English),
3  December 1959. The Cuban Representative to the OAS denied the charges. For the
statement made by Ambassador Leví Marrero Artiles, Representative of Cuba, in the spe-
7 In airgram G-25, cited above, Mallory reported that Ydígoras stated on November
10 that he had refused to talk with the MDN leaders in the presence of the 1958 MDN
Presidential candiate, Cruz.

automatically draw to him entire gamut from somewhat right of cen-
ter. Ydígoras dilated on possibilities working with Galich saying he
needed cooperation in Congress from new PR deputies elected and not
obstructive tactics as Villagran Kramer and Castillo Arreola. [text not
declassified] At appropriate moments and bearing in mind Department’s
instruction, I adverted to future dangers, the peril which Arevalo would
bring and the necessity for astute appraisal and action. I suggested that
were he successful in establishing some working relationship with
Galich and were Galich successful in establishing some leadership over
PR, it were desirable maintain in working relationships by at least non-
combative situation with a moderate left at moment non-Communist.
Department’s instruction A-56 was slightly modified by Embassy
to fit in with conditions of the moment and in view President’s par-
ticular susceptibilities. In keeping with Department’s very thoughtful
permission and with show of frankness I allowed President to read our
revised next.8 Regarding those parts of Department’s instruction which
perhaps were a little more pointed on the political side, he did not
voice observations. He did, however, read whole document with very
close attention taking what I would judge to be at least 20 minutes so
to do. He asked questions respecting individual words in English. He
stopped from time to time to discuss particular points which showed
he apparently seizing significance. He made particular mention in a
considerable discussion of Department’s observation that splinter par-
ties of the left would quickly unite under Arevalo.
On loans, he declared that in spite of a considerable memory for
detail, he had never been told reason why certain loan applications had
been rejected. I did not fail to point out this was during time of Roberto
Alejos. He said he now realizes it was not American Government which
had been poorly disposed, but rather Guatemala proposals which had
been improperly presented. He also now realized that the package
handed Dr. Milton Eisenhower, which they had believed was properly
done and which Dr. Eisenhower had characterized as the finest presen-
tation he had seen, did not constitute a proper loan application.
The President expressed particular pleasure over Department’s
suggestion that it might prove desirable to make some public utterance
in connection with democracy and constitutional governments and I
said I had used that point in making my address to him the previous
evening at the Presidential palace which he pointed out is to be pub-
lished in full today.9
President voiced concern about himself and like-­minded Latin
American colleagues at what appears to be a spirit of understanding
manifest following visit Premier Khrushchev to U.S. He said Americans
8 Not found in Department of State files.
9 No record of this address of November 9 was found in Department of State files.

Guatemala  705
seemed to be taken in, whereas Latins were practical enough to know
that no matter what arrangement was made, no matter what condi-
tions were met, and no matter how we might comport ourselves, the
Russians would continue working hard and actively to undermine the
situation in Latin America. He related this to the Cuban and other situ-
ations and hoped that the United States would not prove gullible.
President terminated discussion by saying he taking every possi-
ble step prevent Arevalo getting favorable position. He had caused to
be instituted seven processes ranging from the murder of Arana,10 the
violation of two girls, through robbery and other things. I remarked
I understood a court action per se would not prevent Arevalo from
returning, that such needed court judgment against him. President
confirmed this saying he was pushing for action. He made it clear
he wished avoid possibility of Arevalo either being nominated as a
Congressman or getting a seat.11
Mallory
10 For documentation on the assassination of Col. Francisco Arana, Chief of the
Nations; The Western Hemisphere, pp. 655 and 664.
at the Secretary’s staff meeting of December 9, Rubottom said “the election outcome
was more favorable than we anticipated in supporting Ydígoras.” (Memorandum by
GT–25.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Mann) to the President of Guatemala (Ydígoras)1
Washington, January 28, 1960.
Dear Mr. President:
Permit me to express to Your Excellency my sincere thanks for Your
Excellency’s letter of December 15, 1959,2 concerning Mr. Arenas’ pro-
posal for increasing Guatemala’s share in the United States sugar market.
ery of this letter was found in Department of State files. The source text bears Mann’s typed
name.
2 Ydígoras letter confirmed Arenas’ request for an annual Guatemalan sugar quota

I had the pleasure of speaking in very general terms with Mr. Arenas
on this subject some time ago.3 I explained then that the allocation of for-
eign sugar quotas was made by Act of Congress4 which does not expire
until the end of this year. I also explained that in 1960 the Congress would
doubtless consider in what form the Sugar Act should be extended and
that it would not be profitable to speculate in advance on what the deci-
sion of the Congress would be I did observe that on the last two occa-
sions Congress had extended the Sugar Act, small increases were given
to the full duty countries and if, as a result of the various economic fac-
tors involved, it should develop that small increases in quotas for the full
duty countries could be made again, I was confident that Guatemala’s
desire for an increased participation in the United States market would
be given every consideration. Perhaps this latter statement was taken by
Mr. Arenas out of context with the other statements.
No figures were mentioned in these conversations. I am confident
Your Excellency will agree that not only is it uncertain that any quota
changes will be made in the Sugar Act but that, if made, it is unlikely they
will even approach in magnitude the figure which Mr. Arenas has sug-
gested.5 Certainly in the past, changes in United States commercial policy
dictated by changing economic factors have been gradual and mod-
erate and they have taken into account the desire of the United States
Government to promote the economic progress of all of the free world.
The United States shares your concern about the dependence of the
economies of Guatemala and a large number of other countries on cof-
fee. It is for this reason that we have supported the efforts of the coffee
exporting countries to prevent severe and harmful price fluctuation in
the price of coffee and, at the same time, helped to promote a more diver-
sified agricultural and industrial production through such techniques as
technical assistance, the expansion of lending facilities and trade and the
creation of common markets consistent with GATT principles. I venture
to hope that Your Excellency shares my optimism that these cooperative
measures will, with the measures taken by other countries, contribute to
sustained economic progress throughout the hemisphere.
I have very pleasant memories of my recent residence in Guatemala6
and of the Guatemalan people whom I had the pleasure of meeting. We
shall continue to seek better ways to make our own cooperation more
3 For further information, see Document GT–21.
for 1960 including an allocation of 6,000 tons reassigned from Cuba to Guatemala under

Guatemala  707
effective and to wish for the happiness and prosperity of the Guatemalan
people and their Government, including especially Your Excellency.
In conclusion may I express to your Excellency the assurances of
my highest esteem.
Sincerely yours,
Thomas C. Mann
GT–26.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs (Irwin) to the Under
Secretary of State (Dillon)1
Washington, February 20, 1960.
Dear Mr. Dillon:
The Department of State authorized the sale of six B–26 aircraft to
Guatemala in December 1958.2 Although the aircraft (configured as one
VIP type, one photo-­reconnaissance type, and four light bomber type),
have been earmarked for one year, implementation of the 1958 decision
has been in a Department of State deferred status due to the tensions in
the Caribbean and the Mexican–Guatemalan shrimp boat incident. On
authorize the sale of these aircraft to Guatemala.3 Meanwhile, during
the past year, the U.S. Air Force has urged reconsideration of the deci-
sion to defer implementation of this sale. The Guatemalan Air Force has
also continually indicated great interest in obtaining these aircraft.
The Department of Defense is concerned with the apparent determina-
tion of the Guatemalan Government to obtain aircraft suitable to their needs
and believes that unless the Department of State reconsiders its 23 December
1959 disapproval of the sale of these aircraft, there is a distinct possibility that
2 The authorization was contained in a memorandum from the Department of State
memorandum of conversation by Richard B. Owen of the Office Caribbean and Mexican
was discussed at staff meeting this morning. Mr. Rubottom said that approval of sale to
Guatemala should be withheld for the time being in view of our efforts to enlist coop-
eration of Italian Government and other supplier nations in controlling arms traffic to
Caribbean. Meanwhile, aircraft should continue to be earmarked for Guatemala in case

Guatemala may initiate negotiations for the purchase of comparable (or bet-
ter) aircraft from European or other sources. Although the United States
Government has successfully prevented the sale by England and Italy
of jet aircraft to Cuba and the Dominican Republic, it is not unrealis-
tic to consider that efforts by those nations to obtain arms will con-
tinue. Guatemala may also be expected to join in the search for arms
from Continental sources. Furthermore, as the U.S. Military Assistance
Program makes available modern aircraft for our allies, the U.S. cannot
always count on diplomatic representation to prevent the sale of surplus
aircraft by these countries as well as by non-Western oriented sources.
The six aircraft selected for sale to Guatemala have been demilitarized and
could not be armed without extensive modification.
In consideration of the above, it would be appreciated if the Department
of State would reconsider its decision of 23 December 1959 to cancel the sale of
B-26 aircraft to Guatemala.4
Sincerely yours,
John N. Irwin II
from Rubottom to Merchant, April 4, 1960.
GT–27.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary
of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1
Washington, April 4, 1960.
SUBJECT
Caribbean Arms Policy: Sale of Surplus B–26 Bombers to the Government of
Guatemala
Discussion:
Our Caribbean arms policy evolved out of increasing tensions in
the area and the threat of Cuban aggression against other countries in
the Caribbean area. It was shaped in part also by other developments,
among them a break in relations between the Governments of Mexico
and Guatemala as a result of the machine-­gunning by the Guatemalan
1960.” Confidential. Co­drafted by Owen and Correll. The source text is an unsigned car-
bon copy.

Guatemala  709
Air Force on December 31, 1958, of a number of Mexican shrimp-­fishing
boats that had ignored orders to leave Guatemalan waters. As a result
of this particular incident, we were asked by the Mexican Government
to withhold delivery of a number of surplus demilitarized B-26 bomb-
ers that we had agreed on December 5, 1958, to sell to the Government
of Guatemala. Although we had already notified the Government of
Guatemala orally that it could send a team to inspect the planes, we
acceded to the Mexican request, predicating suspension of sale arrange-
ments, in our conversations with the Guatemalans, on the then nota-
ble increase in Caribbean tensions. Although Mexico and Guatemala
patched up their differences in September, 1959, we were forced to con-
tinue to ignore Guatemala pleas to effect sale of the B-26 bombers in the
interest of securing British cooperation in restricting arms shipments
to the Caribbean area. The Guatemalan Government has continued to
press for delivery of the planes in question. These circumstance have
served to irritate our relations with Guatemala and to weaken the influ-
ence of our armed forces with the Guatemalan military.
One of the basic reasons for wanting to sell the B-26 planes to the
Government of Guatemala is to prevent it from shopping elsewhere
for armaments that it needs to replace depleted equipment. The main-
tenance of Guatemalan reliance on American equipment in essential
to our retention of influence over its military. President Ydígoras, in
January, let it be known that, should he have to shop elsewhere for
planes, he would probably have to entrust training of his air force to
other than a United States mission. Such a move would dissipate years-­
long efforts to establish close and friendly ties with the Guatemalan mil-
itary, whose influence in local politics is traditional. The Department of
Defense feels very strongly in this connection, and a communication to
that effect was addressed to the Under Secretary of State by the Second
[text not declassified] The sale would involve six demilitarized stan-
dard B–26’s (three of which would be dismantled for spare parts), one
B–26 equipped for photo reconnaissance, and one B–26 equipped as a
VIP plane.
Recommendations:3
1. That ARA be authorized to release the B–26’s for sale to
Guatemala [text not declassified]4
2 Not filed with the source text, but printed as Document GT–26.
3 The source text contains no indication of the Under Secretary’s action on these
recommendations.
4 The British Embassy in Washington, having been informed of the decision in favor
of the sale, requested the Department of State to limit delivery to two B–26s. (Letter from
G. G. Brown to Edwin S. Vallon, Deputy Director, Office of Caribbean Affairs, April 15;

2. That you sign the attached letter (TAB C) to Mr. Irwin informing
him that we have decided to sell the B–26s to Guatemala.5
5 Not attached to the source text. Merchant’s letter to Irwin, April 6, reads as fol-
lows: “I regret that we have taken so long in replying to your letter of February 20 to
Under Secretary Dillon regarding the sale of B–26 aircraft to Guatemala. We have gone
through a great deal of soul searching on the question and now I am happy to inform you
Department of State authorization of the sale of eight B–26 aircraft to Guatemala was con-
President Ydígoras agreed to the offer on the same day. (Telegram 436 from Guatemala
GT–28.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Guatemala1
482. Cruz Salazar now in Washington trying to prevent substitu-
tion of long term loan to Guatemala for grant aid he hoped to obtain
through Congressional action.2 Guatemalan Chargé yesterday made
similar representations to us in Ydígoras’ name saying President had
heard interest-­bearing fifteen year loan was envisioned instead of
grant aid and that he considered terms onerous.3 Cruz pressed argu-
ment grant aid indispensable for psychological reasons to demonstrate
strong USG approval Ydígoras administration.
We have told Cruz and Guatemalan Chargé that while strongly
desiring to help Guatemala resolve its current financial difficulties we
cannot honestly regard its problems as drastic in same sense as Bolivia
and Haiti, only grant aid recipients, nor more serious than those of sev-
eral other Latin American countries. Accordingly, we could not justify
making Guatemala exception to firm policy of restricting grant aid to
emergency conditions. To do so, we have explained, would involve
Department in serious difficulties with other nations that can argue
forcefully they are entitled to as much consideration as Guatemala. We
Drafted by Gorrell and signed by Rubottom.
2 A memorandum of conversation by Gorrel on Cruz’s meeting with Stewart, May
3 The memorandum of this conversation between Sáenz and Stewart, May 25, is in

Guatemala  711
also pointed out anti-Ydígoras elements would seize on grant aid at
this time as alleged evidence his laudable position on Cuba was sell-­out
to U.S.
Cruz and Chargé were told yesterday final approval of $3.5 million
long-­term loan to Guatemala was imminent. Approval now has been
granted and you may so inform Ydígoras.4 Telegraphic instruction will
follow with terms to be subject to further negotiation.5
Herter
to reply to a letter of March 31 from Gustavo Mirón Porras, President of the Bank of
Guatemala, with an offer of a $3.5 million long-­term loan to Guatemala and by agree-
ing to earmark quetzal proceeds from a CCC Wheat Credit as the Guatemalan con-
GT–29.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central
American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Washington, July 26, 1960.
SUBJECT
Guatemalan Situation
The tense situation that has developed in Guatemala, culminat-
ing in declaration of a “state of siege”,2 requires, we believe, a new
look at our approach to President Ydígoras’ repeated calls for finan-
cial assistance.
1960.” Confidential. Drafted by Gorrell. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 The declaration, approved by the Guatemalan Congress and issued on July 19,
suspended certain civil rights and put defense forces in control for 30 days. It blamed the
agitation on “political elements, principally Communists,” aiming to subvert constitu-
strike and chronic disturbances, climaxed by an aborted garrison takeover in Cobón on
July 16 and a hand grenade exploded in a theater in Guatemala City on July 18, preceded
the issuance of the decree. A description of the incidents leading to declaration of the state

Ydígoras has handled his politics with exceptional astuteness and
it can be argued that his “soft” policy toward the left, for which he has
been censured by some sectors, has done much to reduce class ten-
sions in that country, and has served to sort the sheep from the goats
in the left-­of-­center political area which, under Castillo Armas tended
to be lumped together as “communist”. For this, he has received some
recognition. On the other hand, his “soft” policy toward the country’s
economic and financial problems has caused considerable concern
to the Department and other agencies. In essence, the attitude has
been that Ydígoras has not acted adequately on the excellent advice
he has received for placing Guatemala’s economy and finances on a
sound basis. He has not, for example, pressed with the forcefulness
the adoption of such measures as broader income-­tax coverage and
a reevaluation of properties for tax purposes. On the assumption
that Ydígoras could assure his government adequate revenues by
adopting such measures, and that Guatemala’s budgetary problem
could be resolved with relative ease (as by recourse to private bank
credit), a Departmental-ICA team recommended in June the grant of a
$3.5 million loan to Guatemala from MSP funds, which would enable
Guatemala to make its counterpart contribution to ICA projects and
thus get these under way, and that facilities be given the GOG for uti-
lization of wheat agreement revenues. These, it was recommended,
should suffice to keep the Guatemalan situation under control. The
at the time quite firm, in answering Congressional inquiries, in say-
ing we believed these measures were sufficient to satisfy Guatemala’s
reasonable needs, and opposed grant aid. Meanwhile, we encouraged
the GOG to present promptly to DLF and Eximbank requests for loans
to finance projects intended to stimulate the country’s economy and
develop a feeling of optimism.
These arrangements were received with marked lack of enthusi-
asm by Guatemalan authorities. Ambassador Alejos remarked that
it was cash his government needed, in 1960,3 and not in the year or
years to come. President Ydígoras made the same point very strongly
3 In a memorandum of July 5 to Acting Secretary Dillon, Rubottom stated that
the International Cooperation Administration made available to the Government of
Guatemala $3.5 million in unobligated special assistance funds on a short-­term loan in
February, and $800,000 in June to relieve an acute cash shortage. (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63
D 146, “Alejos, Carlos (Ambassador); Guatemala, 1960”). In addition, the International
Monetary Fund agreed to a Standby Arrangement with Guatemala which made avail-
International Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year

Guatemala  713
in an informal message to Mr. Mallory,4 warning that access to ade-
quate funds might determine the success of his efforts to control leftist
agitation. Ambassador Alejos has been extremely active in presenting,
documenting, and pressing for approval of two road-­building loan
applications now before DLF, but has repeatedly expressed dismay at
the apparent unlikelihood that early action on them could be hoped for,
much less anticipated.
The Country Team in Guatemala, in evaluating the present ten-
sions there, recommended on July 25 that, in order to encourage con-
servative and non-Castro, non-­communist elements toward unity,
approval of the DLF Rio Hondo Loan application submitted to DLF
should be announced immediately as a catalytic act to encourage and
bolster conservative elements.5
In reviewing the Guatemalan situation, we feel that, should current
agitation result in Ydígoras’ overthrow and in a take-­over by ­pro-Castro
elements, the Department will be subjected to intense and plausible
criticism, along the lines that it has been penny wise and pound fool-
ish. It is superfluous under the circumstances to argue in favor of the
positions we have taken thus far. Attacks on this position would prob-
ably center on the theme that we have been warned persistently that,
unless large sums of cash could be furnished Guatemala to enable it to
bring itself up to date in the payment of its obligations—­most notably
of wages to Government employees and school teachers—­extremist
agitators would stimulate resulting unrest to resuscitate nostalgia for
“the good old days” of Arbenz. We have been warned that, as long as
the GOG is held to an austerity program in the interests of financial
stability, and can not undertake public works either to absorb unem-
ployment or to satisfy expanding popular demand for greater living
amenities, the pro-Castro and communist agitators will have an almost
obstacle-­free field for operation. The charge would be leveled at us that
we have underestimated the political dangers of the social-­economic
problems surrounding Guatemala’s cash shortage, and insisted on
adopting an orthodox, business-­like approach to an abnormal situa-
tion, with resulting disastrous consequences.
The political realities are that the extreme left has received not
only moral but financial and, reportedly, tangible encouragement in
the form of weapons, from Cuba; that the adoption by Ydígoras, in
recent months, of a somewhat harder posture toward the left has united
extreme leftist elements, and that the recent Khrushchev statements
4 Not found in Department of State files.

on United States interference in Cuba, while alarming and rallying to
our cause some significant formerly critical left-­of-­center elements, has
also undoubtedly given increased confidence and power of conviction
to agitators. These took advantage of a minor strike of Social Security
workers in January to stir up demonstrations, whereas that effort was
short-­lived, the same agitators have had for more spectacular success
in building up a minor student grievance into a teachers’ strike that
has lasted well more than a month and, in conjunction with terrorist
activities (i.e. bomb throwing), has whipped Guatemala into a state of
extreme tension, alarm and pessimism, Although it seems possible that
the extreme left has now overplayed its hand, and although Ydígoras
appears to have played his cards with his characteristic astuteness,
(using a much lighter touch than most persons to the right of center
would like) reports indicate that the left, now well organized and
directed (with the plans mayor of the Arbenz regime now congregated
in Habana), will continue to exploit even the most insignificant inci-
dents to create an impossible situation. We cannot therefore afford to
go on the assumption that Ydígoras will successfully outmaneuver all
future agitators and plotters. We should, we believe, take positive steps
to help him reduce the susceptibility of the mass of the population to
leftist blandishments.
Accordingly, we urge that DLF and/or Eximbank be asked to
act favorably and expeditiously (in a matter of days, not of weeks or
months) on the two applications for loans now pending before them.
The one given top priority by the GOG is for $9 million (with a foreign
exchange component of $3.6 million) for the completion of a highway
from Rio Hondo through Esquipulas to the Honduran Border. The
chief qualms harbored by our people in Guatemala and by Eximbank
revolve around the possibility that such a loan would increase com-
petition for the IRCA railway and possibly finish it off. Eximbank par-
ticularly is concerned by the fact it refused a loan to IRCA not long
ago, and considers itself exposed to criticism if, on the other hand, it
were to facilitate competition for this American concern. However,
the directness of the competition in arguable. From a purely politi-
cal standpoint it may be regarded as unwise to bolster an American
investment that has long been the source of infinite anti-American
sentiment in Guatemala while disregarding the desirability of open-
ing up a large area to economic exploitation and improvement, and
of fostering the aim of Central American unification pursued by
Ydígoras.
The second loan application now pending before DLF and
Eximbank is for road construction to the El Salvador border from El
Molino through Jalpatagua. This is for $4.5 million, and reportedly is
considered the more viable application in Eximbank.

Guatemala  715
Eximbank, which is now studying both applications, asked
Ambassador Alejos for more complete data on them about two weeks
ago. On the personal orders of President Ydígoras, the Dirección de
Caminos in Guatemala dropped virtually all other work to concentrate
on furnishing the desired information, and Ambassador Alejos submit-
ted it yesterday, July 25. The President obviously wants no responsibil-
ity for delays in action on these requests. The direct implication is that,
if action is not taken promptly, the fault will be ours.
A third application, which our Embassy considers to have great
merit, will reportedly be submitted to DLF next week, and will involve
roadbuilding to the Cobán area, aimed at opening up what is poten-
tially one of Guatemala’s richest provinces, one capable of absorbing
much of the teeming population of the Indian areas.
We recommend that, if at all possible, the two applications now
being processed be handled expeditiously, and an announcement of
their approval be made on the earliest possible date. Time is definitely
of the essence, as events are moving very fast and we must not be
caught in the position of having supplied too little too late.
With the aim of reversing the trend of nostalgia for Arbenz’ day,
we suggest also investigation of the rumored intention of the United
Fruit Company to dispose of its large holdings in the Tiquisate area.
Reports speak of the possibility of selling these, under a United States
Government guaranty for UFCO, to workers’ cooperatives. If it should
be found that there is, in fact, disposition in UFCO to do this, it would
be highly desirable that the Company be urged to announce its plans
quickly, and to develop the impression that it is not only under extrem-
ist regimes that agricultural workers can aspire to acquiring ownership
of these valuable lands.
OAP, in making the recommendations below, feels it necessary
to point out that, while the loan applications described above are
not considered top priority projects by Eximbank or REA, the Rio
Hondo project is given No. 1 priority by President Ydígoras. It would
seem logical to give considerable weight to this fact, in view of the
President’s now acknowledged political acumen. Our relations with
him have not been made easier by our apparent unwillingness to
accept his own programs, which are normally predicated on polit-
ical and sociological as well as economic considerations. It should
be remembered that Ydígoras has received only two $5 ­million bank
loans since he has been in office,6 both on the basis of programs favored
Banco de Guatemala for rubber production and to Export-Import Bank authorization for

by United States experts. The $5 million rubber loan was assigned a
rate of interest that has made its utilization virtually impossible. The
$3.5 million subsequently lent out of MSP funds, you will remem-
ber, was intended to get IGA projects underway and did not increase
Ydígoras’ flexibility of movement.
Recommendations:7
1. That you sign a letter to be addressed to Mr. Waugh of Eximbank,
requesting urgent favorable consideration of both the Rio Hondo and
El Molino loan applications, and that, if necessary, you follow up this
latter with personal representations.
2. That you authorize an approach to the United Fruit Company
concerning its plans for the Tiquisate area in Guatemala.
7 A copy of the letter from Rubottom to Waugh, July 28, suggested in the first rec-
the second recommendation states that it is “O.K. to inquire, subject to proper clearances
re U.S. Government guarantees.” “Thomas G. Corcoran, a lawyer in private practice with
the firm Corcoran, Youngman and Rowe, brought the proposal to the attention of Under
Secretary Dillon on October 10, and Dillon referred the matter to Assistant Secretary
Mann. (Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D 199). No record of further
action was found in Department of State files.
GT–30.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Guatemalan Affairs (Godfrey)1
Washington, August 19, 1960.
SUBJECT
Guatemala: Visit of the Minister of Finance
PARTICIPANTS
Manuel Bendfeldt, Minister of Finance of Guatemala
Franciso Fernandes, Manager of the Bank of Guatemala
Carlos Alejos, Ambassador of Guatemala
REA – Ambassador Turkel
OAP – Mr. Higdon
OAP – Mr. Godfrey
Guatemala 1960.” Official Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

Guatemala  717
The Minister of Finance explained that it had been necessary for
him to call today instead of on August 22, as had been scheduled, due
to the necessity of his immediate return to Guatemala. He stated that he
and Mr. Fernandes had just completed negotiation of a $10 million loan
from the Bank of America in association with the Chase Manhattan
Bank and other unspecified banks. Terms for repayment were five
years at 5 percent annual interest. The loan agreement included a pro-
vision for the deposit of certain Bank of Guatemala dollar reserves in
the loaning banks on a 6-­months call basis. The Minister explained that
funds from this loan would be used to liquidate outstanding fiscal obli-
gations, i.e. deuda flotante.
The Minister stated that the Guatemala Government had recently
He promised to provide copies of this plan through the United States
Embassy in Guatemala. Ambassador Turkel observed that if external
financing would be sought for any part of this plan, then the loan proj-
ects should be divided into three different categories: (1) self-­liquidating
projects; (2) long term, non-­self-­liquidating (“social”) type loan proj-
ects; and (3) mixed type, which would only be partially self-­liquidating.
Ambassador Turkel said that we placed particular emphasis on private
initiative and participation of private investment capital in plans for
economic development. The Minister replied that his government
agreed with this emphasis and for this reason President Ydígoras has
not approved the Petem project since it provided for too much govern-
ment participation and control.
In reply to an inquiry by Ambassador Turkel, the Minister stated
that service on the public debt now averages about 10 percent of the
total annual budget. Service on the foreign debt now amounts to only a
little more than $1 million annually with the major service costs going
towards the internal debt. He again emphasized that the loan just con-
cluded with the Bank of America would be used toward liquidating
the floating debt of approximately Q$12 million, which included over-
due salaries and other various unpaid accounts.
Ambassador Turkel inquired if the development plan included
plans for housing, and observed that while such projects were com-
mendable, all our available loan resources could easily be employed
in just housing projects. Of course, this was not possible but we did
look with favor on self-­help housing projects. Ambassador Turkel
stated that we also look favorably on projects providing agricultural
credit to small farmers. He cited the examples of Costa Rica and
Colombia in promoting successful agricultural credit programs. The
2 Not found in Department of State files.

Minister stated that some housing projects were a social and political
necessity even though economically they did not deserve the same
priority as projects designed to increase the general economic income.
With regard to agricultural credit, he said the situation in Guatemala
could not be compared to that of Costa Rica or Colombia, since such
programs of supervised credit would likely prove too expensive to
operate in Guatemala. He quoted as an example the loan program
percent and had to be loaned at a maximum of 8 percent. The banks
had shown little interest in promoting rubber development loans,
since after deducting costs, the banks received only a small return
of approximately ½ percent. Ambassador Turkel observed, with ref-
erence to the rubber development loan, some consideration might
be given by Guatemala to renegotiating this loan on more favorable
terms.
Ambassador Alejos pointed out that President Ydígoras faced spe-
cial problems, both financial and fiscal, at this time and he hoped for
assistance from the United States. The Ambassador stated that a pri-
mary objective was a loan for the Rio Hondo highway project but it
appeared that there were still certain problems to be resolved before
the loan project could receive further consideration. He pointed out
that the Rio Hondo project was of much more significance than the Rio
Molino highway project since, in comparison, the Rio Hondo project
would give local employment on a much larger scale.
Ambassador Turkel assured the Guatemalan visitors that we were
ready to give all possible help to the government of President Ydígoras.
He emphasized that the Guatemalans should present well-developed
projects and that the presentation should show the relation of the spe-
cific project to the overall balance of payments situation, both present
and future. He also stated we are interested in the Central American
plans for economic integration and are prepared to give sympathetic
consideration to projects related to this plan. He said he wished to
make a special point, however, that we cannot help with budget deficit
financing.
The Minister thanked Ambassador Turkel for his remarks and
stated that he clearly understood our inability to finance budget deficits.
With regard to the current fiscal difficulties in Guatemala, the Minister
stated he was particularly interested in revising the revenue code and
that he hoped we would be able to provide expert technical advice for
such revision. While he was not interested in technical assistance with
regards to fiscal administration, he indicated that he was interested in
advice on administration and organization of the Ministry of Finance
and Public Credit.

Guatemala  719
GT–31.
Letter from President Eisenhower to President Ydígoras1
Washington, September 12, 1960.
Great and Good Friend:
I wish again to express my appreciation for your friendly letter
of August twenty-­third delivered personally into my hands by your
Ambassador, Carlos Alejos.2 I am indeed pleased to renew the per-
sonal exchange of views I first enjoyed with you during your visit to
Washington in February, 1958. Your frank and comprehensive com-
ments on the present situation in Guatemala have been studied with
interest and sympathy by officials of this government.
Your letter further confirms my conviction that the countries in this
Hemisphere face, individually and collectively, a very definite threat to
our democratic way of life and to our American system that requires
our constant vigilance and resolute action. From the very inception of
our independence we in the Americas have recognized that we share
a common destiny and that a threat from without to any one of us is a
threat to all of us. This firm belief and our determination to uphold it
was overwhelmingly confirmed at San Jose just a few days ago. Your
timely efforts in alerting others to the most recent threat to the American
system merit special commendation.3
I have noted with particular satisfaction your account of your
efforts to provide the benefits of economic and social justice to the
Guatemalan people without sacrificing democratic freedoms and prac-
tices. This is particularly important since it describes exactly that which
distinguishes our system from the doctrine some now are seeking to
impose in this Hemisphere. This insidious doctrine proposes that our
peoples must relinquish their personal freedom and their individual-
ity in order to achieve the material progress we seek. In response to
this challenge, our representatives at the meeting of the Committee of
Twenty-One in Bogotá have proposed that the forces of domestic action
and of international cooperation working hand in hand can achieve the
economic and social advancement of our people without sacrificing the
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Delivered
September 21, 1960.
2 Not printed; Ydígoras asked for a grant of $20 million in special assistance and left
the details to be worked out by his Ambassador in Washington with a special mission
from Guatemala, if necessary. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.)
3 In a conversation with Secretary Herter at San José on August 22 regarding the
Seventh Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Guatemalan Foreign
Minister Unda Murillo outlined Guatemalan difficulties with Cuba which Guatemala
had brought to the attention of the Inter-American Peace Committee. (Secretary’s
Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D 199).

fundamental human rights and freedoms which we have achieved and
preserved at great costs.4 As an immediate demonstration and as tangi-
ble evidence of our sincere devotion to this objective I recommended,
and the Congress of the United States approved, the authorization of
$500 million for this purpose.5
It would indeed be a tragedy for us all and a great triumph for
Communism if your country having once freed itself of the Communist
yoke should again find that yoke reimposed. You may be sure that the
needs of Guatemala, both for the immediate and for the long term, will
be given prompt and sympathetic attention by my Government, which
has responded willingly in the past to Guatemalan needs. As you know,
just a few days ago approval was given of a total of $9.6 million in
loans and credits by the Export Import Bank and by the Development
Loan Fund.6 Active consideration is being given to other loan requests
already filed with our lending institutions.
Regarding your current situation, I suggest that through your
Ambassador here in Washington you provide the specific details of the
needs for special assistance referred to in your letter to me. Ambassador
Alejos has shown himself to be a most energetic and conscientious rep-
resentative of your government and he is already well acquainted with
those officials charged with the responsibility of handling such requests
and the procedures involved.
Again, I would like to assure you of my sympathy and of my deep
concern over the enormous difficulties you are facing so resolutely. I
extend to you my cordial best wishes for your personal health and hap-
piness, together with my wish for the continued prosperity and peace
with justice of the Guatemalan people.
With assurances of my highest esteem.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
4 For documentation on the Committee of 21 meeting at Bogotá, Colombia,
6 In a memorandum of October 28 to Under Secretary Dillon, Milton Barall,
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, stated the follow-
ing: “The Eximbank, in August 1960, authorized for the El Molino-Rio Paz Highway
estimated local currency costs. The Eximbank portion of the funds was provided from
an allocation of a $7.5  million line of credit for transportation and communications
project in the Government of Guatemala’s four-­year investment program.” (ARA/OAP

Guatemala  721
GT–32.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mann)1
Washington, November 3, 1960.
SUBJECT
Visit of the Guatemalan Ambassador with the President
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Excellence Carlos Alejos, Ambassador of Guatemala
Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs
Ambassador Alejos opened the conversation by extending greet-
ings from President Ydígoras to the President. The conversation
turned to the question of Salvador and Ambassador Alejos stated that
Guatemala had already recognized the new regime. There was some
discussion about development in Salvador.
Ambassador Alejos then referred to the need of Guatemala for bud-
getary support and for loans for roads there, relating this to the problem
of unemployment in Guatemala. The President stated that the difficulty
with budgetary support was that it might create a continuing require-
ment and that he preferred to help with development loans. There was
some discussion concerning the efforts which the Guatemalan gov-
ernment has made to balance its budget and the Ambassador stated
this was a one-­time problem. The President then inquired whether this
matter was being given prompt attention and on Mr. Mann’s reply in
the affirmative the President said that he was sure a prompt decision
would be forthcoming.2
the International Cooperation Administration had approved $10 million for budget sup-
GT–33.
Editorial Note
A group of dissident Guatemalan military officers forcefully seized
arms and vehicles at a military fort on the outskirts of Guatemala City
on Sunday morning, November 13, 1960. The American Embassy

reported that the rebels evidently aborted or were thwarted from plans
to take over the city’s two regiments. They seized the base at Zacapa,
70 miles northeast of Guatemala City, the port of Puerto Barrios, and
the radio station at the nearby port of Matías de Gálvez on the Gulf
of Honduras. The uprising and subsequent events were described in
1860). Additional documentation concerning revolutionary activ-
ities in Central America is presented in the compilation on United
States policy regarding certain political developments in the Central
American area.
GT–34.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Muccio) to
the Department of State1
224. For Mann from Barall.2 In meeting with Dillon on grant aid to
Guatemala, I recall he used words: “You may even have to announce
it while you are there.”3 This statement prophetic. Immediate action
called for to shore up friendly Chief of State in confused but danger-
ous situation. If Ydígoras now overthrown, even by moderates or mil-
itary elements, GOG would still be weakened and susceptible Castro/
Communist overthrow near future. Principal weakness of Ydígoras
and therefore principal basis for attack, whether from left, moderate,
or right, arises from his economic and fiscal policies. It is clear that
GOG submission to IMF was merely optimistic forecast which cannot
materialize. Budget cuts first quarter have been so deep as to jeopardize
current GOG efforts retain power, affecting mobility troops and police,
availability pol, spare parts, etc. I believe immediate action indicated
with next 48 hours decisive. Accordingly I propose inform president at
meeting scheduled nine a.m. fourteenth that ten million dollars budget
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, accompanied by an ICA officer,
would visit Guatemala to discuss the Guatemalan budget with Ydígoras, Bendfeldt,
Director for Latin America, International Cooperation Administration, accompanied
Milton Barall to Guatemala City.
3 The referenced meeting was not further identified. Regarding Barall’s meeting

Guatemala  723
support forthcoming and that Rio Hondo loan receiving positive action
DLF. Johnston concurs.
Muccio
GT–35.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Muccio) to
the Department of State1
reports as to nature movement.
Foreign Minister visited me in excited state at 8 p.m. at behest
President saying hoped U.S. would prevent sea or airborne invasion
from Cuba and assist in case invasion from neighboring country.
Insisted uprising was Castro-­inspired and that government has long
been predicting would happen. Said he had just sent strong telegrams
incriminating Cuba to OAS and UN.3 Also said PR and Mario Mendez
Montenegro who left for U.S. two days ago heavily involved. Said
Mendez planned return to assume leadership movement if successful.
Actual situation little changed. GAF has been strafing Barrios
and Zacapa all day and late this afternoon airlifted 100 or so troops
to Chiquimula to move against Zacapa tonight or tomorrow morning.
Elements of Mariscal Zavala is regiment reportedly also on way to port
area. Government pronouncements have variously blamed uprising on
Communists (PGT) and Mendez Montenegro.
Muccio
Puerto Barrios military base including airport were in rebel hands and that Matías de
telephoned OAS Secretary General Mora, November 13, regarding the rebellion, alleg-
ing the Castro Government aided it and urging OAS action to avoid such disturbances
to democratic governments. The Inter-American Peace Committee, which met in emer-
gency session to consider the Guatemalan message, said it was willing to act if called
States copies of a note of November 14 to the U.S. Secretary General from the Mission of
Guatemala to the United Nations regarding the armed uprising. The Guatemalan note did
not request a meeting or any action, except circulation of the note. A copy was enclosed
with despatch 541 from the United States Mission at the United Nations, November 21,

GT–36.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Prepared in
the Office of the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 14, 1960.
The Secretary telephoned the President in Augusta to say that he
has been in a huddle with Allen Dulles and our Latin American experts
on Guatemala.2 The Secretary said the situation looks very serious; that
our information is still a little scattered but it looks as though the rebels
had control of Puerto Barrios on the coast and it looks as though the
Cubans have a hand in this. The Secretary said if the Cubans are plan-
ning actual assistance to the rebels on the coast by either ship or air, we
having a feeling perhaps we could get from Guatemala, Costa Rica and
Nicaragua a request that we give them assistance against such a move
by the Cubans. The Secretary said he had talked to Secretary Gates,3 and
that Admiral Dennison has been briefed, and Defense has been alerted
to the possibility of putting ships off Guatemala to interdict this.
The President said he thinks this is what we have to do. The
President said his paper morning did not give a correct report on the
situation in Guatemala.4 The Secretary said we are having troubles com-
municating; that [text not declassified] we are sending messages down
right away. The President asked as a matter of fact whether we would
need a request from all three countries, and the Secretary said we would
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers. “Phone Calls & Miscellaneous Memos,
November 1960–January 1960.”
2 Regarding Secretary Herter’s meeting with Allen Dulles, see footnote 3, below.
November 14, reads as follows: “Telephoned Secretary Gates to say he was now meeting
with Allen Dulles and others on the situation in Guatemala and understands Admiral
Dennison has been briefed on the situation there. Secretary said we are considering get-
ting Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Guatemala to ask for help to interdict any help from
Cuba and this would obviously involve naval forces. Secretary asked how far Gates can
go in the services on what might be necessary and also asked what they had in that area.
Gates said he would alert the services and said he assumed we had forces in that area
in view of the situation in Cuba.” (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, “phone Calls and
Miscellaneous Memos, November 1960–January 1961”)
4 The intelligence item concerning Guatemala reported to President Eisenhower
on November 14 read as follows: “President Ydígoras remains in control in the capi-
tal following coordinated insurgent attacks on military installations in Guatemala City
and two key provincial capitals on 13 November. The attackers, however, apparently
withdrew from their Guatemala City objective with a quantity of military equipment
and were joined by an unknown number of defecting soldiers. Ydígoras, faced with the
most serious threat of his nearly three years in office, immediately declared a state of
siege throughout the country. Preliminary reports indicate that the insurgents are led by
a coalition of expediency composed of a rightist faction and a Communist front polit-
ical party which has ties with the Castro regime in Cuba.” (Memorandum by Lt. Col.
John S. D. Eisenhower, Assistant Staff Secretary, White House Office, November 14, 1960;
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, “DDE Diaries”)

Guatemala  725
not need it but it would be much stronger. The President agreed and
said this would particularly be so if each country says there is external
aggression. The President asked what we would do about the OAS, and
the Secretary said the requests would also have to go to the OAS but the
requests can be made both individually and collectively.
The President said he approved in every respect. The President
asked that the Secretary make a little note of the matter and send a
report down to the President.5
5 Reference presumably is to the memorandum from Herter to Eisenhower
November 16, see Document GT–42.
GT–37.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Guatemala1
328. Joint State-CIA Message.
1. Confirming telephone conversation between Secretary and
Ambassador this morning2 [text not declassified]
2. This message also confirms Secretary’s statement to Ambassador
that U.S. prepared to consider promptly and favorably a written offi-
cial Guatemalan Government request of U.S. to assist Guatemala in air
and sea within limits of Guatemalan national jurisdiction to seek out
and prevent any attempt at reinforcing or supplying rebel forces from
outside Guatemala. We have in mind particularly Cuban and com-
munist agents. Our opinion is that Guatemala has sovereign right to
request such assistance without invoking Rio Treaty.3 U.S. suggesting to
Niact. Drafted by Mann and signed by Hugh S. Cumming, Jr., Director of Intelligence and
Research, Department of State.
see Ydígoras in five minutes, to try to get from Ydígoras a request under the Rio Treaty
for U.S. assistance to prevent any external aggression. Muccio was to make it clear that
if Ydígoras made the request, “it would not be just for surveillance but interdiction.”
[text not declassified] (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, “Phone Calls and Miscellaneous
Memos, November 1960–January 1961”)
3 Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for signature at Rio de

Governments of Costa Rica and Nicaragua that they may wish to make
similar request of U.S. for assistance within their national territories.4
3. In any such request for assistance should probably be followed
promptly by formal request of Guatemalan Government for OAS action
under Rio Treaty. We are giving this aspect of problem our urgent atten-
tion and you are requested obtain preliminary views Government of
Guatemala on this subject. Whether Articles III or VI should be used
would depend on available evidence.5
Please telegraph promptly any information concerning Cuban
involvement which may come to Embassy’s attention.
4. Ability of Ydígoras’ regime to survive rebellion would seem
to hinge largely on support of armed forces. Please cable urgently
Embassy’s estimate of attitude armed forces and recommendations
concerning action which may be taken in Washington or by Embassy to
strengthen will of officer corps to defend regime.
5. Embassy’s estimates concerning probable strength of rebel forces
their supplies equipment available and sources of same also urgently
required.6
Herter
4 Instructions for the American Embassies to offer U.S. assistance were sent by
telegram 134 to Managua, repeated to San José and, for information, to Guatemala City,
an armed attack;” extra continental or intercontinental conflict; or “any other fact or situ-
ation that might endanger the peace of America.”
Force were behind the Government; [text not declassified] message had no suggestion to
strengthen the will of the officer corps; Barall’s message (offer of $10 million in special
assistance) was most helpful; news of U.S. surveillance of the coast was being given wid-
est word of mouth distribution within military circles. Regarding paragraph 5, [text not
declassified] reported on the strength of Guatemalan forces and their supplies before the
rebellion because the number of troops siding with the rebels and the amount of supplies
GT–38.
Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special
Assistant (Krebs) to the Secretary of State1
November 14, 1960.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers. 1 page not declassified.

Guatemala  727
GT–39.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Prepared in
the Office of the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 14, 1960.
The Secretary telephoned Mr. Gates who was then meeting with
the JCS. Mr. Gates said they are ready to reload some Marines on a
carrier and to sail the carrier the long way around Cuba to put it in the
vicinity of Guatemala. Gates said the Marine amphibius group and the
carrier can be in the area by the 17th or 18th and Gates said they were
about to send a despatch on this giving the specific orders. Gates said
this has all been done, but it can of course be cancelled. The Secretary
said the situation has changed somewhat since the Secretary talked to
Gates this morning. The Secretary said he had spoken to the President
and got his approval to necessary actions so long as they do not get
out of the OAS channels. [text not declassified] The Secretary said he had
talked with Ambassador Muccio and then read Gates a report of Mr.
Mann’s subsequent talk with Muccio.2 The Secretary said we had also
sent telegrams to Nicaragua and Costa Rica so we might get requests
for help from them as well as Guatemalan.3 The Secretary said on the
carrier business, he felt there was no harm so long as it stays out of
territorial waters. Mr. Gates said they decided to reload the Marines
and tell them to sail in that direction. Gates said they will reload the
carrier with propeller A-­d’s (?) with a half squadron of fighters and
sail to Guantanamo through the West end of Cuba so it will be in the
area by the 17th or 18th. The Secretary said we would know more in
the morning, but this is a good precaution anyway. Mr. Gates said he
would send over a copy of the actual despatch setting forth the specific
orders on this operation.4
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, “Phone Calls & Miscellaneous Memos,
2 For a report of Assistant Secretary Mann’s talk with Ambassador Muccio, see
Document GT–37.
3 Guatemala and Nicaragua made such requests. For documentation, see footnote 3
to the memorandum of November 16 from Secretary Herter to the President, p. and the
compilation on Nicaragua, Document GT–42.
4 Reference possibly is to the telegram from the Commander in Chief, United States
Atlantic Fleet, Adm. Jerauld Wright, to the Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Arleigh A.
“Central America”)

GT–40.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Muccio) to
the Department of State1
revolt and failure so far successful government action quell it causes
Embassy concern. Government vociferously castigating Fidel Castro as
responsible this uprising and claiming invasion to back it up imminent.
Yet (1) it has failed land troops at Barrios to retake base and Embassy is
unaware any engagement, successful or otherwise, by Mariscal Zavala
troops at Zacana, and (2) all indications are that dissident army elements
jumped ahead on their own and extremist political elements are only now
attempting to join forces. Capital remarkably tranquil and if movement
were Communist-Castro inspired and instigated, it is logical to assume
there would be coordinated agitation by leftist labor, student, etc., groups.
Meanwhile, Foreign Minister today instructed GOG representatives
Washington invoke protection Rio treaty, charging revolt Castro-­inspired
and to be supported by troop and arms movements from Cuba.
This kind of situation of course ideal for exploitation by extrem-
ists both right and left. Embassy fears that with substantial propor-
tion troops out of city and general uncertainty and lack of confidence
resulting from prolongation revolt. Communist and leftist opposition
elements will soon try agitation of various kinds including strikes and
demonstrations. In such a situation rightist elements might be impelled
themselves strike first prevent leftist takeover.
Favorable financial news conveyed Ydígoras and Cabinet in
Barall’s and my conversation with him this morning no doubt substan-
tially encouraged GOG.3 Ydígoras exudes confidence but recognizes he
is atop murmuring volcano. Devoutly to be hoped he may be able trans-
form his confidence to air force and army elements who will proceed
with vigor to end revolt. There are, however, indications of dissension
within air force and that military are loath to fight brother military. Also
air force and military, because of GOG’s cries of wolf over past months,
now refuse to believe, in spite GOG protestations and exhortations, that
rebels are really Castro agents.
If recent reports are borne out rebels in Barrios and Zacapa hand-
ing out arms wholesale to civilians and there should develop other
2 See Document GT–35.
3 Barall informed Ydígoras that $10 million in budget support was forthcoming and
that the Rio Hondo loan application was receiving positive action. Barall and Johnston
visited Guatemala, November 13–17, in connection with the Guatemalan request for

Guatemala  729
evidences leftist influence or exploitation movement, army and air
force may close ranks. Next 24 hours should clarify situation and trend.
Muccio
GT–41.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Muccio) to
the Department of State1
228. Re Higdon telephone conversation last night, Foreign Minister
said last evening he instructing Alejos officially request U.S. armed
forces assistance to prevent within Guatemala air or sea-­borne efforts
introduce troops or supplies to rebels. Said Alejos would communicate
with Department as to exact wording GOG request.2 Foreign Minister
ecstatic about U.S. willingness make this commitment, stating it was
what GOG had long wanted.
Muccio
GT–42.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, November 16, 1960.
SUBJECT
Requests for Assistance From Guatemala, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua.
In connection with my separate memorandum confirming our tele-
phone conversation of November 14 on this subject,2 the Guatemalan
Embassy has today presented us with a request for assistance of the
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers. Secret. Drafted by Coerr, Krebs, and
Herter. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy. This memorandum incorporates rec-
ommendations in a memorandum of the same date from Mann to Herter. (ARA/OAP
Files, Lot 63 D 127, “Guatemala”).
2 For the memorandum of this telephone conversation, November 14, see Document
GT–39.

type as discussed.3 The Nicaraguan Government has likewise deliv-
ered a note today to our Embassy in Managua along similar lines. The
Costa Rican Government has informed our Embassy that it believes
surveilliance will not be necessary for the time being.
We do not yet have any proof that the Guatemalan rebels are sup-
ported by Castro or communist forces.
The purpose of our assistance would be to prevent the rebels from
receiving any reimbursements or supplies that Castro or the com-
muists might try to send them. Under present conditions, however,
the overt use of our military forces within Guatemalan jurisdiction
would be inadvisable because they might appear to be taking sides in
what may turn out to be an internal Guatemalan conflict.
I believe our forces should [illegible in the original] discreet sur-
veillance in order to be able to lead [illegible in the original] assistance
should its need become evident, but that they should not under present
conditions attract attention in Guatemala.
I therefore recommend that you authorize the Secretary of Defense
(a) to instruct our Naval units to remain on the high seas near Guatemala
out of sight of lead and our aircraft to patrol at a height at which they will
not attract attention and (b) to report promptly any evidences of a Castro
or communist attempt to send the rebels supplies or reimbursements and
to refrain from combat operations unless specifically authorized.
I would recommend further that you authorize a statement for the
press, either from the White House or from the State Department, along
the following lines, in the event a question is asked:
“In response to requests by the Governments of Guatemala and
Nicaragua, surface and air units of the United States Navy are in a posi-
tion in which they could assist these Governments, should it become
necessary, to seek out and prevent intervention on the part of commu-
nist-directed elements in the internal affairs of Guatemala and Nica-
ragua through the landing of armed forces or supplies from abroad.”4
3 The request was contained in a note dated November 15 from Ambassador Alejos
to Secretary Herter, which read in part as follows: “I have the honor to request the assis-
tance of Your Excellency’s Government in a surveillance of the Caribbean approaches
to Guatemala in detecting and preventing the intervention on the part of communist
directed elements in the internal affairs of Guatemala through the landing of men and
A notation on this note reads as follows: “In lieu of a reply to this note, the President
sent a special message to President Ydígoras on November 30, 1960.

Guatemala  731
I have this morning discussed the foregoing with Secretary Gates
and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and they are agreeable to
the suggested procedure. General Lemnitzer has indicated that ships
now available in the Florida area could arrive off the Guatemalan coast
within 48 hours.
The ships available include an aircraft carrier and a small amphib-
ious force with a contingent of Marines. It is my own feeling that given
the possibility of leaks, it would be just as well not to have Marines
aboard any of the surveilliance ships. General Lemnitzer points out the
Marines would be merely on what is a routine and normal training
[illegible in the original] in that area and that, should it be necessary to
use the Marines, several days would be saved by having them aboard.
I nevertheless feel it would be better to risk a delay than to risk the seri-
ous reaction which would inevitably follow should the rumor spread
that Marines are en route to Gautemala.5
Christian A. Herter
5 In a memorandum of conversation between the President, Secretary Herter,
General Lemnitzer, and Press Secretary Hagerty at Augusta, Georgia, August 17, Brig.
Gen. Goodpaster states that “one point of detail was as to whether a Marine battalion
should be abroad the ships used in the surveillance operations. The President thought
they should not be kept abroad, but should be left at the nearest suitable station. General
Lemnitzer agreed that this could be done acceptably.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman
File, DDE Diaries)
GT–43.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Guatemala1
350. Ten million dollars approved by Under Secretary Dillon for
imports from the U.S. with counterpart being granted to the GOG as
accrued. Detailed information to follow. You may wish convey info
President Ydígoras.2 Public announcement left to your and President’s
Drafted by Carwell and signed by Higdon.

discretion. If public announcement contemplated, please give depart-
ment 24 hours advance notice to permit consideration simultaneous
release Washington.3
Herter
3 Ydígoras and Muccio agreed on an announcement to be issued to the press on
the El Molino highway, and approved of a $10 million grant to assist the Guatemalan
No record of a simultaneous release in Washington was found.
GT–44.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Guatemala1
Washington, November 23, 1960.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 2 pages not declassified.
GT–45.
Telegram From the Embassy in Guatemala to the
Department of State1
Guatemala City, November 25, 1960.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 2 pages not declassified.

Guatemala  733
GT–46.
Letter from President Eisenhower to President Ydígoras1
Washington, November 28, 1960.
Dear Mr. President:
I should like to thank you for your very kind message of November
nineteenth.2 The steps taken by the United States Government have
enabled us to be in a position to respond to the request received from
Your Excellency’s Government on November sixteenth for assistance
in preventing Communist-­directed efforts to intervene in the internal
affairs of your country through the landing of armed forces or supplies
from abroad.3 I am gratified to learn that constitutional order is being
maintained in Guatemala.
The American people join me in expressing warm good wishes to
the Guatemalan people and to Your Excellency personally.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. The referenced
letter was transmitted by telegram 374 to Guatemala, November 30, with a request for
to Ydígoras who agreed to release, and it was issued the following day as a White House
press release. The press release is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
2 For text, see ibid., p. 872n.
randum from Herter to Eisenhower, November 16, Document GT–42.
GT–47.
Editorial Note
A White House press release of December 7, 1960, noted that the
emergency in Guatemala and Nicaragua had passed, and that United
States surface and air units in a position to prevent intervention in
those countries by landing of forces or supplies from abroad had been
ordered to return to normal operations. For text, see Public Papers of
the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower. 1960–61, page
872 note. For a memoir of these events, see Dwight D. Eisenhower. The
page 613.

Haiti: U.S. Relations with Haiti1
the Second Secretary of the Embassy in Port-au-Prince, Virgil P. Randolph, III, was trans-
HA–1.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle
American Affairs (Wieland) to the Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, January 9, 1958.
SUBJECT
Authorization to Ambassador Drew to Discuss with Haitian Officials Factors
Involved in Restoration of Normal Relations.
With respect to our proposal relating to steps Ambassador Drew
will take on his return to Port-­au-Prince to attempt to resolve the Talamas
case,2 the Ambassador hopes to be in a position to explain to President
Edward Little, Deputy Director of the Office of Caribbean and Mexican Affairs; and cleared
with Albert Post of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. Paragraphs 1,
of the Cuba-Haiti-Mexico Branch of the International Cooperation Administration. A
marginal notation by Rubottom indicates the Assistant Secretary’s approval of the list of
suggested elements in the memorandum. A separate notation on the source text indicates
that a copy of the memorandum was given to Ambassador Gerald Drew on January 10.
tation regarding the case of Shibley Jean Talamas, an American citizen who was beaten
to death while in the custody of Haitian police on September 29, 1957. Talamas, who had
been accused of political activity against the Haitian government, had surrendered himself
voluntarily to Haitian authorities after they had assured Embassy officials that Talamas
would not be harmed.
Following Drew’s return to Port-­au-Prince on January 14, 1958, extensive negotia-
tion between the two governments produced a settlement along the following lines. The
Haitian government publicly expressed its regret over the circumstances surrounding
Talamas’ death, reaffirmed guarantees for the security and well-­being of American citi-
zens in Haiti, and agreed to pay an indemnity to the Talamas family. The United States
had sought to obtain the dismissal of the officers responsible for Talamas’ death, but the
Haitian government would agree only to have them court martialed and disciplined.
The agreement was embodied in an exchanged of notes between the governments of
the United States and Haiti at Port-­au-Prince on February 5, 1958. The Embassy at Port-­
au-Prince transmitted the texts of the notes, which were made public at the time, to the

Haiti  735
Duvalier some of the factors which would be involved in reestablish-
ment of normal, friendly relations between our countries if the Haitians
give us satisfaction over this incident. These “factors” are in no sense a
quid pro quo, and the Ambassador has no intention of describing them
as such. Rather, the explanation of them would be presented as some of
the elements of our relations which existed before Talamas’ death and
which would exist now if it were not for that unfortunate occurrence.
We believe the elements of such restoration are as listed below and,
if you agree, the Ambassador will describe these factors to the President
if he considers it appropriate in his discussions in Part-au-Prince:
in accordance with previous arrangements.
2. Recreational visits of U.S. fleet units would be resumed as soon
as they could be scheduled.
3. The Ambassador would immediately recommend that high-­
ranking Army and/or Marine Corps officers visit Haiti to discuss train-
ing of the Haitian Army and the possible augmentation of U.S. military
missions in Haiti.
4. It would be explained that the U.S. Development Loan Fund
is receiving applications from interested governments for economic
development project meeting the criteria of the Fund.
5. Finance Minister Thebaud would be invited to visit Washington
to review the Haitian economic situation and to review cooperative
steps which might be taken in this field. This visit would also per-
mit the Finance Minister to discuss problems with the ExImbank, the
Development Loan Fund, the IBRD, and the IMF. The visit of Minister
Thebaud would also permit discussion of the following matters of
mutual concern:
(a) Plans for allocation of $2 million grant aid already earmarked
for Haiti from FY 1958 Mutual Security program funds.
(b) Cooperative steps to stimulate U.S. tourist travel to Haiti.
(c) Cooperative steps to stimulate U.S. private investment in Haiti.
(d) Review of U.S. technical assistance programs in Haiti to explore
areas where additional projects might be desirable.
(Availability of the remaining $3 million of the Artibonite loan has
not been included since it has been made clear to the Haitians that it
is only technical difficulties which have held up the release of these
funds.)

HA–2.
Editorial Note
During a meeting at the Department of State on March 21, Victor
Nevers Constant, a member of the Haitian Senate, informed Department
officials that the Government of Haiti would be disposed to grant to the
United States rights to establish a missile base on “La Tortue” island
off the north coast of Haiti. Constant presented credentials signed
by President Duvalier authorizing him to negotiate and sign docu-
ments concerning this proposal. Constant emphasized the friendship
that President Duvalier felt for the United States and noted that from
the standpoint of Haitian domestic opinion, it would be preferable
for the United States to appear to be the first to make the proposal,
with the understanding that the Haitian Government would accept
it. Department officials assured Senator Constant that they would
transmit the proposal to the Department of Defense for its comment.
In a telegram to President Eisenhower of May 9, President Duvalier
reaffirmed the offer to provide the United States with facilities and
an appropriate site for a missile base. (Presidential Correspondence,
ter to President Duvalier that his proposal was appreciated and would
repeated his offer in another telegram to President Eisenhower.
(Presidential Correspondence, Lot 66 D 174) At the instruction of the
Department of State, on July 7 the Embassy in Port-­au-Prince delivered
an acknowledgment to President Duvalier of receipt of the telegram sent
On October 23, the Officer in Charge of Haitian Affairs, Norman
Warner, delivered to the Haitian Embassy in Washington a note from the
Department of State expressing appreciation for the Haitian offer and
indicating that the Department of Defense had completed its study and
found no need at the current time for an additional facility of the type
described by Haiti. The note added that the United States would keep
the offer under review and if the situation changed in the future, Haiti
would be consulted promptly. The Department of State copy of the note
indicates clearances from Secretary of State Dulles, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs Robert Murphy, the Bureau of Inter-American

Haiti  737
HA–3.
Editorial Note
Mission, headed by Minister of Finance Fritz Thebaud, met in Washington
with representatives of the Department of State, the Department of the
Treasury, the International Cooperation Administration, the Export-
Import Bank, and the Development Loan Fund to discuss Haiti’s
outstanding economic and financial problems. As a result of these dis-
cussions, the following agreements were reached:
1) Haiti agreed to regularize its interest and amortization pay-
ments on a $27 million credit from the Export-Import Bank, which had
been in default, and to reorganize the administration of the Organisme
du development de la Vallee de l’Artibonite, or Artibonite Valley Authority,
to the satisfaction of the Export-Import Bank. The Bank in return con-
sented to finance a survey of the Artibonite project in order to ascertain
the cost of satisfactorily completing it and also agreed to a resumption
of construction on the project.
2) The International Cooperation Administration agreed to make
available to Haiti $2 million in fiscal year 1958 special assistance funds
for economic development projects such as roads, bridges, irrigation,
and water supply.
3) The International Cooperation Administration agreed to increase
with increased program assistance slated for agriculture, health, educa-
tion and public works.
4) The Development Loan Fund agreed to consider expeditiously
financial assistance for sound project proposals from either the Haitian
government or private sources for which financing was not otherwise
available.
A summary of the agreement is in Department of State press
pp. 880–881. A more detailed summary of the agreement is in a mem-
9–1758. Additional Department of State documentation concerning the
discussions is in the file 838.10.

HA–4.
Letter from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Port-­au-Prince, June 11, 1958.
Dear Dick:
I am beginning to have increasingly serious qualms about the
establishment of a Marine Corps Military Mission to Haiti.2
Until quite recently it could honestly be said that a semblance
of democracy existed in Haiti. In the past five or six weeks, however,
things have changed and I would now describe the existing regime as a
“Police State” clothed in the trappings of democracy.
A convenient cut-­off date for this drastic change can be taken as
May 2 when martial law and a brief curfew were established.
Prior to that date there was a semblance of an independent or oppo-
sition press composed of Haiti Miroir and Independance. The editors and
some of the staff of these papers are now in jail and their plants were
wrecked by unidentified civilian bands, obviously with the approval of
the Military, as the incidents occurred during a period of stringent curfew
when peaceable citizens were being shot down in cold blood for violating
the curfew.
The two defeated candidates for the Presidency, Louis DEJOIE
and Clement JUMELLE previously enjoyed an attenuated liberty.
Now, however, on the flimsy pretext of involvement in the Mahotière
bomb affair, Dejoie was hounded into exile with a price on his head
and Jumelle and his brother Ducasse have been similarly forced into
hiding as outlaws. The pretense that either of these men were actually
involved in the manufacture of bombs is not taken seriously by anyone.
After Dejoie was exiled from the country, there was some thought
that Jumelle might be tolerated. His entire family was arrested recently
Official-Informal.
March 31, President François Duvalier had stated repeatedly and categorically that Haiti
wanted a United States military mission composed of Marine Crops officers. Duvalier
explained that it was the Marines “who founded and trained the Haitian Army and [who]
government sent a military mission to the United States with instructions to request the
United States Government to dispatch a military mission to Haiti to reorganize the Haitian
Army. As a result of these discussions, the Department of Defense, with concurrence of the
Department of State, authorized the Department of the Navy to discuss with the Haiti gov-
ernment an agreement to augment the U.S. Naval Mission, currently established in Haiti,
so as to accommodate a U.S. Marine Corps Mission. (Letter from Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs Mansfield D. Sprague to Rubottom, April 29, 1958;

Haiti  739
but has been released, with the exception of a brother who is still in jail.
The Colombian Minister informed me that the Assistant Manager of
the Haitian-Colombian Bank, a known Jumellist, was savagely beaten
in his home by a masked gang in an effort to force him to reveal the
whereabouts of Jumelle. At last account he was recovering in a hospital
from the beating which left him close to death.
I would emphasize here that I am persuaded that neither Dejoie
nor Jumelle have seriously conspired against the Government since the
inauguration of President Duvalier, although it is probably true that
some of their followers, particularly of Dejoie, may have engaged in
conspiratorial plotting. A large number of political prisoners languish
in jail with estimates ranging from 80 to 800 and the actual figure prob-
ably being somewhere in between.
The Army, which under General Kebreau was at least a counter-
poise to the civilian element of the Government, now appears to be
under the complete domination of Dr. Duvalier. It is difficult to believe
anything else when we have a photograph in our possession of the head
of the Secret Police, Clement BARBOT, striding behind the President
with a sub-­machine gun under his arm, his military escort bringing up
the rear, during the Flag Day celebration at Arcaihaie on May 18. To the
best of my knowledge the Secret Police continues to operate with the
tolerance, if not the support, of the Army.
The financial assistance to the Duvalier Administration which
has thus far been forthcoming, or is in prospect, from United States
and international sources will help to perpetuate the present regime.
Looking at it for what it basically is, namely, aid to the people of Haiti, I
find it entirely defensible and would even go so far as to support addi-
tional amounts of aid in the future.
However, I think we should do some careful soul-­searching before
we agree to send a Military Mission to Haiti, particularly one of such
composition and size that it will practically guarantee the continuance
in office of Dr. Duvalier to the end of his six-­year term in 1963. Of course,
we want stability in Haiti but, particularly having in mind the critical
examination of our policies in Latin America provoked by the recent
incidents involving the Vice President, should we agree to the estab-
lishment if the Mission without establishing any conditions precedent?
I find myself becoming increasingly repelled by the thought of send-
ing a Mission in here when the jails are crammed with political prisoners,
many presumably innocent and none of whom have been given the ben-
efit of a fair trial; when defeated candidates and their supporters, many
of whom have asked for nothing but peace and harmony, are beaten,
tortured and hounded into exile; when a restrained opposition press has
been ruthlessly snuffed out of existence; and when masked night rid-
ers, reminiscent of the Ku Klux Klan, operate from their headquarters
in the National Palace. Aside from the question of our own conscience,

I think we should give particular thought to the repercussions in the
United States and abroad if we go through with the establishment of the
Mission without some effort to correct the conditions I describe.
I would like to suggest that we consider conveying to President
Duvalier the thought that the abolishment of the Secret Police, the
release or trial of political prisoners, the restoration of the two sup-
pressed newspapers to the status quo ante, and a halt to hounding of
political opposition are prior conditions to our agreement to a Military
Mission. There may be other conditions we may wish to include, but
these are the main ones which occur to me now.
If my recommendation is adopted, we will have to consider how to
approach the President without upsetting our present friendly relations
or arousing cries of “intervention”. Obviously it will be a difficult and
delicate assignment.
In closing, I wish to make it quite clear that I am heartily in favor
of establishing a Military Mission here, preferably composed of mem-
bers of the United States Marine Corps as requested by the Haitian
Government. I can think of no surer guarantee of stability for the fore-
seeable future. However, I repeat, we should consider carefully whether
we can justify the establishment of such a Mission to a Government
responsible for the measures which I describe.
Sincerely,
Gerald A. Drew
Jerry
HA–5.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the
Department of State1
44. President Duvalier for third time in course of day sent for me
Limit Distribution. During the night of July 28–29, a small band of insurgents landed on
the Haitian coast and seized an army barracks in Port-­au-Prince. In the course of retaking
the barracks on July 29, Haitian government forces killed all of the insurgents. Additional
documentation this incident is in file 738.00.
2 Drew forwarded a more detailed account of this conversation to the Department
previous conversation between Drew and Duvalier on July 29 is in telegram 42 from Port-­

Haiti  741
and Minister Interior Duvigneaud he produced large volume miscella-
neous identification papers and photos allegedly removed from corps
of subjects thereof apparently establishing that four of seven members
of rebel expedition were residents Miami and presumably U.S. citizens.
At least two held deputy sheriff badges or commissions from Florida
authorities. This in apparent conflict with information made avail-
able to Embassy representatives earlier in day who were invited view
cadavers two participants said to be American citizens with expla-
nation other two foreigners were Dominicans. However this conflict
understandable view excitement and general confusion. Furthermore
there are widely divergent accounts of events of day including version
raiders were denounced in advance to GOH by army officers thought
to be defectors and were shot on landing and bodies brought to Port au
Prince where fighting at Casernes led by several army officers members
of conspiracy.
President agreed permit our Consular representatives examine and
photograph papers to establish identify of alleged Americans. Results
will be forwarded Department promptly.
President further claimed papers, photographs, weapons et
cetera found on auxiliary sail boat abandoned at Deluge south of
St.  Marc established its U.S. identify. However Haitian authorities
unable identify boat either by name or number although claiming it
flew American flag.
In tone of exceptional gravity President reminded me of my pre-
vious offer to be of assistance which he had declined for time being
by saying “I now formally request immediate expulsion Magloire3
and Dejoie from U.S. territory on grounds they have organized and
launched armed expedition against my government with participation
U.S. citizens”. He stressed his desire keep whole matter confidential
in Haiti to avoid disturbing friendly relations between two govern-
ments but said he would expect favorable action on his request within
48 hours. I agreed forward his request to Department promptly.
I endeavored explain that commission as deputy sheriff in many
jurisdictions in U.S. was honorific title frequently bestowed for per-
sonal or political reasons and disclaimed it implied official knowledge
of or support for expedition. When Thebaud said boat could only have
sailed with connivance federal officials I entered strong denial indicat-
ing that boat could well have sailed clandestinely or from some point
outside U.S. territory.
1956.

I expressed regret that persons appearing to be American citizens
had participated in hostile act against government. While President
gave repeated assurances desire avoid any deterioration friendly rela-
tions there are already indications subordinate officials may be dis-
posed capitalize on situation to place us on defensive.
At end session in his office President Duvalier took me to room on
lower floor in palace containing large stock rifles, shotguns, M-1’s and
ammunition together with miscellaneous personal effects allegedly
removed from boat as well as large number snapshots of alleged
American participants found on boat.
While not yet prepared comment on legal chain evidence linking
Magloire with launching armed expedition there is no doubt my mind
he is one of several or possibly sole instigator and financial backer of
coup. All three Haitian ex-­officers identified as his close supporters and
partisans. The President’s claim Dejoie connected therewith apparently
based on assertion that Dejoie’s photographs found in boat.
However if legally or administratively possible I believe if only
on grounds of comity we should respond affirmatively and promptly
Duvalier request for expulsion Magloire. Re Dejoie I prefer wait for
further evidence. Obviously participation alleged U.S. citizens places
us in extremely vulnerable position and regardless well known defi-
ciencies Duvalier regime I recommend at earliest possible moment
we make public disavowal participation American citizens and
appropriate expressions regret. Incidentally I do not exclude possi-
bility GOH may seize on this to endeavor to extract economic and
political advantages from us possibly including diplomatic claim for
damages.
While Duvalier emphasized his desire avoid disturbing friendly
political relations between two governments delay in facing up to situ-
ation can only weaken our position.4
Drew
Ambassador Drew had been instructed to inform the Haitian Government that the United
States deplored and regretted the reported involvement of American citizens in the rev-
olutionary attempt of July 29 against the legally constituted Government of President
Duvalier. The release also noted that Drew had requested Haiti to furnish all available
evidence to facilitate the inquiries of U.S. Government agencies into whether there had
been any violation of United States laws. For the text of the release, see the Department of

Haiti  743
HA–6.
Memorandum of a Conversation, the White House1
Washington, August 7, 1958.
SUBJECT:
Call of Haitian Foreign Minister on the President
PARTICIPANTS:
The President
Dr. Louis Mars, Foreign Minister of Haiti
Under Secretary Herter
William A. Wieland, Director, Office of Middle American Affairs
During a call at 4 p.m., August 7, on the President, Haitian Foreign
Minister Mars delivered a letter from President Duvalier saying that
the Haitian Government hopes for United States military support.2 He
recalled the efforts to overthrow President Duvalier during the last
days of July and said the Government expects further revolutionary
attempts.
The President asked the Foreign Minister to convey his sincere
regrets to President Duvalier that United States citizens had been
involved in the plot and that the United States Government had not
known this in time to stop it.
In reply to a question from the President, the Foreign Minister said
that the revolutionary plotting against the Duvalier Government has
assumed serious proportions. He cited two clandestine radio stations
broadcasting threats that the Presidential Palace will be bombed and
2,000 rebels will march on the capital. He said that President Duvalier
has “knowledge” that President Trujillo of the Dominican Republic
is financing the revolutionary attempts with a $500,000 fund estab-
lished for the purpose. The Foreign Minister said that President Trujillo
aspires “to be President of the entire island” and “does not like” that
the Duvalier Government is attempting to build a sound economy in
Haiti.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential.
Drafted by Wieland.
In a memorandum to President Eisenhower of August 7, Acting Secretary of State
Herter recommended that the President meet with Foreign Minister Mars as it was
“highly desirable that you receive the Foreign Minister in order to dispel any impression
that we countenance the organization of revolutionary expeditions in the United States
against Dr. Duvalier’s government.” (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers)
2 In this letter of August 2, President Duvalier maintained that the attack on Haiti of
July 28–29 was part of an international Communist conspiracy and requested U.S. mili-
tary assistance to help defend Haitian territory. An unofficial translation of the letter is in
the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.

President Eisenhower said that President Duvalier’s appeal would
be studied by the State Department and other appropriate agencies.
The President said that he understood the Department of Justice is now
investigating the facts of the recent plotting in the United States against
the Haitian Government. Under Secretary Herter corroborated this.
The President said he was meanwhile preparing a greeting to
President Duvalier in response to his letter to him.
On leaving, the Foreign Minister left a previously prepared sum-
mary of his intended remarks with the President, in addition to a letter
from President Duvalier.3
3 The summary, not printed, is attached to the unofficial translation of Duvalier’s
letter of August 2.
In a letter to President Duvalier of August 8, President Eisenhower affirmed that “the
United States deplores the involvement of its citizens in the revolutionary attempt against
your Government on July 29, 1958, and appropriate agencies of this Government are con-
ducting an inquiry to determine what violations of United States laws may have occurred.”
In regard to Duvalier’s request for military assistance, President Eisenhower indicated that
he had asked the Department of State and other U.S. government agencies to give urgent
and careful study to the matter. (Presidential Correspondence, Lot 64 D 174)
HA–7.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle
American Affairs (Wieland) to the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1
Washington, August 28, 1958.
SUBJECT
Marine Corps Training Mission to Haiti
Problem:
The President of Haiti, Dr. Duvalier, has requested that a Marine
Corps Training Mission be assigned to Haiti. The problem is to
Norman Warner, Officer in Charge of Haitian Affairs, and cleared with George O. Spencer
of the Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs.
The source text is an uninitialed carbon copy. Attached to the source text is a mem-
orandum from Wieland to Rubottom dated January 22, 1959, which describes several of
the documents relating to the Marine Corps mission to Haiti. It indicates that the August
28 memorandum constitutes a “position paper” on the subject.

Haiti  745
determine whether the United States should comply with this request.
If the Haitian Government is given an affirmative answer, a supple-
mentary question arises: should we make assignment of the mission
subject to certain provisos, notably agreement by President Duvalier
to provide satisfactory operation conditions for the mission and to take
measures designed to allay current political tensions?
Background:
President Duvalier requested a Marine Corps Training Mission in
late March and has become doubly anxious to have the mission arrive
since the revolutionary attempt against his government on July 29. He
desires the mission to bring about a permanent improvement in the
status and sense of responsibility of the Haitian army as well as to help
stabilize his Government and as evidence of U.S. support.
A Marine Corps Survey Team which visited Haiti from May 18
to 31 concluded that there is a definite need for a military mission to
improve the efficiency and capability of the Haitian army, and to pro-
mote stability within the Haitian army and in the Republic of Haiti
itself. It recommended that a fairly large mission be sent (an initial min-
imum of 30 members to be increased to 50) as that advice could be given
both at headquarters and field levels. The General Staff of the Haitian
army has stated that Haiti’s economy could not support a mission of
the recommended size but President Duvalier has privately assured us
that the necessary funds would be forthcoming.
Discussion:
The charge that the U.S. supports Latin American dictators may be
brought against us if we send a Marine Training Mission to Haiti.
Duvalier’s government has taken on many of the characteristics of
a dictatorship; abuses by the secret police, destruction of newspaper
plants, arrests of labor leaders and journalists, persecution of politi-
cal opponents, arbitrary arrests and prolonged imprisonment without
trial. However, during the attempted coup on July 29 there was no dis-
affection in the Haitian army or the general population and the abil-
ity to hold power for the foreseeable future whether or not we send a
training mission. He justifies his strong-arm tactics on grounds that the
opposition is plotting his own violent overthrow and he cites the July
29 attempted coup as proof.
Possible criticism of the Marine training mission as U.S. intvervention
in Haiti is to be expected from various sources including the USSR propa-
ganda apparatus which voiced this criticism against the recent brief pro-
tection of the Guantanamo Base water supply by 60 Marines. Moscow
Radio has already taken the line that the involvement of Americans in
the attempted coup on July 29 is evidence of U.S. intervention against the
Duvalier government. The fact that President Duvalier has specifically

and urgently requested assignment of the Marine Training Mission can
be used to offset charges of intervention. Prior agreement by Haiti to
allay domestic political tensions and a prohibition against the mission’s
training of the Haitian police at this time would lessen the danger of the
mission’s becoming involved in internal matters.
The secret police were first organized about January of this year and
have steadily increased in importance since that time. They probably
deserve much credit for crushing the July 29 revolution and Duvalier
may be convinced that they are his chief reliance in keeping control
of the government. Emboldened by the July 29 incident, the secret
police may now commit greater abuses than in the past; this could
result in diminution of popular support for Duvalier at home and he
himself might become a virtual prisoner of his own “palace police” if
he permits their power to grow unchecked. This danger is the greater
because the army has been weakened by successive “purges” of its
officers. Duvalier may realize the dangers of this situation and may
move to bring the secret police under control by incorporating them
into the regular army. A decree reorganizing the Haitian army (issued
August 4, 1958) refers to the need for a more adequate system of con-
trol and administration of the Army of Haiti considering the “increase
in its effective forces and the number of Special Services.” The same
decree makes the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces responsible for the
direction of “all military and police operations.” If the secret police are
brought into the army, they would presumably come within the pur-
view of the proposed Marine Corps Training Mission and be subject
to our advice. Since this eventuality would expose us to strong criti-
cism, it should be explained to President Duvalier ahead of time that
the training mission will not become involved in advising or training
the police.
The over-riding need is a period of political stability in Haiti to give the
government a chance to attack its other problems (economic, financial,
social). Beginning in December 1956 when Magloire was ousted, Haiti
was rocked by one political crisis after another as a succession of short-
lived governments tried and failed to wield power. Serious financial
and economic deterioration accompanied the political upheavals and
Haiti appeared to be on the verge of administrative chaos when the
military council of government took power in June 1957. Using ille-
gal force when necessary, the Haitian army restored a semblance of
political, administrative and financial order, permitted an election to
be held and turned over power in October 1957 to a civilian govern-
ment headed by Dr. Duvalier. President Duvalier has also resorted to
an illegal strong-arm methods to maintain order and seems to have
an acute fear of opposition political activity. In these circumstances it
appears probable that political stability in Haiti for the present will only

Haiti  747
be achieved at some cost in civil liberties; if this is accepted as a realis-
tic working assumption, the objective of the U.S. should be limited to
achieving a gradual amelioration of the situation. Our ability to use our
influence to this end would be enhanced by the presence of a Marine
training mission.
The present status of U.S.-Haitian relations calls for a positive ges-
ture on the part of the United States to effect the reverse practice of
the Duvalier government to the participation of American citizens in
the July 29 attempt and the fact that it was launched from U.S. soil. A
few days after that even, President Duvalier sent his Foreign Minister
on an urgent mission to Washington to deliver a letter to President
Eisenhower requesting U.S. military assistance for Haiti. The arrival of
a Marine training mission would be a timely, positive response to this
plan for help. Further, this reassurance of our good intentions might
render Duvalier more amenable to our influence in bringing about an
improved domestic political climate.
Conclusions:
1. We may be criticized for “supporting a dictator” if we send a
Marine mission to Haiti, but it appears that Duvalier in fact has con-
siderable popular support and the ability to hold power regardless of
whether we send the mission. By sending a mission we may be able
to influence Duvalier away from dictatorial methods. The Mission
might be viewed by U.S.S.R. propagandists as evidence of U.S. inter-
vention in Haiti but this charge can bee offset by the fact that President
Duvalier has requested the mission. We should seek prior agreement
that Duvalier will take steps to allay the political tension and that no
advice or training will be given to the police.
2. The secret police have brought Duvalier into disrepute but they
are his chief reliance in keeping power and it would be unrealistic to
expect him to abolish them at this time. We should encourage Duvalier
to bring the police under control but we should make it clear that we
will not become involved in police training.
3. Haiti’s greatest need is a period of political stability and we can
contribute to this by using a Marine training mission to influence the
Haitian Army constructively. The Haitian army has been the ultimate
and practically the only source of stability in the past year and a half
although seriously weakened by purges.
4. The present status of our relations with Haiti calls for a positive
gesture to offset the adverse reaction of Haitian officials to the partici-
pation of Americans in the July 29 attempted coup and the fact that it
was launched from U.S. soil.

Recommendations
1. That you sign the attached letter to the Assistant Secretary of
Defense, Mr. John N. Irwin, II,2 recommending that Marine Corps per-
sonnel be assigned to Haiti on a training mission provided that the
Haitian Government agrees to let the mission operate under condi-
tions deemed satisfactory by the Department of Defense and by this
Department. An essential condition to be met prior to despatch of mis-
sion personnel is that the Haitian Government agree to take measures
designed to allay current political tensions. Further, the letter states that
the Haitian Government should be informed that if there is a recurrence
of internal violence of political origin, the training mission’s activities
may be curtailed or the mission possibly withdrawn in order to avoid
any appearance of U.S. involvement in Haitian domestic matters. The
letter also expresses the Department’s belief that the training mission
should not become involved in training or advising the Haitian police.
The letter suggests finally that a representative of the Department of
Defense visit Haiti in the near future to inform President Duvalier of
our decision and the conditions attached to it.
2. That you initial the attached telegram3 informing Ambassador
Drew of our views on the assignment of a Marine Training Mission to
Haiti.
3. That you initial the attached memorandum4 informing the Under
Secretary of our conclusions and requesting his concurrence in your let-
ter to the Department of Defense and the telegram to Port-­au-Prince.
2 Not printed. The letter from Rubottom was sent on September 9 to Mansfield
D. Sprague, who had replaced Irwin as Assistant Secretary of Defense for International
Security Affairs during the interim. In addition to the contents described in the August 28
memorandum, the letter sent to Sprague on September 9 included a paragraph indicating
that the Department of State’s approval of the assignment of Marine Corps personnel to
Haiti did not mean that the Department approved of all of the recommendations of the
military survey team, especially those concerning material or financial support of the
3 Not attached to the source text and presumably the same as telegram 99 to Port-­au-
Prince, drafted by Warner on August 28 initialed by Snow, and transmitted on September 5.
4 Not printed. No indication has been found that the memorandum was sent.

Haiti  749
HA–8.
Record of a Meeting1
Washington, September 14, 1958
Meeting—September 14, 1958—Economic Program for Haiti
PARTICIPANTS
State Department: Messrs. Rubottom (ARA); Snow (ARA); Wieland (CMA);
Warner (CMA); Conover (REA); Post (REA); and Favell (KD)
Development Loan Fund: Mr. Rayan
Treasury Department: Mr. Harley
ICA: Mr. Atwood
Export-Import Bank: Messrs. Kimball and Dennison
Mr. Rubottom opened the meeting by pointing out that the eco-
nomic situation in Haiti has shown no significant improvement and that
a new look was necessary. He said that we should consider obtaining,
in cooperation with President Duvalier, greater responsibility in eco-
nomic affairs. Since the Duvalier government was freely elected and the
best prospect we could see ahead, Mr. Rubottom was convinced that
we should make efforts to intensify our cooperation. He believed that
Duvalier wants to work with us and that we should try to convince
him that we do likewise. Mr. Rubottom raised with Mr. Atwood the
need for experienced ICA personnel at the top level to deal with the
Haitian government in overall economic planning and implementation.
Mr. Rubottom said that Messrs. Waugh, Dillon and McIntosh recognized
the importance of completion of the construction work at the Artibonite
Valley and that we should consider having the DLF supply the funds
for this purpose. In addition, he said we should continue our grant food
program there and indicated that perhaps a greater account could be
shipped. Mr. Atwood stated that the problem was one of getting ade-
quate distribution of foodstuffs.
Mr. Rubottom pointed out that it was a matter of high priority to
set up an inter-­agency committee to study the Haitian economic prob-
lem, Mr. Snow agreed.
Mr. Rubottom then mentioned that a Marine Corps training mis-
sion was expected to go to Haiti shortly to train the Army.
Mr. Atwood agreed that ICA experience showed that there was a
need for proper advisors to the GOH. He mentioned in this connection
Confidential. Drafted by Post on October 13.

the need for a Klein-Saks type mission2 and referred to Prescott Carter
as a possibility. Such a mission might strengthen the Haitians and still be
outside the USOM mission. He asked whether the Artibonite cost survey
had been completed. Mr. Kimball replied that this had not been done.
Mr. Harley queried whether the Haitians would be willing to
accept outside advisors. Mr. Rubottom replied that we would use the
“carrot and stick” approach.
Mr. Wieland pointed out that there were two forces struggling
within the Haitian government; one-­pro-American and the other
anti-American. The latter headed by Blanchet, were attempting to
sabotage relations with the United States. As things are now, it looks
as though the pro-American force might win and they need our help,
especially when Duvalier is leaning in their direction.
Mr. Atwood mentioned that the situation seems to be similar to the
one in Bolivia. Mr. Wieland said what was needed was a concrete pro-
grams to present to Duvalier. Mr. Harley asked what was the “carrot”
that we intended to use. Mr. Atwood mentioned that the IMF, Artibonite
financing, and technical assistance could be used as the “carrot”.
Mr. Dennison doubted whether the Haitians could stand any more
debt burden since they were again in default with the Eximbank. The
Eximbank, he said, did not want to put any more money into Haiti to
complete the Artibonite project.
Mr. Rubottom said that he thought that we could work out a suc-
cessful program. Mr. Pollack mentioned that there existed a Haitian
nationalization program and he thought that we should use our influ-
ence to see that it was to our benefit. Mr. Snow elaborated on the elec-
tric power problem and the attitude of the Haitian toward the Island
Light and Power Company. Mr. Dennison said he understood that
Marc Charles and Arthur Bonhomme wanted to nationalize the Power
Company.
The Artibonite, Mr. Wieland said, was the immediate problem
facing us and all efforts should be made to put it into production.
Mr. Atwood mentioned that the Eximbank held $300,000 of ICA money,
part of which could be used for the costing of the remainder of the work
on the project. Mr. Snow believed that the Artibonite should be com-
pleted and that full consideration should be given to private power in
developing the water resources. Messrs. Snow, Conover, Dennison and
Warner agreed that the cost survey should be initiated immediately.
2 The United States firm, Klein-Saks, Inc., provided financial and economic counsel-
ing to several Latin American governments. In December 1958, the Haitian government
contracted the services of Klein & Saks, Inc. and Lehman Brothers, Inc. Documentation
concerning the negotiations of these contracts and subsequent discussions between
Department of State officials and representatives of the two firms is in file 838.00.

Haiti  751
Mr. Rubottom then reviewed the sense of the meeting as followed:
(1) That the cost survey be top priority.
(2) That ICA and State would look into the problem of economic
consultants for the GOM.
(3) That the Haitians be informed of the adverse aspects of nation-
alization of the power industry, without trying to sell them on any spe-
cific private power measures.
(4) That the DLF then take up the financing of the Artibonite proj-
ect completion.3
Mr. Kimball said that the cost survey would come to about $15,000.
3 On September 23, Samuel C. Waugh, President of the Export-Import Bank, advised
the Department of State in a letter to Assistant Secretary Rubottom that the Haitian
government was in default to the Bank for the sum of $500,000 in connection with the
Artibonite loan and for the sum of $25,000 in connection with an additional loan. Waugh
added: “It is our option that no assistance by other governmental agencies should be
given to Haiti unless it maintains its debt payments to this Bank. Even though assistance
may be coming from other agencies, we are strongly of the opinion that the sanctity of
obligations should be preserved and such a concept impressed upon the Haitians. If a
debtor is to be relieved of debt payments while receiving aid, it would create a harmful
HA–9.
Letter from the Deputy Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs (Murphy) to the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs (Sprague)1
Washington, September 23, 1958.
Dear Mr. Sprague:
I refer to Mr. Rubottom’s letter of September 9, 19582 which recom-
mended the assignment of United States Marine Corps training per-
sonnel to Haiti provided that the Haitian Government would agree to
permit such personnel to operate under conditions deemed satisfactory
by the State and Defense Departments. As you know, representatives of
the Department of Defense (Colonel Victor Croizat, USMC) and of this
Warner and cleared in draft with Spencer and Athol H. Ellis of the office of the Special
Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination.
2 See the summary of the letter to Irwin in the memorandum from Wieland to Snow
of August 28, Document HA–7.

Department (Mr. William A. Wieland) visited Haiti September 10 to 13
to discuss this matter further with the President of Haiti and officials of
his government.
Ambassador Drew participated in these discussions and on
September 12 an understanding was initialed by him and the Haitian
President on the following points: the Haitian Government will take
measure to allay current political tension; the U.S. reserves the right
to curtail the training mission’s activities or even withdrew it in case
of a recurrence of internal violence of political origin; and the training
mission will not become involved in training or advising the Haitian
police. The Haitian Government also agreed to give adequate support
to the training mission and to allow it sufficient scope to operate effec-
tively. A public statement was released in Haiti on the fact that discus-
sions were being held; the specific understanding reached has not, of
course, been made public.3
I think it is of great importance to follow up these successful
talks with the Haitian President by assigning a Marine Corps Training
Mission to Haiti at the earliest possible time. Since negotiation of the
necessary agreement and other preliminary steps may consume several
months, I further recommend that a temporary military training unit
(USMC personnel) be sent immediately to Haiti to begin the training
desired by the Haitian Government.4 This would be of great value from
the point of view of our basic relations with Haiti, as tangible evidence
of our intention to work with Haiti in this field of vital importance to
it. On July 28–29 of this year a revolutionary attempt was made against
the elected Government of Haiti by a small force launched from U.S.
soil, which included American citizens. This attempt was quickly
crushed but there are many reports of further plotting in the United
States and elsewhere against the Haiti an Government. To counteract
the adverse impression created by the involvement of Americans in the
July 28–29 attempt and the reports of further plotting on U.S. soil, I
think it is of urgent importance for the U.S. to take all possible steps to
forestall a possible repetition of that attempt. The speedy arrival of a
military training unit (even though it might be a comparatively small
unit assigned on a temporary basis) would be useful in accomplishing
this political objective. Further, the Haitian request for this mission has
made it possible for us to obtain important political commitments from
3 The texts of the memorandum of understanding for negotiations of conditions
under which the United States would provide Marine Corps Personnel to Haiti and of the
joint communiqué issued to the press on September 12 were transmitted to the Department
4 Snow had recommended this course of action in a memorandum to Murphy of

Haiti  753
the Haitian President which, if complied with, should tend to stabilize
the presently-disturbed situation in that country.
A further consideration motivating my recommendation for the
early assignment of a military training unit is that the experience of
this temporary unit will provide a test of the probable effectiveness of
the proposed full-scale training mission as well as a test of the Haitian
Government’s ability to allay political tension, as agreed in the memo-
randum of understanding. A copy of that memorandum is enclosed.5
Sincerely Yours,
Robert Murphy
5 The temporary Marine Corps training unit arrived in Port-au-Prince on October 31.
United States and Haiti concluded a Naval Mission Agreement that provided for the assign-
ment of a permanent mission of Naval and Marine Corps personnel. For the text of the
agreement, see 9 UST 1528.
HA–10.
Draft Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, February 2, 1959.
SUBJECT
Request for Grant Assistance for Haiti from President’s Contingency Funds
Recommendation
Owing to the failure of the coffee crop and declining coffee prices,
Haiti has exhausted its U.S. dollar reserves and is running a very sub-
stantial budgetary deficit despite severe reductions in fiscal expenditure.
Confidential. Drafted by Post. The source text is an uninitialed carbon copy that was not
sent. It lists the concurrences of Assistant Security of State for Economic Affairs Thomas
Mann, Special Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination John O. Bell, and Regional
Director of the International Cooperation Administration’s Office of Latin American
Operations Rollin S. Atwood. According to a memorandum from Snow to Dillon,
undated but apparently drafted CIRCA February 12, the International Cooperation
Administration had refused to concur in Rubottom’s memorandum of February 2 and
had indicated instead that a “substantial revision” was needed. An uninitialed carbon
copy of the ICA memorandum is attached to the source text.

Economic paralysis and social and political chaos are likely to result
unless Haiti immediately obtains financial assistance from abroad. In
view of this temporary situation which is important to the security of
the U.S., I recommend:
the FY 1959 funds available under the President’s Contingency Fund
under Chapter III of the Mutual Security Act of 1954,2 as amended; or
2) The allocation and commitment as grant aid of $4 million from
the FY 1959 funds available under the President’s Contingency Fund
and the allocation of $1.5 million from Special Assistance funds to be
In view of the extreme urgency of the case, the possibility that
Congress may delay in voting the FY 1960 Mutual Security Program
appropriations, and the probability that all the $4.5 million of Special
Assistance will be requested in FY 1960, it is believed that the first rec-
ommendation should be followed.
Discussion
Haiti has the lowest per capita income and the heaviest population
density in Latin America. The margin between subsistence and hunger
is not very great. Haiti does not produce enough food for its popula-
tion and meets the gap in its requirements through imports. Since 1955
Haiti has been receiving grant assistance under the Mutual Security
Program. In FY 1958 Special Assistance of $2 million was granted and
for the current fiscal year an equal amount is programmed of which
$500,000 has already been deposited with the Haitian National Bank.
U.S. Special Assistance has been used to give balance of payments sup-
port in order to assure an adequate flow of essential imports to the
Haitian economy.
With the fall of General Magloire in December 1956 and the resul-
tant political disorder which saw six governments in one year, there
was an intensification of capital flight and economic uncertainty. To
the above problems, there was added an abnormally low coffee crop
for the year of October 1956–September 1957. As a consequence U.S.
­dollar reserves were virtually depleted and a stabilization program was
arranged under which the IMF maintains a resident representative in
a quota of $7.5 million none of which has yet been repurchased.
In FY 1957–58 there was a slight improvement in the Haitian eco-
nomic situation as a result of an excellent coffee crop and a decrease in
political instability under the Duvalier Government which was elected

Haiti  755
in September 1957. Dollar reserves, however, failed to increase to former
levels and by the beginning of the current fiscal year in October were
only about $3 million compared with an average of over $9 ­million at
the same date over the period 1950 through 1955.
Thus Haiti was in a very vulnerable position when the present cof-
of adverse climatic conditions in addition to the crop cycle in which
small crops normally follow large crops. The decline in coffee pro-
was made even more disastrous by the 20 per cent decline in interna-
tional coffee prices between the crop years. For Haiti, which normally
relies on coffee for 70 per cent of its export earnings, the consequences
were critical. In effect a country with a national income of only slightly
above $250 million for 4 million people was faced with a loss of almost
$20 million of that income. This would signify a drop in the standard
of living by 8 per cent in one year. Moreover, the Government’s budget,
which ordinarily obtains about 25 per cent of its revenues directly from
coffee export and other taxes, immediately ran heavy deficits which
violated the terms of Haiti’s Standby Agreement with the IMF and so
made Haiti ineligible to make any further use of IMF resources.
In January the Government revised its budget and reduced the
anticipated expenditure level by about 18 per cent for the reminder of
the fiscal year by cutting salaries by 10 to 20 per cent, by curtailing
investment projects and operational costs, and by reductions in defense
expenditure. Even then expenditures are expected to exceed revenue
by about $6 million and there appears very little chance that this deficit
can be reduced. The Government has no financial resources at its dis-
posal. So far this fiscal year it has borrowed over $2 million from the
National Bank, which is already heavily loaded with Government debt,
and further loans from the Bank will only aggravate the crucial dollar
payments problem by an inflationary expansion of import demand. As
Haiti is one of the few countries with a freely convertible currency and
since the foreign sector is relatively large, it is estimated that any given
expansion of credit usually creates a proportional 25 per cent demand
for foreign exchange. To solve that budgetary problem by recourse to
the National Bank, therefore, is not feasible in view of the inadequate
level of dollar reserves. In addition, IMF resources would continue to
be unavailable to Haiti if there was resort to deficit financing.
The balance of payments situation is desperate. At the present time
Haiti has reserve of less than $1 million, slightly more than one week’s
imports. With the failure of the coffee crop, the usual seasonal increase
in reserves is not taking place and there is actually a continued drain.
Only one week ago, the ICA had to disburse $500,000 of the $2 million
available from FY 59 Special Assistance funds to assure convertibility

of the gourde, the continued flow of essential imports, and the payment
of international obligations. It is estimated that Haiti will require
$1 ­million monthly or a total of $8 million of external financial assistance
from February through September 1959 to maintain international sol-
vency and to import foodstuffs, petroleum, medicines, machinery, and
other essentials. Part of this $8 million requirement can be met from the
$1.5 million of remaining Special Assistance funds from this fiscal year.
It is hoped that $1 million can come from the IMF under the terms of
a revised standby agreement which recognizes the changed situation
because of the small coffee crop. The IMF money, however, will most
probably not be available unless Haiti meets the internal financial crite-
rion of a balanced budget. There remains $5.5 million, assuming the uti-
lization of the IMF million, that Haiti must obtain if we are not to have
the imposition of exchange controls and devaluation and resultant eco-
nomic, political and social chaos as the import flow is sharply reduced.
In the face of such a critical situation, which I believe to be a temporary
emergency affecting U.S. interests and security, it is recommended that
immediate action be taken to assure Haiti a minimum essential level
of imports to September 30, 1959 by either of the following measures:
the FY 59 funds available under the President’s Contingency Fund
under Chapter III of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended, or
2) The allocation and commitment as grant aid of $4 million from
the FY 59 funds available under the President’s Contingency Fund and
the allocation of $1.5 million from Special Assistance funds to be avail-
In view of the extreme urgency of the case, the possibility that
Congress may delay in voting the FY 60 Mutual Security Program
appropriations, and the probability that all the $4.5 million of Special
Assistance will be required in FY 60, it is believed that the first recom-
mendation should be followed.
In closing I would like to point out some political consequence of
a collapse in Haiti. This country is the only Negro republic in Latin
America. The rising nationalities of Africa are well aware of the close
relationship which has existed between Haiti and the U.S. Failure on
our part to give effective assistance at this critical time is likely to be
regarded most unfavorably among those countries in Africa which are
now independent and those which will soon become so. The mainte-
nance of political stability in the Caribbean is important to our security,
and we should try to alleviate the causes of unrest in that area. Since the
Duvalier Government was duly elected by Haitians in elections as free
as could be expected by Haitian standards and President Duvalier has
taken steps to reconcile the political opposition, including a promise to
give up his emergency decree powers, our financial assistance would

Haiti  757
also appear to be working in favor of a greater degree of responsible
government in Haiti. We expect to reach agreement with the Haitian
Government on procedures which will assure that U.S. financial aid
will be utilized efficiently and effectively.3
3 On February 13, Atwood submitted to Acting ICA Director Leonard J. Saccio a
separate memorandum addressed to Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
Douglas Dillon, that recommended, among other points, that up to $6,000,000 of spe-
cial assistance funds be made available to the Haitian Government as emergency foreign
exchange and budget assistance. Atwood’s memorandum emphasized that the Haitian
Government had “proved itself unable or unwilling to resolve its own administrative
and budgetary problems” and that as prerequisite to receiving the special assistance,
Haiti must accept a system of strict controls and supervision. On February 17, Saccio
forwarded Atwood’s memorandum to Under Secretary Dillon with a covering memo-
randum indicating approval of Atwood’s memorandum with the provision that the
proposed controls described in the memorandum be amended to obtain the approval of
Haitian Finance Minister André Theard who was then in Washington. (Carbon copies of
Atwood’s memorandum of February 13 and Saccio’s covering memorandum of February
Bureau of Inert-American Affairs, in a memorandum from Snow to Dillon of February
18, agreed to the $6,000,000 level of financial assistance but objected to ICA’s characteri-
zation of Haiti’s inability to manage its own affairs and found several of ICA’s proposed
controls an undue interference in internal Haitian affairs. (ARA Special Assistant’s Files,
Saccio exchanged letters providing for a United States pledge of $6,000,000 in special
assistance funds and a Haitian agreement to a revised list of controls and supervision.
The Department of State transmitted the text of the notes to Embassy Port-­au-Prince in
For the text of the announcement contained in press release 138 of February 24, see
HA–11.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the
Department of State1
321. Deptel 317.
I have finally come to share the opinion held by U.S. Government
officials in Haiti, my diplomatic colleagues and overwhelming majority
Department telegram 317 to Port-­au-Prince, February 25, requested the Embassy to report
official and public reaction to the announcement that the United States was extending
budgetary support to Haiti. The Embassy was also asked for its evaluation concerning
the current stability of the Duvalier regime and the possibility of strengthening its popu-

Haitians of all walks of life that prospects of long-­term survival of
Duvalier regime are at present time poorest since his inauguration
October 1957. Reasons are many and complex internal reasons may be
summarized as follow:
(1) Desperate economic-­financial situation stemming from heri-
tage previous administrations aggravated by poor current coffee crop
with sharp unseasonal decline in foreign exchange and government
revenues.
(2) Bad administrative practices and management of government
machinery leading to almost total failure administration and construc-
tive projects despite glowing promise.
(3) Politically President Duvalier has succeeded in alienating
practically all groups including not only supporters of this political
opponents, but many patriotic Haitians initially prepared support
him if given a chance, has estranged both influential Catholic Church
and some Protestant groups and due largely excessive brutality secret
police has won enemy all classes ranging from wealthy elite to black
masses followers of ex-President Fignole.2
(4) He has ruthlessly trampled on civil liberties through suppres-
sion independent press and tolerated, If not directed, brutalities by
secret police. Latest incident of savage beating responsible business
man by officer of President guard culminates long record of brutality
and has undone any possible good effect of relaxation harsh police
measures in January this year.
(5) President has almost entirely neglected any effort develop his
own popularity. He remains largely isolated from population, holding
court alone in palace with almost no attempt through public appear-
ances in Port au Prince or provinces to broaden base his support. His
furtive secretiveness probably overlaid with large measure primitive
superstition has alienated most decent supporters, leaving him sur-
rounded by small palace clique of persons of lowest possible result.
Believe it is now too late for Duvalier succeed broadening base his pop-
ular support.
Externally principal elements are:
(1) The political alliance between Dejoie and Fignole has shaken
government and holds greatest potential threat to regime.
(2) Propaganda activities and threats of invasion from Dejoie and
followers from Cuba are encouraging enemies and triggering many to
abandon ship they believe will sink.
2 Daniel Fignole briefly served as the Provisional President of Haiti between May

Haiti  759
(3) The ill-­concealed hostility of Castro in Cuba and Betancourt in
Venezuela is further comforting exiles those countries and opposition
at home.
(4) December 22 alliance with Trujillo is proving serious liability at
home and abroad.
Despite all the foregoing it must be recognized that Duvalier has
skillfully concentrated power including arms and ammunition in
Presidential guard and secret police with Army practically leaderless
and powerless. It is obviously impossible forecast how or when his
overthrow will occur but hostile landing on coast might well provide
spark leading to mass uprising now only restrained by fear secret police.
Given his fanatic character and messiah-­like complex I see no chance he
will abandon reins of government peacefully. Also working his favor is
absence any one political figure capable holding country together. While
many names mentioned by opposition there is general feeling that nei-
ther Dejoie, Fignole nor Jumelle could stay in office long and that only a
junta or committee public safety (U.S. support being assumed) following
his overthrow could maintain order and hold new elections.
Also strengthening his position are U.S. aid and recent develop-
ments in field foreign investment although generally believed this
assistance will only delay his inevitable downfall.
Director USOM and [text not declassified] concur.
Drew
HA–12.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Haiti1
Department appreciates analysis in reftel and requests country
team follow up analysis with recommendations for action which might
Drafted by Warner; cleared with Wieland and John C. Hill, the Special Assistant to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs; and signed by Rubottom. Robert
Donhauser, Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for political Affairs,
was informed of the telegram’s content.
2 See Document HA–11.

be appropriate in circumstances, keeping in mind U.S. policy objectives
in Haiti of fostering economic growth and financial equilibrium within
framework political stability and responsible government. Pursuant
recent recommendations from Embassy on specific problems (des-
Department had acted on premise best hope for stability and progress
in Haiti is to work with present constitutional government to solve spe-
cific problems. Does country team believe this premise still valid? If not,
Department solicits recommendations for change in U.S. approach to
problems Haiti.
Meanwhile, Department believe recent constructive U.S. action alle-
viate financial crisis in Haiti provides good basis for approach to President
Duvalier along following lines. (1) We have been closely observing
developments and doing all we properly can assist constitutionality sta-
bility in Haiti by working out Marine Corps training mission, emergency
financial aid, increased technical cooperation program, surplus food
program, [illegible in the original] vessel visits and taken other steps to
aid GOH in alleviating distress of Haitian people. In doing so, we have
tried avoid involvement in internal Haitian political affairs and with that
in mind came to understanding with President Duvalier in September
1958 to guard against military training assistance being misinterpreted
as political interference. The President should be reminded of his under-
standing at that time to take steps to allay political tensions and of our
having reserved right to curtail activities or withdraw mission in case of
internal political violence. (2) While mindful of outside pressures on his
government which we seeking to allay, we are troubled by recent devel-
opments which appear run counter to September understanding and
give color opposition charges GOH relies on force not popular support
and which hinder our efforts in behalf of Haitian stability. As appropriate
you should mention such examples as (a) press reports quoting Cuban
police authorities that gunmen recently arrested in Cuba say they were
hired to kill Dejoie and other Haitian exiles; (b) reports from press and
other sources of one alleged Dejoieist killed and another severely beaten
in Port-­au-Prince recently, and other apparently unwarranted political
reprisals, despite January assurances given by President; (c) Department
further seriously concerned over statements widely attributed to
President Duvalier published in press of Haiti and elsewhere (and not
disavowed to date) and with damaging repercussions, that President
called on his followers to “chop off heads and burn houses” if revolution-
ary attack made. This interpreted as invitation to indiscriminate, unre-
strained mob violence and has deeply shocked responsible U.S. opinion.
(3) We have felt constrained to discuss these matters with President in

Haiti  761
light September understanding and, in doing so, to point out again that
growing adverse reaction in U.S. and elsewhere to such developments
creates serious difficulties for U.S. in its efforts assist GOH to overcome
pressing financial and economic problems. (4) Ambassador might also
refer in course interview to adverse reaction in U.S. and elsewhere to
unprecedentedly close rapprochement between Haiti and Trujillo espe-
cially view widespread and growing intensity of anti-Trujillo campaign
in Caribbean and rest of hemisphere.
Department understands President Duvalier plans major pro-
nouncement at Cap Haitian March 5. (FYI Val Washington4 has told
Department he plans arrive Haiti March 4 and have frank discussion
with President Duvalier on situation). If Ambassador concurs in mak-
ing approach to President along lines given above, Department believes
most desirable this be done prior March 5 in hope President Duvalier
might be guided by such views in making whatever pronouncement he
has in mind. Department expressed views similar to paragraphs two
and three to Ambassador Bonhomme here last week who promised
convey to President Duvalier.
4 Member, Republican National Committee.
HA–13.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the
Department of State1
Port-­au-Prince, March 11, 1959.
No. 384
SUBJECT
United States Policy Toward Haiti.
After protracted reflection and consultation with members of
the Country Team, the following observations are submitted on the
Department’s question whether the Embassy has any recommenda-
tions to make for changes in United States policy toward Haiti.
2 See Document HA–12.

It is my opinion that there should be no change in our present policy
of extending financial assistance to the Haitian Government in the hope
of avoiding the chaos which would inevitably ensue if the Government of
President Duvalier were violently overthrown. It is believed that none of
the principal opponents of Dr. Duvalier could either hold office or work
together for more than a brief period, if at all, following his downfall.
Furthermore, in such an event, it is believed that there would inevitably fol-
low a period of chaos and widespread disorders before some semblance of
a stable Government could be installed. It can also be speculated that such
conditions might lead to some form of intervention from the neighboring
Dominican Republic, and possibly other countries in the Caribbean area. It
would be superfluous to point out that any such developments would be
contrary to our objectives in Haiti and the hemisphere as a whole.
Given this assumption, it is obvious that the only alternative to such
developments is to continue to extend aid to the present Government of
Haiti. The first concrete announcement of the recent decision to extend
budgetary support in the amount of $6 million, which appeared in
the New York Times of February 28, and was subsequently announced
by President Duvalier in his speech at Cape Haitian on March 6, has
already strengthened him both at home and abroad. While I believe
it is much too early to predict that even if wisely used this aid will
enable him to last out the remaining 4 ½ years of office, it does appear
to have confounded his political opponents both within and without
the country and to have given him a new feeling of confidence. In
effect, Dr. Duvalier apparently feels that this aid represents the seal of
approval on his Administration by the American Government. It can
only be hoped that he will make good the promises contained in his
March 6 speech of embarking on an era of conciliation. Such efforts on
his part in many directions will come much too late. It is not believed
that anything he could do would ever win the collaboration of either
Déjoie, who has been ruined economically and was for a time under
sentence of death with a price on his head, or Fignolé, many of whose
followers have been persecuted, or Clément Jumelle, who is still in hid-
ing and two of whose brothers were shot down by Duvalierist police.
To what extent our aid has discouraged revolutionary plotting by
his opponents abroad cannot be assessed by the Embassy, but based
on the reaction internally it is not unlikely that they have at least been
discouraged.
Conversely, were we now to withhold aid from Duvalier during the
present period of crisis, it would in a sense constitute negative interven-
tion just as much as if we were to intervene in a positive manner to over-
throw his Government through extending aid and comfort to his enemies.
Still a further consideration of great importance in assessing our
policy toward the Duvalier Administration is the effect which devel-
opments here involving the relations between the two countries would

Haiti  763
have on our prestige in the emerging African countries, as well as the
colored people of Asia. While very possibly few, if any, citizens of Ghana,
Indonesia, or Thailand could identify the present Chief of State of Haiti,
the existence of even a brief period of chaos in the oldest independent
colored country located on our doorstep would be interpreted as a fail-
ure on our part in the field of international relations and would undoubt-
edly be exploited by communist parties in that part of the world. In other
words, we cannot afford to let Haiti “go through the wringer”.
It would be far too optimistic to forecast now that the aid we have
already given will pull this Administration through its allotted course
or that it will be the last aid we will be called upon to extend. However,
it is my considered opinion that for better or for worse, both on grounds
of moral principle and political expediency, we had no option but to
follow the course we have elected to pursue up to now. To what extent
we can continue to prop up this Government in the interest of both
Haiti and United States is a question which will have to be answered
when the time comes.
Gerald A. Drew
HA–14.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Haiti1
451. For Ambassador from Rubottom.
Besides genuine concern which Department has for health of
President Duvalier due his high office and long and friendly association
with United States in various capacities, there is deep preoccupation
Distribution. Drafted by Rubottom and initialed by Wieland. On May 27, Ambassador
Drew informed the Department of State that he had learned from Haitian officials in
strictest confidence that President Duvalier had suffered a coronary occlusion during the
evening of May 24 and that his condition continued to be grave. (Telegram 415 from
United State medical assistance, the Department of State arranged with the Department
of Defense for the Chief Cardiologist at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base to proceed with spe-
his recovery, President Duvalier sent a letter to President Eisenhower on July 13 person-
ally thanking the President, the Department of State, and Ambassador Drew for their

here that unless President recovers quickly Haiti may sink back to polit-
ically unstable morass such as followed overturn Magloire. Prospect of
Cabinet rule as called for by Constitution in event incapacity President
is unpromising, especially if head of Secret Police, irrespective his per-
sonal qualities, is locus real power. Knowledge abroad of Barbot’s exer-
cising authority would also contribute to further bad public relations
for Haiti which has been a continually adverse factor in trying to nor-
malize relations that country. Presumably Cabinet would have power
to appoint Barbot to some official position but this is internal Haitian
matter. Your view on this requested. Also, should President die, do you
think there would be immediate contest for power not withstanding
constitutional provision that head Supreme Court assume Presidency?
Request your views urgently regarding personal qualities Nicoleau of
leadership and whether he could be expected to hold on to Presidency.
In view above, U.S. should try assume effective guiding role at this
critical juncture in Haitian affairs. Believe all responsible Haitian should
be urged to lay aside personal ambitions and permit orderly constitu-
tional processes to be carried out should this become necessary. They
should understand clearly (and you authorized use this line in talking
with members of Government and others in your discretion) that abil-
ity of United States to continue its programs of assistance to Haiti will
repeat will depend on their joining forces to provide orderly and peace-
ful transition of power if such unfortunately becomes necessary.
As you know, Mutual Security legislation is now under active
debate in U.S. Congress and before U.S. public. Our programs for Haiti,
including special assistance and the Marine Corps Training Mission,
have been the subject of repeated informal discussion and review
before the Senate Foreign Relations Sub-Committee on Latin America
and the House Foreign Affairs Sub-Committee on Latin America. These
programs have been presented to the Congress and to the U.S. pub-
lic as “calculated risks”. It would be regrettable if Haiti were now to
show itself incapable of maintaining orderly processes of government.
Should political instability ensue, Department’s position in support of
above-­mentioned programs would be in grave jeopardy.
Murphy

Haiti  765
HA–15.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the
Department of State1
10. Foreign Minister Mars sent me note dated July 8 to say GOH
instructing Ambassador Bonhomme officially request U.S. help pre-
serve its neutrality and territorial inviolability during present Caribbean
­crisis.2 Bonhomme authorized inform Department GOH making its
port and airports available to permit U.S. armed forces patrol Haitian
waters and air space since Haiti does not have material resources with
which protect itself from invasion (Embassy telegram 6).3 GOH making
request pending OAS collective action re-­establish peace in Caribbean
and for purpose remaining out of quarrel presently diving certain mem-
bers American family and permitting Haiti once again clearly demon-
strate its support principles non-­intervention.
GOH has no objection to publicity this demarche. Note by pouch.
I aware our firm policy of collective action through OAS to pre-
serve peace of hemisphere and reluctance our part undertake unilateral
action which might give rise to old cry of big stick diplomacy. However,
the fuse is burning fast and the powder keg in this part of Caribbean
may blow up before we can get effective collective action through
OAS or proposed MFM.4 Haiti is clearly peace-­loving state with no
aggressive designs on anybody and I feel we could make good case for
prompt effective action to protect her shores from threatened invasion.
Knowledge on part of would–be invaders we have set up protective
Repeated for information to Habana and Ciudad Trujillo.
On July 2, the Dominican Republic had requested the assistance of the Organization
of American States following the landing of revolutionary expeditions in its territory.
For additional information, see Document DR–8, for documentation relating to the
Fifth Meeting of Consultation of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, held
On July 8, Ambassador Drew reported that Foreign Minister Mars had informed
him that the Haitian Government was extremely concerned about reported Cuban and
Costa Rican preparations for an invasion of Haiti preliminary to a renewed attack on the
2 On July 9, the Embassy at Port-­au-Prince transmitted to the Department of State the
4 Reference is to the Fifth Meeting of OAS foreign minister held at Santiago, Chile.

patrol area off Haitian coast and around island would in my opinion be
surest possible deterrent to threatened invasion.
Drew
HA–16.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Haiti1
Department most sympathetic plight Haitians and will do all pos-
sible be responsive their request. Outcome present OAS consideration
Caribbean problem not yet clear and in view categoric assurances
Castro that no expeditions will be launched from Cuba, read to OAS
committee today by Cuban Foreign Minister Roa, Department feels
some of heat is off if for no other reason than attention of hemisphere
countries being focused on Cuban performance this regard.
Although risks are involved, Department believes that patrol
as requested by Haitians should not be established at this juncture.
Possibility such patrol being kept under consideration but immedi-
ate steps being limited to following: (1) Navy will hold USS Barry in
Port-­au-Prince two or three days beyond scheduled Sunday departure
(we considering requesting that vessel this type be maintained Port-­au-
Prince for duration immediate crisis) and (2) Navy arranging visit of
destroyer-­type vessel to Cap Haitian, to arrive Monday morning.
Request Ambassador inform Foreign Minister that Department
giving active and high-­level consideration Haitian request with full
awareness emergency conditions, that Cuban FonMin again committed
his government to non-­intervention policy today in OAS and that pend-
ing final decision on Haitian request, Navy taking two steps described
Drafted by Little; cleared in draft with Rubottom and John C. Dreier, Acting Director of
the Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs; cleared in substance with Captain
R. Kefauver, Head of the Western Hemisphere Branch of the Office of the Chief of Naval
Operations; and signed by Wieland. Donhauser was also informed of the telegram’s
substance.
Port-­au-Prince, transmitted on July 9, informed the Embassy that the Haitian Chargé
Gaston Woel has delivered a note to the Department of State, the substance of which had

Haiti  767
above. Request Embassy arrange clearance ship visit to Cap Haitian.
Department passing similar info to Bonhomme Saturday3 morning.
Herter
3 July 12.
HA–17.
Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State1
Washington, July 20, 1959
SUBJECT
Delivery of note in reply to Haitian request for U.S. assistance
PARTICIPANTS
Ernest Bonhomme, Ambassador of Haiti
ARA- Mr. Rubottom
CMA-Norman E. Warner
Ambassador Bonhomme was invited to call in order that
Mr.  Rubottom might deliver our note dated July 202 in response to
the Haitian Embassy’s note of July 93 requesting United States assis-
tance to safeguard Haiti’s neutrality and independence. Ambassador
Bonhomme did not open the note and read it during the conversation
and therefore did not comment directly on it.
Mr. Rubottom opened the conversation by stating that we have
fully shared Haiti’s concern over the Caribbean situation and reports
of plotting directed against Haiti. He stated that the Ambassador and
his Government may not have been aware of this but he, Mr. Rubottom,
had  many talks with officials of other Latin American governments
during the past several months concerning the situation and particu­larly
Haiti’s plight in being caught in the middle. He mentioned specifically
having talked with the President and foreign Minister of Venezuela and
with the Cuban Ambassador4 here. Mr. Rubottom said that we in the
by Warner on July 22.
dangers and confidence in the Organization of American States to find a solution to them.
4 Rómulo Betancourt, Ignacio Luis Arcaya, and Ernesto Dihigo, respectively.

Unites States know that it is difficult to fully control political activities
against other countries and that the regrettable expedition against Haiti
in July 1958 which had left from Unites States soil was an example of this
(Mr. Rubottom again expressed our deep regret over this occurrence). Mr.
Rubottom noted that we understand that Haiti has been brining to the
attention of other governments any information it has on activities in those
other countries which it believes threaten Haiti. Mr. Rubottom expressed
our hope that effective action will be taken through the Organization of
American States to allay present Caribbean tensions. He said, however,
that should this recourse not prove to be adequate then the United States
would have to consider whether other measures would be required. He
remarked that we are disturbed over the irresponsible attitude taken by a
small number of individuals, or governments, in Latin America.
Concluding the foregoing remarks, Mr. Rubottom asked for the
Ambassador’s views on the present situation to which the latter replied
that the Haitian Government is still very concerned over reports of
impending invasions. The Ambassador said that the situation in Haiti
is “volatile” and that some persons, even in the Cabinet, think anything
might happen.
The visits of U.S. Naval ships to Haitian ports was also mentioned
by Mr. Rubottom as a gesture of U.S. friendly concern for Haiti in pres-
ent circumstances.
In response to Mr. Rubottom’s query as to the crop outlook, the
Ambassador said that it looks like a “bumper” coffee crop which will
ripen early. The Ambassador mentioned also his Government’s hopes
that the proposed sugar mill in northern Haiti will be financed by the
Development Loan Fund since completion and operation of this mill
would furnish new employment in that area and make an important
contribution to Haiti’s economy generally. Mr. Rubottom recalled his
discussion of this with Ambassador Bonhomme last month and noted
that the Department has done what it can to move this matter forward
as rapidly as possible. He said that he does not like to make predictions
but he hopes that a decision will be reached shortly.
In response to Mr. Rubottom’s inquiry as to President Duvalier’s
health, Ambassador Bonhomme said he had seen the President when
he was in Haiti two weeks ago and found him looking better than he
had expected. He said the President has been getting around town in an
automobile and even had a slight accident. The Ambassador believes
the President will have to avoid henceforth the “killing pace” he had
set for himself before and that the President will have to delegate more
responsibly to others. The Ambassador said that the President feels that
Ambassador Drew saved his life by getting a specialist over from Guantanamo
to examine him.5 He described the relations between the President and
5 The emphasis appears in the source text.

Haiti  769
Ambassador Drew as very close and warm and said this applies also
to relations between their respective subordinates and associates such
as Foreign Minister Mars and the President’s “special assistant Barbot”
on the one hand and Mr. Yoe and Col. Heinl on the other. Mr. Rubottom
expressed gratification over the President’s recovery and the good
working relations we have in Port-­au-Prince.
Mr. Rubottom mentioned that we have heard rumors of impend-
ing Cabinet changes. Ambassador Bonhomme said he thinks a few
changes may be made but that there will not be a general “shake-­up”.
He thinks that Finance Minister Theard and Foreign Minister Mars will
be retained. He remarked that Theard is under very heavy pressure
because of the financial and fiscal stringency which he must impose.
Referring to recent differences between the Senate and the Cabinet,
Ambassador Bonhomme commented that some criticism is necessary
and that he thinks is a healthy sign of vitality.
HA–18.
Memorandum of a Conversation, the White House,
Washington1
August 4, 1959
SUBJECT
Call on President Eisenhower by the Ambassador of Haiti, Ernest Bonhomme.
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Ambassador of Haiti, Ernest Bonhomme
R. R. Rubottom Jr., Assistant Secretary of state for Inter-American Affairs
After being greeted by the President, the Ambassador handed him a
note (in French only)2 in which President Duvalier expressed ­appreciation
for the President’s efforts on behalf of world peace and offered military
cooperation from Haiti in the form of military bases as well as such other
Drafted by Rubottom.
2 In this letter dated July 13, President Duvalier offered allow the United States to
establish submarine bases and training camps on Haitian territory. The white House sent
Duvalier’s letter to the Department of State with a request for a translation. The letter and
a copy of the translation as sent to the White House are in Presidential Correspondence,
Lot 64 D 174.

cooperation as might serve the common ends pursued by the United
Stated and Haiti.
The Ambassador told the President that President Duvalier was
grateful for the role being played by the United States at this momen-
tous juncture of world events and that, while he recognized that the
Caribbean was only a small part of the total picture, he still recalled
the President’s remarks last year that “Peace is indivisible”. The
Ambassador said that cooperation should be a two-­way street and
in view of that being extended by the United States, Haiti wanted to
reciprocate, possibly by facilitating the use of its territory by the United
States for training in tropical warfare or for a naval base, perhaps with
submarine facilities.
The President asked whether there was any particular site that
the Haitian President had in mind. The Ambassador recalled that San
Nicolás had always been considered to be an excellent prospective base
site and that there were other secure areas available.
After expressing thanks for the proffered Haitian cooperation, the
President said that the U.S. approached the problems of the Americans,
other than those of a bilateral nature, through the Organization
American States. The Unites States is hopeful that the upcoming meet-
ing in Santiago on August 12 will contribute to a solution to the problem
of the Caribbean. It is our hope at least that the meeting will prevent the
problem from becoming any more serious since, unfortunately, outright
solutions to problems sometimes elude us. The President said that the
Departments of State and Defense would have to give detailed study
to President Duvalier’s specific offer. This may require some time, so
that a definitive reply may not be forthcoming until after the meeting in
Santiago.3 He said that he would send an acknowledgment promptly,
however.
The President told the Ambassador of his pleasure on being
informed of the recovery of President Duvalier from his recent heart
attack. After thanking the President for receiving him, the Ambassador
departed.
3 In a memorandum of September 19, acting Secretary of State Douglas Dillon
informed President Eisenhower that the Department of State in consultation with the
Department of Defense had completed its study of President Duvalier’s proposal and
had determined that “there is no present or anticipated requirement for a permanent mil-
itary installation in Haiti, although it would be useful to have access to sites suitable for
intermittent amphibious training. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Administration
Series, “Dillon, C. Douglas”) Eisenhower initialed the memorandum. On September 22,
the Department of State instructed the Embassy at Port-­au-­prince to inform President
Duvalier of the United States decision as described in Dillon’s memorandum. (Airgram

Haiti  771
HA–19.
Memorandum from Albert Post of the Office of Inter-
American Regional Economic Affairs to the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, October 14, 1959.
SUBJECT
Additional Requirement for Special Assistance for Haiti for Period October 1959 -
September 1960. (FY 60)
Summary and Recommendations
It is expected that Haiti will require reduced Special Assistance
in FY 60 mainly owing to substantially larger coffee exports, which
about 580,000 bags valued at $22 million. A balance of payments gap
$3.6 ­million. However, capital flight and unreturned export earnings
will sharply reduce any surplus. Since dollar reserves are now at histor-
ically low levels, it is believed that a $2 million increase in such reserves
will be necessary in order to cope with anticipated low export earnings
for FY 61. The IMF on September 30 renewed its standby with Haiti
requiring a balanced budget, reductions in official debt, credit restric-
tion, and a balance of payments surplus.
It is recommended that financial assistance to Haiti be made avail-
able as follows:
mitted from U.S. FY 60 funds ($2 million still remains available from the
million to $5 million.
(2) that the gourde counterpart of U.S. Special Assistance be
used by the USOM in cooperation with GOH for sound economic
development projects. In FY 59 the gourde counterpart of $6 million
(G30 ­million) was granted for budget support; no funds should be used
Memos 1959–1960.” Official Use Only. Cleared with Wieland; sent through Harry R.
Turkel, Director of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. A notation on
the source text by Rubottom reads: “Approved. R[oy] R[ubottom].”
[Footnote in the source text.]

for this purpose in FY 60 since GOH revenues are based on a “normal”
production years.
(3) that the disbursement of special Assistance funds be made by
the USOM Director in accordance with previous practices and criteria
established jointly which will be governed by an exchange of letters
with the Minister of Finance and the President of the National Bank.
A detailed justification for those recommendations is given in the
following discussion.
[Here follows eight pages of discussion of the recommendations
indicated above, omitted for Reasons of space.]
HA–20.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, May 31, 1960.
SUBJECT
Suggested Letter from President Eisenhower to Haitian President Duvalier concern-
ing Consultation on Cooperative Development Program.
Discussion
A special mission is being sent to Haiti about June 2 to consult
with Ambassador Drew and President Duvalier on problems affecting
the economic development program there. It would contribute to the
success of this special mission if President Eisenhower would send a
letter to President Duvalier on this occasion. The suggested text of such
a letter and a memorandum concerning this proposal are attached for
your review and forwarding to the President, if you approve.2 If the
message is approved, it is recommended that it be released only on the
initiative of President Duvalier.
Serious problems have disrupted our cooperative development
program in Haiti in recent months, culminating on May 25 in “popu-
lar” demonstrations apparently inspired by the Haitian Government
Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Warner.
2 Neither printed. The memorandum for the President, dated June 1 and signed by
Herter, is in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.

Haiti  773
to force the resignation of key Haitian administrators and technicians
engaged in the “Poté Colé” regional development project in northern
Haiti. In scope and cost, this is the most important component of the
grant-­financed cooperative program. The Haitian Government has not
yet supplied us with a report as to the circumstances of these demon-
strations (although this was immediately requested) or expressed
regrets or official concern over the incident as would be normal if it had
been contrary to the Government’s desires. Meanwhile the absence of
these key Haitian employees has brought a number of the “Poté Colé”
activities to a temporary halt and jeopardized the entire project.
The most important loan-­financed component of the development
program (the Artibonite Valley irrigation project) came to a stop in early
March following unilateral action by the Haitian Government in dismiss-
ing one of the project’s top Haitian employees, an engineer, and install-
ing as his replacement a discredited former Public Works Minister who
had been fired for malfeasance. Persistent but inconclusive efforts have
been made since March to arrive at satisfactory personnel and adminis-
trative rules to govern the project, with further disbursements from the
Development Loan Fund suspended pending the outcome. On April
20 President Duvalier ordered the project shutdown temporarily; early
in May the Haitian Director of the project was forced to resign; a now
Haitian Director was then appointed and accepted by us but President
Duvalier still has not indicated when he plans to resume work on the
project. On May 20, President Duvalier indicated his displeasure over
what he considered improper conduct by the senior ICA technical
advisor on this project. We plan to withdraw this man from Haiti if the
President confirms that he has lost confidence in him; we acknowledged
that this technician was indiscreet but we also recognize that his abrupt
removal will create serious practical problems in trying to resume work
on the project. This man was so well qualified technically and by previ-
ous service in Haiti that President Duvalier had specifically requested his
return to Haiti as advisor on the Artibonite project.
We are deeply disturbed over various abrupt, unilateral and seem-
ingly irresponsible actions taken by the Haitian Government with
respect to these economic development projects which seem vital to the
Haitian economy. A variety of motives has been suggested to explain
such actions, ranging from a desire for political patronage and personal
enrichment through venal appointees to ultra-­nationalist impatience
over outside “interference” in the Haitian development program. There
may have been a few instances of personal friction between American
technicians and their Haitian colleagues although working relations
have been generally good. We also know that the Haitian Government
has become more and more impatient over what it feels are excessive
delays in getting action on requests for United States assistance. These

have included applications to the Development Loan Fund, a request
for grant military assistance, and recently a request to negotiate an air
transport agreement. Haiti may believe that the best way to stimulate
more urgent and sympathetic United States action is to make an open
show of discontent with the present program.
Despite the difficulties posed by the present situation, we believe
every effort must be made to salvage the development program and
restore a satisfactory working relationship. Economically, Haiti has more
problems and poorer prospects than any other Western Hemisphere
republic. Financially, Haiti faces another critical shortfall in foreign
exchange receipts in 1961 due to rain damage to next fall’s coffee crop
during the recent flowering stage. Fiscally, a serious shortfall in gov-
ernment revenues will accompany reduced coffee exports next winter
and spring. Politically, the Duvalier administration would be severely
strained by a reduction in United States assistance. From the United
States point of view continued economic progress and political stability
in Haiti are of special importance at this time due to mounting political
tension else where in the Caribbean.
In order to probe the Haitian Government’s attitude more deeply
and determine the outlook for carrying on an effective assistance pro-
gram, we plan to send a special mission to Port-­au-Prince about June 2
to consult with Ambassador Drew and to hold frank discussions with
President Duvalier on the development program—­its objectives, prob-
lems, and ways and means of enhancing its effectiveness.
Ambassador Harry R. Turkel3 will head the special mission, accom-
panied by Mr. Rollin S. Atwood, Regional Director for Latin American
Operations of the International Cooperation Administration.4
Recommendation:
That you sign the attached memorandum to the President rec-
ommending that he send a letter to President Duvalier concerning the
forthcoming visit of a special mission to consult on the cooperative
development program in Haiti.5
3 Turkel was the United States representative on the Inter-American Economic
and Social Council of the Organization of American States, with the personal rank of
ambassador.
4 Edmund Hutchinson of the Development Loan Fund also accompanied the
mission.
5 Turkel, Atwood, Hutchinson, and Drew participated in conversations with
President Duvalier on June 3 and 4. Eisenhower’s letter, which introduced Ambassador
Turkel and requested President Duvalier’s cooperation in frank discussion, was deliv-
ered at the June 3 meeting. As a result of these discussions, on June 7 Rollin Atwood
and Haitian Secretary of State Gerald Philippeaux signed an agreement providing for
the resumption of work on the Poté Colé project and joint administration of personnel
matters. The Embassy at Port-­au-Prince transmitted the text of the agreement to the

Haiti  775
HA–21.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)
to the President1
Washington, June 9, 1960.
SUBJECT
1954,2 as amended, permitting the furnishing of military assistance to Haiti3
The purpose of this memorandum is to recommend that you make
Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended (hereinafter referred to as “the
Act”), to permit the furnishing of military assistance to Haiti.
The proposed military assistance is needed principally to increase
the capability of Haiti for defense against foreign-­based attack such as
was launched from Cuba against Haiti in August 1959. The aggressive
attitude of the Cuban Government and increasing political unrest in the
Dominican Republic make it urgently desirable to strengthen Haiti’s
capability for defense against new attacks and also to enable it to resist
political pressures from these aggressive neighbors. Haiti is especially
vulnerable to attack and political pressure because of its geographic
position, its military weakness, and the persistent economic and bud-
getary problems which prevent Haiti from remedying military defi-
ciencies from its own resources. In these circumstances, it is considered
to be important to the security of the United States to promote stability
in the Caribbean area by furnishing military assistance to Haiti primar-
ily for its legitimate self-­defense without regard to the requirement of
section 105(b)(4) of the Act that such assistance be furnished only in
furtherance of Western Hemisphere defense missions, and secondarily
for its internal security upon a determination under Section 105(b)(4) of
the Act that internal security requirements may be the basis, in part, of
this program.
Enclosed is a detailed discussion of the background and justifi-
cation of this program, the implementation of which is estimated to
require the expenditure of up to $300,000 of funds available under the
Act for military assistance; a small amount of excess equipment may be
included.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files. Secret.
3 The Haitian Government had requested United States assistance for military
equipment in notes from the Foreign Office and the General Staff to the Embassy at Port-­

It is considered that the furnishing of the proposed assistance and
the use of funds available there for under the Act are in furtherance of
the purposes of the Act and are important to the security of the United
States.
IT IS, ACCORDINGLY, RECOMMENDED that you sign the
enclosed memorandum which contains the determinations required by
the Act in order to carry out the proposed military assistance program
to Haiti.4
The Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Bureau of the
Budget concur in this recommendation.
Douglas Dillon
[Enclosure]
Military Assistance Program for Haiti Requiring Determinations,
Under the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended.
The assistance proposed for Haiti includes initial equipment and
related services for one under-­strength infantry battalion at an esti-
mated cost of $300,000; a small amount of excess equipment may be
included. This equipment would include infantry weapons, ammuni-
tion, light vehicles and communications equipment, as well as a limited
amount of air transport equipment. There will be a continuing modest
annual requirement for training materials, maintenance, and spares.
This continuing requirement is expected to be financed as grant mili-
tary assistance and would be dependent upon Presidential determina-
tion to provide such assistance in future fiscal years.
In August 1959 a small invasion force (31 men) landed in Haiti
from Cuba. Although this attack was defeated, the material deficien-
cies of the Haitian army became apparent during this action. All of the
invaders except two (an Algerian Frenchman and an Argentine news-
man) were Cubans and some were Cuban army personnel. Earlier in
1959 armed expeditions had departed from Cuba against Panama, the
Dominican Republic and Nicaragua. Prior to the August attack, the
Haitian Government had requested the recall of the five Cuban mili-
tary attachés in Port-­au-Prince on grounds that they were implicated
in terrorist bombings and other subversive activities. The attachés were
also charged with suspicious travel to the Haitian-Dominican frontier
regions. Subsequent to the August invasion, the Cuban Ambassador
4 On June 14, Eisenhower signed the memorandum containing the Presidential
determination. The United States and Haitian Governments entered into an agreement
relating to the transfer of military equipment, materials and services to Haiti, through an
exchange of notes at Port-­au-Prince on September 1, 1960. For the text of the agreement,
see 11 UST 2097.

Haiti  777
in Haiti returned to Cuba following semi-­official Haitian charges of
his complicity in the invasion. The Haitian Ambassador in Cuba also
returned to Haiti and neither government has since maintained dip-
lomatic personnel in the other’s capital (although both governments
officially maintained the fiction that relations are normal).
The provocative and irresponsible actions of the Castro Government
in Cuba continue to be a source of concern and a serious threat to the
security of neighboring countries. Haiti is in an especially vulnera-
ble position because of its physical nearness to Cuba, its military and
economic weakness, and its geographical attractiveness as a stepping-­
stone for a Cuba-­based expedition against the Dominican Republic.
The Dominican Republic also poses a continuing threat to Haitian
territorial and political integrity. Since 1937, when Dominican forces
perpetrated a border massacre in which more than 10,000 Haitians
were killed, Trujillo agents have persistently tried to intervene in
Haitian affairs. Since the advent of Castro to power in Cuba (January
1959), Trujillo has sought to assure the benevolent neutrality of Haiti
in his struggle with Castro and, if possible, to obtain positive sup-
port from Haiti against Castro. With United States encouragement the
Government of Haiti has thus far resisted heavy pressures from both
the Dominican Republic and Cuba. However, the marked increase in
domestic unrest in the Dominican Republic in recent months may fore-
shadow violent political upheavals in that country in the near future.
It is believed probable that the Cuban Government would try to take
advantage of a revolutionary situation in the Dominican Republic to
install a Castro-­type régime there. In such circumstances pressures
on Haiti from both Cuba and the Dominican Republic would rapidly
increase. The dangers to the United States security in the Caribbean are
especially serious in view of the Communist influences now evident
within the Cuban Government.
It is considered to be in the United States interest to provide Haiti
with the military equipment, materials, and services described above
using up to $300,000 of funds available for military assistance in fis-
cal year 1960. The furnishing of military assistance on a grant basis to
any Latin American nation is subject to several conditions. First, under
Sections 105(a) and 141 of the Act, the President must determine that
the increased ability of the nation to defend itself is important to the
security of the United States, and that the furnishing of such assistance
will strengthen the security of the United States and promote world
peace. Second, Section 105(b)(4) of the Act provides that military equip-
ment and materials may be furnished to a Latin American nation only
in furtherance of missions directly relating to the common defense of
the Western Hemisphere and that, unless the President determines oth-
erwise, internal security requirements shall not be the basis for such a

military assistance program. Third, pursuant to Sections 141 and 142(a)
of the Act, the recipient nation must agree to the undertakings which are
specified by Section 142(a) of the Act and normally included in the con-
ventional military assistance agreement. Fourth, under Section 511(c)
of the Act, any nation receiving military equipment or materials on a
grant basis must make arrangements for the return to the United States
of any such equipment and materials when no longer required for the
purposes for which furnished.
The first condition has been satisfied. In the President’s message
on the Mutual Security Program of February 19, 1958,5 the necessary
findings were confirmed as to countries for which military assistance
was then proposed, Haiti being among such countries.
The second condition requires a Presidential determination under
While the military assistance proposed to be furnished is designed
to bolster Haiti’s capacity to resist external aggression, the types of
equipment, materials, and services to be furnished would consequen-
tially strengthen the internal security capability of the Haitian armed
forces and could be used for internal security purposes. Therefore, it
is considered desirable to waive the first of the two above-­mentioned
requirements of Section 105(b)(4) of the Act and make the determina-
tion required by the third sentence of Section 105(b)(4).
The third and fourth conditions have been satisfied also by a
military assistance agreement signed with Haiti on January 28, 1955.
However, this military assistance agreement does not apply to the assis-
tance here in proposed, namely, the furnishing of military equipment,
materials and services to assist Haiti to maintain its legitimate self-­
defense, without reference to Western Hemisphere defense missions.
Therefore, a further agreement will be sought with Haiti to satisfy the
respect to the assistance here in proposed.
5 For the text of the President’s message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958 (Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office,

Haiti  779
HA–22.
Memorandum from the Acting Director of the
International Cooperation. Administration (Saccio) to the
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1
Washington, June 20, 1960.
SUBJECT
Budgetary Support for FY 1959–1960 to Haiti.
The Haitian request for budgetary support for the fiscal year end-
ing September 30, 1960 was submitted by a committee representing the
for the months of June, July, August and September, 1960. In view of the
size of this request it is doubtful if the provision of $1 million will do
much to satisfy the desires of the Duvalier Government.
alleged shortfall of “fiscal” receipts, $1.3 million for unbudgeted annual
payments on international debts and contributions, and $1.8 million
for restoration of salary cuts and other desired expenditures. Both the
Embassy and the USCM have recommended a negative response to
this request and have reported that the Haitian presentation has not
been justified, that there is no reason for expecting a shortfall in fiscal
receipts and that the request fails to establish a real need for the aid.
If the $1 million is made available during the present Haitian cur-
rent fiscal year, it will undoubtedly results in a demand for at least
$7 million and possibly more for budgetary support for the coming fis-
cal year 1960–1961. In view of the prospective decline in receipts as the
result of a short crop of coffee in FY 1960–1961, some budget support
appears likely to be required—­but the asking price will be much larger
if we provide budgetary support this year when it is not needed.
It must be assumed that supplying $1 million for the remainder
of this fiscal year will be interpreted by the Haitian Government as an
indication that its refusal to carry on a constructive development pro-
gram which the United States is financing is a sure way to secure bud-
getary support from the United States and will make any constructive
program of economic development practically impossible. This is par-
ticularly true when it is taken into consideration that during the pres-
ent fiscal year the Government of Haiti has followed the policy of not
only refusing to help itself but of rejecting constructive help designed
to bring economic development.
It is believed that if it is considered necessary for political reasons
to make available $1 million for budgetary support during the next two

months, then we should be prepared to support the Haitian budget to
the extent of some $6 to $8 million during the coming Haitian fiscal year
and be prepared for the possibility that in addition Haiti will demand a
large amount of development funds “without strings”.
In its most recent communication the Embassy has advised:
“Accordingly consider most productive immediate action would
be priority shipment to Haiti of weapons and equipment programmed
for army’s mobile light infantry battalion, specifically including in ini-
tial increment, as means of dramatizing our support and tightening
Merceron’s control over outlying units, at least one of helicopters for
battalions helicopter platoon. While initial increment weapons and
equipment should be sent with minimum delay, phasing in of sub-
sequent shipments should be on call by and under positive control
MAAG acting with Embassy concurrence, not only to avoid glutting
but to assure maximum leverage all times. If this recommendation
approved, MAAG will initiate immediate request for weapons, train-
ing, ammunition, and equipment to be included in initial increment.
“As related matter, of importance only secondary to support of
army infantry battalion, consider that immediate grant to Haiti under
MAP of C-47 aircraft for air corps, to be used for military airlift and by
Cohata, would have important impact on army generally, on air corps
specifically, and would be widely recognized as tangible evidence our
support.”
We strongly recommend the Department accept views of officials
on the ground, namely, that the United States (1) not provide any bud-
ons and equipment and C–47’s mentioned above.2
L. J. Saccio
2 In a letter to Acting Director Saccio of July 22, Under Secretary Merchant acknowl-
edged the unsatisfactory conditions that existed in Haiti but advised: “I remain of the
opinion that on foreign policy grounds directly related to the Cuban situation we should
make available to the Government of Haiti $1 million for budgetary support during the
next two months. This should be done without any commitment whatsoever, in our own
minds or implied, otherwise to continue budgetary support thereafter. I ask, therefore,
that on this understanding ICA proceed to make the necessary arrangements in collab-
oration with Assistant Secretary Rubottom.” In regard to Saccio’s recommendation con-
cerning military equipment, Merchant offered his support and stated that the Department
of State was working closely and urgently on the matter with the Department of Defense.
On July 29, the Embassy at Port-­au-Prince was informed of the decision to make
available $1,000,000 to the Haitian Government for budgetary support during the fol-
lowing two months in ICATO 34, and Department of State telegram 29, filed respectively
Ambassador Bonhomme during a meeting with Ambassador Turkel on August 12
to discuss the United States offer of budgetary assistance, stated that President Duvalier
considered the sum of $1,000,000 to be inadequate and needed an additional $1,500,000
immediately. Turkel told Bonhomme that he saw no possibility of increasing the amount

Haiti  781
HA–23.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State1
Washington, June 28, 1960.
SUBJECT
Haitian–United States Relations
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Ernest Bonhomme
CMA – Mr. Wieland
CMA – Mr. Warner
Ambassador Bonhomme called at 4:00 pm by invitation and the
ensuing conversation lasted an hour and a half. It was a wide-­ranging
exchange of views on this United States assistance program in Haiti, with
President Duvalier’s speech at Jacmel last week, as the starting point.
Neither Ambassador Bonhomme nor the CMA officers had yet seen the
text of President Duvalier’s remarks, but only newspaper articles con-
cerning it. Highlights of the discussion are the following paragraphs.
Ambassador Bonhomme was unable to explain why President
Duvalier had chosen to express himself on United States assistance in
this public way in Haiti. The Ambassador only commented that the
occasion was the dedication of a wharf built with the assistance of pri-
vate United States firms. His implication was that this occasion pointed
up the contrast between private and official United States efforts to help
Haiti. The Ambassador thought that press efforts to portray President
Duvalier as calling for a choice between the United States and Soviet
Union had been a misinterpretation of his words.
Mr. Wieland asked what were the Ambassador’s views on how to
put matters back on the tracks. The Ambassador paused, then replied
that he supposed the President was awaiting some results from the
“Special mission” he had entrusted to Ambassador Turkel when the
latter visited Haiti.2
Drafted by Warner.
2 On June 24, the Embassy at Port-au-Prince reported that the central theme of
President Duvalier’s speech of June 21, made on the occasion of dedicating the Jacmel
Wharf, was his disappointment with the meagerness of United States aid. In the speech,
Duvalier admitted that his efforts to improve the general welfare had not yet succeeded,
but blamed the lack of progress not on government efforts but on the inadequacy of
United States assistance. The Embassy commented that while public reaction interpreted
the speech as anti-American and a strong warning to the United States, the speech was
only a public reiteration of views that the Haitian Government had been expressing pri-

We showed Ambassador Bonhomme a draft press release3 the
Department has prepared for possible use in clarifying the dollar
amount of United States aid to Haiti in Fiscal 1960 and 1959 and the
release may be missing the point Haiti has tried to make: i.e, what has
this aid accomplished? He referred to the $3 million loan for a private
sugar mill as an example, as well as the $300,000 road study loan. We
pointed out that although the sugar mill loan has not been used, it is
nevertheless a legitimate example of United States efforts to help. We
observed that much time and effort by United States officials went into
getting the loan approved in view of the high priority given in by the
GOH. We mentioned that, as the Ambassador knew, there had been
great interest show by the Haitian Government in getting this done
including telegrams from President Duvalier. Failure to use the funds
is not the fault of the United States Government nor of the Haitian
Government but appears to be due to the efforts of the borrower to
transfer his interest in the loan to a third party.
The present status of the road study loan was also discussed briefly,
with the Ambassador apparently puzzled and frustrated by previous
and present delays. Mr. Warner said he thought that the DLF would be
disposed to proceed rapidly with this loan once the Artibonite prob-
lem were cleared up. This prompted the Ambassador to make more
general comments about Haiti’s relations with the DLF. He complained
that Haiti makes an application and then a long time after, often many
months later, is informed that the application is not in proper form,
is not in English, or that it lacks supporting data. He still is not sure
whether applications should go through USOM in Haiti or go directly
to the DLF. He understands that the USOM represents the DLF with
regard to DLF disbursements in the Artibonite valley, but he doesn’t
know if USOM represents the DLF in all other matters in Haiti. In any
event, some applications have been submitted through the USOM and
have gone on to the DLF but subsequently they were found to be faulty.
Ambassador Bonhomme wondered why the USOM could not imme-
diately have told the Haitian Government about the inadequacies of
the applications prior to sending them on to the DLF with consequent
administrative delays.
Ambassador Bonhomme recalled that in the latter stages of the
Magloire Government (1956), he had witnessed a similar hesitancy in
going through with United States assistance. He said he had found out
later this had been due to the expectation by the United States that the
Magloire Government was not going to last. He said that all sorts of
3 Not found.

Haiti  783
reasons had been given to him (he was Haitian representative on the
joint development council at the time) and he was assured that funds
were available for repairing Hurricane Hazel damage but the result
was that very little assistance was forthcoming. Mr. Warner assured
Ambassador Bonhomme that this is not the case now and that the United
States is prepared to cooperate with the Haitian Government to carry
out an effective program. He said he was not familiar with the situation
in 1956 but that it has been our intention and still is to do everything
we can to be of assistance in overcoming the problem in Haiti which
we recognize as being serious and urgent. He said that we assume, and
hope that the Haitian Government assumes, as a basic premise that
there is good will and good faith on both sides and that with such an
assumption, we would like to get down to specifics, identifying what
the specific problems are and trying to work out specific solutions. Mr.
Warner stated that as we see the situation, the next step in the Poté Colé
project and in the Artibonite valley is for the Haitian Government to
nominate the key personnel who are needed before activities can be
fully resumed.
When asked again what specific problems he saw in the situation,
Ambassador Bonhomme hesitated and then said that the question
appeared to him to be one of general atmosphere. He thought that in
some cases United States technicians had gone farther than they should
in carrying out their advisory roles. The Ambassador thought that in a
situation such as we have in Haiti, people should perhaps be allowed
to make mistakes. The Ambassador seemed to be implying that United
States advisors are sometimes paternalistic in their actions and that
this had offended the dignity and self-­esteem of Haitian officials.
The Ambassador was not specific other than to mention Mr. Yoe and
Minister Philippeaux in this connection.
Ambassador Bonhmme also remarked that some of the best-­
qualified Haitian technical and administrative personnel are not polit-
ically in sympathy with the Duvalier administration. He thought that
part of the assistance program should be to train technicians rather than
to expect to find technicians already qualified. Mr. Warner commented
that we realize the program cannot operate in a political vacuum and
we recognize that political considerations have to be taken into account
by the Duvalier government. We consider that President Duvalier is the
best judge of the Haitian political picture. However, if there are political
objections to individual Haitian employees, we think it would be better
to talk over the situation ahead of the time instead of having the man
abruptly fired. In this connection, Mr. Warner asked the Ambassador
whether he thought the basic principle of having mutually acceptable
personnel working in the program was a desirable principle from a

practical working point of view. The Ambassador agreed that this was
an essential principle, but it was at this point that he suggested that to
be acceptable personnel should not necessarily be the most highly qual-
ified from a technical point of view. Mr. Warner commented that we are
not trying to have a program which is dependent on any single man
for its success and Mr. Wieland cited the case of the recent departure of
Mr. Ward from Artibonite valley and the difficulties we are having in try-
ing to find another man who is as well qualified. Nevertheless, in order
that the work go forward, we have named a temporary replacement
who is not as well qualified but who we think is acceptable for the time
being. In the same spirit we have accepted the Haitian Government’s
nominations of Mr. Cantave and Mr. Jospitre and believe that we can
carry on a satisfactory program with them even though they do not
appear to be as well qualified, from the point of view of previous expe-
rience, as the men they replaced.
It was apparent that Ambassador Bonhomme is discouraged and
frustrated by the present state of affairs. At one point he mentioned that
he has been considering returning to Port-­au-Prince to tell President
Duvalier that it he continues his apparent new policy of turning away
from the United States, the Ambassador’s usefulness in Washington
may be ended. Mr. Wieland and Mr. Warner said they hoped the
Ambassador would not find it necessary to do this and assured him of
their very high regard. Mr. Warner said that if the Ambassador should
return to Port-­au-Prince, he should assure his Government, if it has any
doubts, that United States policy toward Haiti continues to be one of
cooperating to the fullest extent possible in working out problems of
mutual concern. Near the end of the conversation, Mr. Warner referred
to the Artibonite valley difficulties and said these are traceable in part to
what happened there years ago when, from the Haitian Government’s
point of view, a great deal of money was spent with comparatively lit-
tle result. The DLF was keenly aware of these past difficulties, and the
criticism which had arisen as a result, when it approved the loan for
further work in the valley; perhaps the DLF has seemed excessively
cautious and strict in its administration of the loan funds. However, the
DLF wished to assure that the funds are used with the maximum effec-
tiveness. Thus how to achieve an effective operation appears to be the
real problem in the Artibonite valley and in other projects rather than
the amount of money. Mr. Warner commented, and the Ambassador
agreed, that money in itself will not solve the problem. When asked
for what specific suggestions he would have to make operations more
effective, the Ambassador had none, although he did say that some
gesture by the United States toward Haiti at this time might be very
helpful.

Haiti  785
Mr. Wieland and Mr. Warner asked the Ambassador to inform us
immediately if this Government’s understanding of what the next step
is to be is not the same as ours; i.e., the Haitian Government should
name persons to fill the key jobs still vacant in the Artibonite Valley
and in the Poté Colé project. Mr. Wieland added that if the GOH had a
different understanding of what the next step should be, we hoped the
Ambassador would advise us at once so the issue could be clarified in
the interest of getting on with constructive efforts.
HA–24.
Editorial Note
July 21, 1960.
The memorandum of discussion of the 452nd meeting of the
National Security Council on July 21, includes the following exchange
regarding the situation in Haiti which occurred during Director of
Central Intelligence Dulles’ briefing on significant developments affect-
ing United States security:
“[Director Dulles reported that] Haiti was characterized as usual
by a chaotic situation. The Duvalier regime was drifting Leftward.
Duvalier was not well and had delegated much authority to a clique
of Leftists. [text not declassified] The government has been attacking the
U.S. and was pro-Castro. The use of U.S. aid for political patronage pur-
poses had crippled the effectiveness of the aid program. [text not declas-
sified] The army was the most important cohesive force in Haiti and
was pro-U.S. It would probably be reluctant, however, to act against the
government. Secretary Herter agreed that the army probably offered
the best bet in Haiti. He stated that the U.S. was not enthusiastic about
a proposal that Haiti contribute army units for the Congo because the
U.S. prefers to have the Haitian army in Haiti.” (Eisenhower Library,
Whitman File, NSC Records)

HA–25.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State1
Washington, August 31, 1960.
SUBJECT
United States Assistance to Haiti
PARTICIPANTS
Drafted by Warner.
2 Robert Newbegin was appointed Ambassador to Haiti on August 27.
During a conversation at the White House on July 11, Secretary Herter had informed
the President that President Duvalier had recently requested the recall of Ambassador
Drew. Herter explained to the President that Ambassador Drew had done a fine a job
in Haiti, was of retirement age, and had requested retirement. Herter also reminded
the President that Haitian governments had requested the recall of the last four United
States ambassadors sent there and that the situation was essentially chaotic. President
Eisenhower agreed to replace Drew. (Memorandum of Conference with the President;
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries).
ARA - Mr. Mann
Mr. Mallon
Ambassador Newbegin2
DLF - Mr. Perry
ICA    - Mr. Atwood
Mr. Harrison
CMA - Mr. Wieland
Mr. Vallon
Mr. Warner
REA - Mr. Sinn
The meeting was called on short notice to take advantage of
Ambassador Newbegin’s brief visit to Washington to consult on devel-
opment assistance problems prior to the departure of Mr. Mann and
Mr. Atwood for Bogotá.
The meeting began with a discussion of the present political situa-
tion in the Caribbean and the desirability of keeping Haiti in a neutral
position between Cuba and the Dominican Republic. There was general
agreement that if the Trujillo Government should fall, Haiti would be
concerned primarily with defending herself from any spilling over into
Haiti of revolutionary situation in the Dominican Republic. Mr. Mann
recommended that Ambassador Newbegin take a suitable occasion
soon after his arrival to let the Haitian Government know that in case
Trujillo’s fall we would want to see a responsible government assume
power in the Dominican Republic, one which is prepared to live up to
its inter-American commitments, and that we would not view favor-
able any action by the Haitian Government which might impede the
attainment of this objective. The principle danger in a Dominican

Haiti  787
revolutionary situation may be efforts by the Castro-­government or
Castrophiles to form a leftist regime sympathetic to or subservient to
the Castro regime.
There was general agreement that the Government of Haiti is in a
desperate situation at the present time, because of economic and finan-
cial difficulties as well as the political box in which she finds herself,
caught in the middle between Trujillo on the right and Castro on the
left. There was general agreement that the United States’ objective be
to obtain enough leverage in Haiti to counterbalance pressures from
Trujillo and Castro. President Duvalier’s request for budget support
and economic aid must be considered in this context. In the ensuing
discussion Mr. Mann stated that Haiti should not be rewarded for
being irresponsible and that any sizeable projects financed with our
assistance cannot be converted into political slush funds, although we
must recognize that the desires of the host government with regard to
individual employees must be taken into account. It was agreed that
budget support should have priority over economic development aid,
and there was some discussion of the desirability of tying budget sup-
port to specific items in the budget. Mr. Mann favored administering
our assistance in such a way that we can turn it on and off in accor-
dance with the degree of cooperation we receive from the Haitian
Government. Mr. Mann also favored not embarking on any large new
projects pending better indications of a cooperative attitude from the
Haitian Government.
Mr. Mann recommended that in offering budget support we urge
the Haitian Government to give further consideration to carrying on
construction in the Artibonite valley under contract. Mr. Mann had to
leave the meeting early, but requested that he be given concrete recom-
mendations (with justifications) along the lines suggested.
In the latter part of the meeting, the possibility was discussed of
“untying” the DLF road engineering loan from the Artibonite loan.
Mr. Perry believed this might be possible. With regard to the suggestion
that the DLF resume disbursements to pay for the engineering studies
in the Artibonite valley, which have been largely completed, Mr. Perry
stated that he would consult with others at the DLF concerning this
possibility.

HA–26.
Special National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, September 27, 1960.
THE SITUATION AND PROSPECTS IN HAITI2
The Problem
To assess the political and economic situation in Haiti, and the
short-­term prospects.
Conclusions
1. President Francois Duvalier’s tenure of power is now reason-
ably secure. So long as Duvalier remains active and continues to receive
sizable external assistance, we foresee no major change in the Haitian
political situation. The opposition is weak and discouraged. The mili-
tary are unlikely to move against the government and are reasonably
capable of maintaining internal order in present circumstances. (Paras.
2. Even with continuing external aid on the scale of that received
in recent years, the hand-­to-­mouth Haitian economy will show lit-
tle or no improvement. The coming smaller off-­year coffee harvest is
likely to produce another budget and balance of payments crisis in
1961. Substantial improvement in the basic economic situation would
require a long-­term program of investment in economic development
on a scale not hitherto contemplated. (Paras. 10–14)
3. Duvalier will persist in his demands for U.S. aid on a massive
scale and in his expressions of resentment at its denial. Nevertheless,
his object is to obtain more aid and he would not intentionally go so far
as to forfeit that which he now receives. (Paras. 17–19)
4. Duvalier probably still makes or approves of all major decisions.
We believe that as yet his leftist advisors can do little more than inten-
sify the President’s own prejudices. (Paras. 20–21)
1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. According to a note on the
cover sheet, “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the
Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.” The esti-
mate was concurred in by the United States Intelligence Board on September 27, 1960.
sequent footnotes designated by symbols appear in the source text. For the text of SNIE

Haiti  789
5. The main threat to continued stability arises from the President’s
ill health. Without Duvalier, a struggle for power would be certain to
occur. The military would be likely to seize control, but probably would
be unable to stabilize the situation. The outcome would probably be
a prolonged period of instability in which pro-Castro elements would
certainly strive to gain control. (Para. 22)
Discussion
6. Background. Haiti is an overcrowded and impoverished coun-
try: its levels of production, income, health, and literacy are the lowest
in the Western Hemisphere. Its politics are highly personal, but reflect
underlying tensions between a long-­established mulatto elite, a rising
Negro elite, and the city mob of Port-­au-Prince. The mass of Negro
peasants is, for the most part, politically inert.
7. Since the end of the U.S. military occupation (1934), it has been
normal for a Haitian President to complete his six-­year term of office,
to seek to perpetuate himself in power, to be thereupon overthrown
by a military junta, and to be fairly promptly replaced by a successor
selected by the junta in private consultation with leading politicians.
Following the overthrow of President Magloire in 1956, this customary
though extra-­constitutional procedure broke down when the contend-
ing political factions could not agree upon a successor. After several
interim governments had been overthrown by popular disorder in
Port-­au-Prince, the army, in September 1957, finally procured the pop-
ular election of Dr. Francois Duvalier. He was bitterly opposed by the
mulatto elite and by organized labor in Port-­au-Prince, but was enthu-
siastically supported by the Negro elite and was generally popular
among the peasants.
8. The Political Situation. Until the spring of 1959, Duvalier’s ten-
ure of power was precarious. Opposition leaders in exile were actively
conspiring against him with some encouragement from the new regime
in Cuba. An invasion of exiles with Cuban support was imminently
expected. The army could not be relied upon to resist it. Duvalier’s
control of the internal situation depended primarily upon the terror
inspired by his notorious “secret police.” The Haitian treasury was vir-
tually empty. At this point the situation was stabilized by the receipt of
$6 million in U.S. budgetary support and by the arrival of a U.S. Marine
Corps mission to reform and revitalize the Haitian military establish-
ment. These measures were significant, not only for their direct effects,
but more importantly as signs of U.S. interest in sustaining the Duvalier
regime. This indication of U.S. support was largely responsible for the
absence of an attempt against the regime in May 1959, when President
Duvalier was incapacitated by a severe illness.

9. Duvalier’s tenure of power is now reasonably secure. The inter-
nal opposition is thoroughly discouraged and intimidated; the oppo-
sition in exile, denied further Cuban support, is no longer a serious
threat. The military and security forces are effectively controlled by
being divided into components no one of which is capable of acting
separately against the regime, and by the appointment of commanders
personally dependent on Duvalier and so divided by personal rivalries
as to be unlikely to combine against him. The army, which includes the
small air force and coast guard, numbers 5,200, but its ground forces
are scattered over the country in small police and constabulary detach-
ments, except for an understrength battalion at Port-­au-Prince. The
National Police and the Presidential Guard, nominally part of the army,
are actually independent commands under Duvalier’s direct control.
Moreover, the 200-­man Presidential Guard separates the army battal-
ion at Port-­au-Prince from any large supply of ammunition. There is,
in addition, a civilian militia of about 400 men and women specially
selected, like the Guard, for personal loyalty to Duvalier.
10. The Economy. Duvalier inherited a stagnant economy and today
it continues in decline, but probably not sufficiently to provoke serious
political consequences. The major problems are inadequate resources,
low agricultural productivity, lack of diversification, and meager eco-
nomic development. Moreover, domestic savings and investment—­
almost nonexistent—­and foreign investment are insufficient to keep up
with capital deterioration, much less to increase production to support
the expanding population.
11. Agricultural production is retarded by the prevalence of subsis-
tence farming on small family plots. There are only two important com-
mercial plantations in the country, one producing sugar, the other sisal.
The major export is coffee, which grows wild and receives a minimum
of processing from the peasants who collect it. Haiti’s continued heavy
dependence on coffee, with its alternating high and low crop years and
price fluctuations, results in periodic strains on the country’s solvency.
Even though agriculture is the major economic pursuit, about a quarter
of Haitian imports are food and other agricultural products.
12. While the government is adhering to a financial stabilization
program prescribed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), its
finances are in a sorry state, partly as a result of administrative inept-
itude and graft. The public debt is close to $70 million and the rising
burden of foreign debt (more than half of the public debt) and amorti-
zation now makes it difficult for Haiti to borrow more. In recent years,
debt service and amortization have amounted to almost 10 percent of
the budget. Haiti’s budget deficit amounted to $8 million in the 1958–
1959 fiscal year. Even though the government has suspended debt ser-
vice and amortization, it probably will fall short of meeting current

Haiti  791
expenses by about a million dollars in the fiscal year ending on 30
September 1960.
13. The regime has managed to keep afloat in the past year with
the continuation of major outside assistance, a good coffee crop, above
average tourist earnings, and the prospect of larger sugar exports to the
U.S. Under terms of the IMF stabilization agreement, Haiti has been
lion in balance of payments support; a new arrangement with the IMF is
under negotiation. The U.S. provided $6 million in budgetary support
as grant aid during the 1958–1959 fiscal year, and has already allocated
a million dollars in grant aid to cover the estimated current deficit. In
addition, Haiti has continued to receive sizable external development
loans and assistance, mainly from the U.S.3
14. Even with continuing external aid on the scale of that received
in recent years, the hand-­to-­mouth Haitian economy will show little
or no improvement. Economic development is not keeping pace with
capital depreciation and population growth. The coming smaller off-­
year coffee harvest is likely to produce another budget and balance of
payments crisis in 1961. Substantial improvement in the basic economic
situation, as distinguished from budgetary and balance of payments
relief, would require a long-­term program of investment in economic
development on a scale not hitherto contemplated. If such a pro-
gram were to be undertaken, its implementation would be hampered
by Haitian sensitivities regarding national sovereignty as well as the
Haitian spoils system.
15. Political Prospects. So long as Duvalier remains active and exter-
nal assistance continues, we foresee no major change in the Haitian
political situation. The domestic opposition is weak, unorganized, and
discouraged. The military are unlikely to move against the government
and are reasonably capable of maintaining internal order in present
circumstances.
16. A successful armed incursion by Haitian exiles—­with or with-
out Cuban support—­is unlikely. Haitian exiles are few in number
and for the most part lack revolutionary zeal. Even though there is
important sympathy for Fidel Castro among students, teachers, and
3 Total U.S. economic aid to Haiti since the end of World War II amounts to over $70
irrigation and road engineering loans), U.S. Public Law 480 (approximately $8 million for
The IBRD has provided $2.6 million for a road maintenance program. The economic
development efforts of U.S. agencies are concentrated in two projects: The Artibonite
Valley Authority and Poté Colé, which combine regional development projects aimed at
raising agricultural productivity and improving health, education, and administrative
standards.

intellectuals, Castroism has had little impact on the Haitian peasantry.
Moreover, Castro’s efforts at reconciliation with Haiti—­in contrast to
his earlier activity against Duvalier—­and his virtual abandonment of
Haitian exiles make trouble from that quarter not likely. A filibustering
expedition would probably meet with no more success than that of a
year ago, which received no local support and was eventually annihi-
lated by Duvalier’s men.
17. A matter of immediate concern is that, since early this year,
Duvalier has become extremely antagonistic in his dealings with U.S.
agencies in Haiti and severely critical of the terms and scale of U.S.
economic assistance. He has opened the joint economic development
projects to the Haitian spoils system, thereby provoking a cut-­back in
the disbursement of U.S. funds for such projects and a slowdown in
operations. In an attempt to induce massive U.S. aid, Duvalier has both
threatened to seek Communist Bloc assistance and warned of the local
Communist threat in his underdeveloped country.4 One effect of the
President’s complaints has been to evoke considerable public criticism
of the U.S.
18. Duvalier’s anti-U.S. behavior is probably rooted in his frustra-
tions: his own inability to improve the miserable living conditions of
the bulk of his people and the inadequacy of U.S. aid to bring about
any early or substantial change in their hopeless situation. He probably
realizes that the U.S.-­sponsored long-­term development projects will
be of eventual benefit to Haiti, but he is also impressed by the fact that
they have had little or no effect on the miserable lot of most Haitians
and are therefore of little political benefit to him.
19. Duvalier will persist in his demands for U.S. aid on a massive
scale and in his expressions of resentment at its denial, employing such
threats as seem to him necessary to gain consideration, but his object is
to obtain more aid and he would not intentionally go so far as to forfeit
that which he now receives. Because of his difficulties with the U.S., he
may feel some sympathy for Fidel Castro. More importantly, Castro’s
recent approaches toward a reconciliation are attractive to Duvalier as
insurance against further Cuban support for the Haitian opposition and
as reinsurance against interference by Trujillo. Nevertheless, Duvalier’s
interests are basically different from Castro’s and he is unlikely to risk
losing the Haitian Army’s support by too close an identification with
the Cuban regime.
20. The situation is complicated by the apparent decline in
Duvalier’s physical and mental health since his severe illness in May
1959 and by his apparent reliance on a small group of leftist advisors,
4 Haiti maintains diplomatic relations with no Bloc country expect Poland. Its trade
with the Bloc is negligible.

Haiti  793
including one or two probable Communists.5 While it is difficult to
assess the degree of influence exerted by these men, it is likely that
they have considerable control over access to the President and over
the information reaching him. However, the Haitian military still have
access to Duvalier and influence with him. We believe that as yet the
President’s leftist advisors can do little more than intensify his own
prejudices, and that Duvalier—­a tough-­minded and suspicious man—­
probably still makes or approves of all major decisions himself.
21. For its part, the Haitian Communist movement, despite a mod-
est revival, remains the smallest in Latin America, and is unlikely to be
a decisive factor while Duvalier is in office. The Communist Party and
the pro-Communist Popular Socialist Party have been outlawed for
years and there is no evidence of an effective underground in Haiti or
among Haitian exiles. While Duvalier harps on the potential threat of
communism, he probably does not see it as an immediate threat to him.
On the contrary, although he acts from time to time against Communist
activities, he finds it necessary or useful to employ the administrative
talents of individual Communists and has acquiesced in the return of
key Communist figures from exile. Nevertheless, the Communists, who
are chiefly mulatto intellectuals, are still few in number. Their influence
and that of their sympathizers is as yet primarily as individuals in the
government bureaucracy—­some in key posts—­and in the press, edu-
cation, and intellectual circles. Their continued location in their present
positions enables them to stimulate anti-American sentiment and to
work toward the development of an effective Communist organization.
22. The main threat to continued stability arises from the President’s
ill health. Still vigorous in appearance, Duvalier continues to suffer the
bad effects of his severe heart attack. Should he die or be seriously inca-
pacitated for a prolonged period, a struggle for power would be cer-
tain to ensue. There is no one leader who could command the quick
and widespread support necessary for strong government. The mili-
tary would be likely to seize control of the government, but probably
would not be able to stabilize the situation. The result would probably
be a period of disorder similar to the nine-­month hiatus preceding the
installation of Duvalier, when six provisional governments rose and
fell. In such an unstable situation, pro-Castro elements would certainly
strive to gain control of Haiti.
5 Paul Blanchet, Minister of Coordination and Information and Secretary-General of
the Cabinet; Herve Boyer, Minister of Commerce and one of Haiti’s few competent econ-
omists; Gerard Philippeaux, Minister of Finance and Agriculture; Michel Lamartiniere
Honorat, Minister of Public Works; Clovis Desinor, director designate of the economic
planning board; Jules Blanchet, Chairman of the Haitian budgetary and accounting insti-
tution. Honorat was an openly declared member of the Haitian Communist Party in 1946.
Jules Blanchet, perhaps the ideological leader of the group, was a founding member of
the marxist Popular Socialist Party in 1946.

23. For historical reasons, there has long been bitter enmity between
the Haitians and the Dominicans. The Haitians particularly hate and
fear Trujillo. As a consequence of this fear, the Duvalier regime was
hesitant to provoke Trujillo by imposing the sanctions invoked against
him by the Organization of American States, but finally did so.
24. In early 1959, when the Duvalier regime was threatened by
Castro, the Dominican Republic was prepared to intervene to prevent
hostile (Cuban) access to its land frontier with Haiti. It might again con-
sider doing so to forestall or counteract the rise to power of a Haitian
regime associated with Castro. Dominican intervention in such a case
would be more likely to take the form of active assistance to anti-Cas-
tro Haitian elements than of outright military invasion. Dominican
support, however, would tend to discredit any Haitian faction which
accepted it.
25. If the Trujillo regime were to be overthrown, the attitude of
any successor government toward Haiti would depend on its character.
A Dominican military junta, or any genuinely liberal regime, would
probably be preoccupied with domestic problems, but would be as
concerned as Trujillo to prevent or counteract the establishment of a
pro-Castro regime in Haiti. On the other hand, a pro-Castro regime
in the Dominican Republic would probably give active support to the
establishment of a pro-Castro regime in Haiti.
HA–27.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Haiti1
124. For Ambassador Newbegin.2
Following for your information and guidance in discussing cur-
rent Haiti economic and financial problems. Following presentation
credentials and initial discussions, your recommendations requested
Drafted by Warner; cleared in draft with Atwood, in substance with W. Ellory Dension,
of the Loan Division of the Export-Import Bank, and with Hebert N. Higgins of the Office
of the Special Assistance for Mutual Security Affairs; and signed by Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Milton Barall.
2 Ambassador Newbegin presented his credentials to the Haitian Government on
November 4.

Haiti  795
regards implementation balance of payments and budgetary support
programs and U.S.-­financed economic development. Primary objective
is preservation close cooperative relations based on mutual confidence
and traditional Haitian-U.S. political alignment. U.S. assistance should
contribute directly this objective in addition to advancing economic
development Haiti and relieving critical financial problems.
Mutual Security Coordinator has made following decisions:
1) commit $5 million from Contingency Fund for support Haitian
for balance payments support and economic development projects (this
get support); 3) earmark $3 million from Contingency Fund to finance
additional development projects in Haiti.
Separate instructions will follow concerning negotiation agree-
ments governing utilization budget support, balance payments sup-
port and economic development assistance. In preliminary discussions
million for economic development. You also authorized inform Haitian
authorities that additional moderate amount assistance may be avail-
able for economic development under certain mutually satisfactory
conditions. However specific amount of $3 million for this purpose
should not repeat not be mentioned at this time, pending your further
assessment of prospects for effective utilization thereof in achieving
U.S. objectives. Actual commitment and use these funds would be
subject to restoration satisfactory working relationship with GOH and
agreement on specific projects.
In discussions you should emphasize U.S. earnest intention to con-
tinue efforts to help overcome problems of Haitian people. At some
time you authorized discuss in frank constructive vein problems which
have impeded assistance program in past. Re budget support program,
you may inform President Duvalier we anticipate that portion funds
available this purpose will be earmarked for some of specific items
Haitian budget he requested in July 1960. While budget support funds
cannot be used for debt repayment, U.S. expects GOH will promptly
meet budget commitments for debt repayment utilizing domestic rev-
enues that purpose (in this connection would be appropriate express
concern over arrearages in payments due ExImBank which budgeted
in Haitian FY1960 not yet paid). Should be made clear budget and bal-
ance payments support made available on understanding Haiti will
continue adhere IMF standby agreement and will seek and follow to
maximum possible extent advice of IMF and ICA financial and admin-
istrative advisers with respects improved budgetary management and
fiscal operations.

You may inform President Duvalier that Mr. Atwood of ICA prob-
ably accompanied by new USOM Director3 plans visit Haiti in near
future to assist you in more detailed discussion FY 1961 assistance
program.
Re President Duvalier’s request for moratorium on payments to
ExImBank, you may state ExImBank carefully studying this request
and you expect receive detailed instructions soon this subject.
ICA concurs this message and request Ambassador discuss with
Acting Director USOM.
Herter
3 Earl. O. Finnie.
HA–28.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Haiti (Newbegin) to
the Department of State1
163. As reported Embassy telegram 161, Foreign Minister in
meeting attended by all Latin American Chiefs of Mission accredited
Haiti read note requesting their support general moratorium on Latin
American debt to U.S.2 I had had no previous intimation anything this
nature contemplated and it came as complete surprise. I stated in course
meeting that it appeared to me question this nature should be treated
by individual governments with U.S. since these are related to bilateral
and not multilateral arrangements. I indicated further that conditions
varies as regards individual countries. I pointed out that since I had
had no prior advice of nature of meeting I could not speak officially
for my government but felt it incumbent at least make above obser-
vations. While it might be normal for Haitian Government endeavor
get support from sister republics in direct negotiations, procedure this
morning is unprecedented as far as I am aware, even for Haiti. Other
than my remarks no Chief of Mission made any comment whatsoever
except Mexican Ambassador as ranking member group, who merely
2 Telegram 161 from Port-­au-Prince transmitted to the Department of State on
November 23 the text of the note by Foreign Minister Joseph Baguidy at the meeting of

Haiti  797
stated those present would transmit note under reference to their
governments.
I expect see Minister Finance this afternoon on unrelated matter
but shall endeavor let him know this type of procedure hardly con-
ducive to sympathetic understanding to Haiti’s problem as far as U.S.
Government agencies concerned.
Newbegin
HA–29.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Haiti1
Department concurs with line taken by Ambassador in conversa-
tions with Haitian officials reported reftels. Embassy requested draft
reply Haitian note along following lines:
1. Existing loans to LA countries by U.S. financial institutions
arranged only after detailed negotiations between parties and based
on consideration very specific circumstances prevailing at time loan
arranged.
2. Consideration of a moratorium on payments is a matter
strictly between lending agency and particular LA government again
to be considered carefully only after taking into account prevailing
circumstances.
Drafted by Richard B. Owen, Officer in Charge of Haitian Affairs, and by Edwin E. Vallon,
Director of the Office of Caribbean and Mexican Affairs; cleared in draft with Turkel and
in substance with Denison, Harlan A. Harrison, Chief of the Cuba-Dominican Republic-
Haiti-Mexico Branch of the International Cooperation Administration, and Marski of the
Development Loan Fund; and signed by Barall.
reported that he had told Haitian Minister of Finance, Herne Boyer and Minister of
Commerce, Clovis Desinor that Haiti’s public request for a debt moratorium was a most
unfortunate step, that it had placed the United States and the Export-Import Bank in a
very difficult position vis-á-­vis a number of other Latin American countries, and that
it could only prejudice Haiti’s attempt to obtain a moratorium from the Bank. (838.
In telegram 165 of November 24, Newbegin informed the Department of State that
he had spoken with Foreign Minister Baguidy along the lines indicated in telegram 164.

3. While U.S. is appreciative of lofty sentiments which motivated
Haitian note, it cannot consider that such bilateral arrangements are
appropriately concern of any governments other than two govern-
ments concerned.
4. Furthermore, agencies of U.S. government, as well as interna-
tional banking institutions, have worked closely with LA governments
in assisting them to establish sound economic and financial practices
which have enabled them to meet their obligations without necessity
of resorting to moratorium and, in addition, have thus aided them in
qualifying for additional loans or other types of financial assistance.
5. U.S. Government and its lending agencies have given in past
and will continue to give extended and sympathetic consideration to
financial needs of individual Latin countries which can be met by exist-
ing institutions.
6. Moreover, U.S. Government has demonstrated, most recently by
Act of Bogotá,3 that it is ready to consider and act upon economic and
social needs of hemisphere where existing institutions are believed to
be inadequate for fulfillment of such needs.
Proposed reply should be sent Department for approval before
submission FONOFF. Department hopes as result Ambassador’s repre-
sentations, Haitian government will cease efforts to push this initiative
and that, upon submission note in reply, whole matter can be dropped.
Department would also appreciate any reaction LA Ambassadors to
Haitian demarche.
Herter
3 The Act of Bogotá, adopted by members of the Organization of American States
at Bogotá on September 12, 1960, established a special inter-American fund for social
development.

Honduras: U.S. Relations with Honduras
HO–1.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1
Washington, February 27, 1958.
SUBJECT
Call on the Secretary by Honduran Foreign Minister and Honduran
Ambassador-­designate
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary.
Sr. Andrés Alvarado Puerto, the Foreign Minister of Honduras.
Sr. Céleo Dávila, Ambassador-­designate of Honduras.
Sr. Carlos F. Hidalgo, Chargé d’Affaires, Embassy of Honduras.
Mr. William P. Snow, Acting Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs.
Mr. Charles Spruks, Assistant Chief of Protocol.
At 3:30 this afternoon the Honduran Foreign Minister, Sr. Andrés
Alvarado Puerto, paid a courtesy call on the Secretary, accompanied
by the Honduran Ambassador-­designate, Sr. Céleo Dávila.2 Having
arrived in Washington only the day before, the ambassador-­designate
had no official status until he had made the customary initial call upon
the Secretary. It was therefore arranged for him to enter the Secretary’s
office first accompanied by Mr. Spruks, to deliver copies of his creden-
tials and related documents. The Foreign Minister was then brought in
and introduced to the Secretary by Mr. Snow.
The Minister brought friendly greetings from the President of
Honduras, Sr. Villeda Morales.3 He said that President Villeda M.
wished the Secretary to know that he shared his belief in the desirabil-
ity of achieving a closer relationship between the North Atlantic Treaty
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D
199. Official Use Only. Drafted on February 28.
2 Dávila presented his credentials as Honduran Ambassador to the United States
on March 10, 1958.

Organization and the Organization of American States. He had already
made public statements to that effect in Honduras and was working
to persuade the presidents of the other Central American countries
within the ODECA framework to his point of view. If the five ODECA
countries could reach a common position in favor of the proposal, they
could bring their influence to bear with some effect upon the other
Latin American countries in the Council of the OAS.
The Secretary stated in reply that he had not contemplated any
organic relationship between the regional organizations. He did believe
it very desirable, however, to develop a means of informal contact
so that they could exchange information and share experiences. The
NATO countries were not always inclined to realize the significance
of developments in the OAS area. It would be well for them to become
more aware of the problems in Latin America and to learn to attach a
greater degree of importance to them. He was especially desirous that
the Western European countries should learn of the most encouraging
progress made by the OAS itself in furthering the peaceful settlement of
disputes, in promoting the acceptance of precepts of international law
and in facing common problems in a frank and friendly atmosphere.
While the OAS was not yet in a state of perfection, there being much
ground still to cover, it was definitely an advanced organization, as he
often took occasion to point out when addressing other regional groups
such as NATO, SEATO, etc.
The Foreign Minister indicated that President Villeda was in favor
of having Secretary General Mora and Secretary General Spaak autho-
rized to develop a procedural plan for the interchange of views. He
then spoke of the perplexities facing the new regime in his country.
Honduras had for many years been under a certain form of government
which was not the most fortunate one for the country. Now President
Villeda was seeking to establish a completely new administration with
different (i.e. democratic) ideas and different personalities. Naturally,
it was a slow process at first and fraught with difficulties. The most
serious basic problems encountered were financial and economic in
character, the first order of business being to balance the budget, which
might require funds from abroad. Another great need was for a proper
system of roads. The Ambassador-designate added that there was also
a serious deficiency in education.
The Secretary remarked that borrowing was not the soundest way
of balancing a nation’s budget, as we ourselves had discovered. He also
inquired whether the Pan American Highway would not be of substan-
tial benefit to Honduras once it was completed. The Minister answered
that the Inter-American Highway passed through only a small portion

Honduras  801
of Honduras; it did not enter the capital or reach to the Caribbean coast.
A good road from the capital to the north coast was definitely required.
The Secretary spoke of the benefits which would accrue from a road
system capable of attracting American tourists from the north, coming
down through Mexico and Guatemala. The Minister agreed but indi-
cated that his Government’s main attention at this time was centered
on the development of Puerto Castilla, situated on the Caribbean shore,
as a tourist resort. It was formerly a United Fruit Company port but
had been abandoned by the Company. It could be reached by air, the
flying time between that port and Miami being three hours or less. His
Government was treating with Pan American Airways to see if an air-
port, hotel accommodations, and other facilities might be financed and
developed there by that Company.
The Minister also commented on the fact that Ambassador Willauer,
at the inauguration of President Villeda last December, had announced
the decision of the U.S. Government to assist technically and financially
in developing an engineering unit in the Honduran Army which could
be employed in building and maintaining highways. His Government
was keenly interested in this and hoped that the project would move
forward rapidly. (This is an ICA project.)
Another of his country’s needs was money, by which he meant bank
credit, available to small farmers and small industry. The Honduran
banks had ample knowledge of the local situation but lacked the funds
for such a loan program. His Government hoped to be able to borrow
enough money abroad to make up for this lack.
The Minister spoke of President Villeda’s contemplated trip
through South America. He had been invited by President Ibañez to
visit Chile in May and, when the other South American governments
heard of this, they also had extended invitations. As a result Dr. Villeda
planned to visit them all and to deliver lectures at leading universities,
etc., lecturing being one of his fortes.
At the conclusion, the Secretary expressed his pleasure at having
had the opportunity to meet the Foreign Minister as well as to receive
the new Ambassador, whom he wished to assure of a cordial welcome
at any time during his tenure of office.

HO–2.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle
American Affairs (Wieland) to the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1
Washington, March 26, 1958.
SUBJECT
Political Situation in Honduras
I am deeply concerned over the outlook for continued political stability
in Honduras. As you know, President Villeda Morales came to power
largely on the strength of a liberal campaign of promises verging on the
Tammany type. As yet, however, he has accomplished virtually noth-
ing, for lack of economic means.
It would be a severe blow to United States interests if the present
Honduran government were to collapse. While it is impossible to pre-
dict what sort of government would emerge from such a collapse, it is
unlikely that it would provide as favorable an atmosphere for the solu-
tion of the country’s fundamental problems or adopt as friendly a policy
toward the U.S. as now prevails. A period of political chaos might also
follow with adverse repercussions in the neighboring countries. The
present Villeda government, while far from perfect, is sincerely striving
to establish representative democracy in Honduras and solve the coun-
try’s basic problems. Villeda is very friendly to the United States. He has
shown a keen awareness of the dangers of the communist movement in
Honduras and he has taken steps to combat it. Coming into office as a
result of honest popular elections, he symbolizes the trend toward the
establishment of democratic government which has been noted in other
parts of Latin America. We would like to see him succeed.
Unfortunately there are signs of political trouble ahead for Villeda.
Many of those who supported him in the belief that he would do some-
thing for them are beginning to grow restless. Our Ambassador in
Tegucigalpa2 reports a growing feeling that Villeda will not remain in
office through this year.
As Villeda’s popularity declines, his opposition can be expected to
become more active. The communists, who had been quiet for several
months, in February stepped up their activities in the labor field and suc-
ceeded in forming a communist-­dominated federation of trade unions
Honduras—1958.” Confidential. Drafted by John L. Gawf of the Office of Middle
American Affairs.
Newbegin was appointed Ambassador on March 26 and presented his credentials in
Tegucigalpa on April 21.

Honduras  803
in Tegucigalpa. The Nationalist Party, including the very large number
of government workers (virtually the entire personnel of the Honduran
Government) who were replaced en masse by Liberal Party members,
can be expected to seize upon every opportunity to embarrass the new
administration by drawing attention to the disparity between Liberal
promises and Liberal performance. There are persistent rumors of dis-
sension within the liberal Party itself; some of the radical Liberals have
no feeling of loyalty toward Villeda and might well turn against him at
an opportune moment. The military would probably abandon him in the
face of any serious deterioration of his popularity. Finally there is already
some indication that conservative elements in control of neighboring
states are not well disposed toward Villeda’s brand of liberalism.
As I see it, the only possibility of averting the threat of a political
crisis in Honduras lies in assisting Villeda to make good on at least
some of his campaign promises by improving the economic situation
in Honduras. This would involve prompt and fairly large scale partici-
pation in economic development programs in Honduras. Some efforts
along these lines (i.e., the Smather’s Amendment Loan program3 and
the Engineering Construction Unit project) are already underway, but
these will not be adequate to deal with the present situation. Also,
as you know, several applications from Honduras for DLF and IBRD
loans are being processed. It is my understanding that these are being
pressed forward as rapidly as possible. Whether these will be approved
soon enough to avert a dangerous political situation remains to be seen.
Summary:
1. The Villeda government in Honduras will shortly be facing seri-
ous political difficulties which are likely to result in its downfall, unless
it can do something to improve the economic situation in Honduras.
2. The only possibility of averting this threat lies in prompt and
fairly large scale U.S. participation in economic development programs
in Honduras.
3. It would seem essential, in trying to implement the objective out-
lined in the NSC paper4 to strengthen representative democracy, that
we do what we can to strengthen the Villeda administration and help
it to promote the sound development of Honduras and thus strengthen
confidence in Honduran democratic institutions.
3 The amendment to the Mutual Security Act of 1956 named after Sen. George A.
Smathers (D-Fla.), provided for the use of a portion of the defense support funds autho-
rized in the Act for health, education, and sanitation projects, and for land resettlement
programs in Latin America. For the text of the Mutual Security Act of 1956 (Public Law
Republics: Multilateral; Mexico; Caribbean, Document 16.

HO–3.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Honduras (Newbegin)
to the Department of State1
53. Dr. Eisenhower, study group members met President Villeda
Morales, Cabinet, Economic and Financial Officials of Honduran
Government and representatives of private sector.2 Meeting with
Economic and Financial officials held in afternoon Wednesday, July
16. This followed by meeting between private sector and Mcintosh,
Coughran and Waugh.
On Thursday morning, July 17, Dr. Eisenhower and members of
Mission met with the Present and Cabinet for further discussions. Brief
meeting held Thursday afternoon between private sector representa-
tives and Mcintosh, Coughran and Waugh.
The President, Cabinet members and Economic and Financial
officials of the Honduran Government requested that consideration
be given to provide financial assistance to economic development and
social development program of present government. Hondurans reluc-
tant establish priorities although suggested by Rubottom.
Assistance desired includes:
1. Rio Linde hydroelectric power project-­first stage assistance
external loan for “offshore” costs and $5–$6 million DLF loan to cover
“local” costs. Director, autonomous power and light agency3, indi-
cated Honduras might be able to cover half local costs if DLF provides
$2.5  million. Proposal similar in principal to recent IBRD/DLF road
loan for $10.5 million.
2. Highways-­construction of Central Highway to cost $6 million.
Roads to run between Talanga-[illegible in the original] with branch from
Yoro to Progreso. This request is in substitution of previous applica-
tion for DLF assistance $3.3 million for construction of “low cost” roads
in other parts of Honduras. These latter “low cost” roads to be under-
taken by Honduran Government with own resources.
2 Dr. Milton Eisenhower, brother and Personal Representative of the President with
three week fact-­finding trip that also took him to Panama, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Puerto
Milton Eisenhower Trip) Additional documentation concerning his stay in Honduras is
in Department of State file 120.1520 as well as in the ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot
“Economic Development—Honduras—March–July 1958.”
3 Luís Bogran.

Honduras  805
3. DLF loan to National Development Bank (Banco Nacional De
Fomento). $2 million to provide credit to the private sector, principally
agriculture.
year $1.7 million.
years. Although amount and type of foreign assistance not specified,
U.S. grant aid for total implicit.
Honduran Government to provide $40 million and U.S. financial assis-
tance for balance. Although not explicit, U.S. grant aid implied.
In addition to requests for assistance, Honduran Government offi-
cials indicated interest in revising U.S.-Honduran trade treaty.4
At meeting with President and Cabinet Hondurans finally agreed
to submit schedule of priorities, memorandum re proposed revision of
U.S.-Honduran trade treaty, and full explanation of new proposal for
central highway program. See above.
Dr. Eisenhower and Mission members avoided commitments to
government although expressed sympathetic interest and understand-
ing Honduran economic development problems. Honduran officials
understand no commitments possible but are hopeful for future.
Representatives of private enterprise presented request for estab-
lishing special $25 million fund over a period of years to be used for
loans to industry and agriculture. Stated such action necessary to stimu-
late investment in private sector now short because of curtailing of flow
of capital from U.S. formerly brought in by fruit and mining companies.
They requested such loans to be repayable in lempiras not dollars with-
out maintenance of value clause or guaranty. Banking and financial
members of mission told private sector representatives $25 million spe-
cial fund not possible and loans must be repayable in dollars or guar-
anteed or contain maintenance of value clause. Suggested that other
alternatives be explored as means of stimulating private under-takings
which contribute to national economy. Private sector representatives
disappointed about special fund and terms of repayment but agreed
other possible approaches to problem should be studied.
Newbegin
4 Presumably the reference is to the trade agreement that the United State and

HO–4.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the officer in Charge
of Honduran Affairs (Gawf)1
Washington, December 2, 1958.
SUBJECT
Current Political and Economic Conditions in Honduras
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador John C. Dreier, Director, Office of Inter-American Regional Political
Affairs
Mr. C. Allan Stewart, Director, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs
Colonel Oswaldo Lopez, Chief of the Honduran Armed Forces
John L. Gawf, Honduran Desk Officer
Colonel Lopez said that he was very much worried by the way
things seemed to be going in Honduras. He spoke at great length about
the ineptitude of the Villeda administration, as a result of its having
replaced the entire personnel of the Honduran Government with inex-
perienced Liberal Party members, despite his pre-­election promise to
form a government of national unity. He went on to describe the cor-
ruption, waste, fiscal mismanagement, softness toward Communism,
and the violations of privacy which had been perpetrated upon var-
ious members of the Nationalist Party by an organization of hatchet
men, which the Liberal Party had set up. He inveighed against the
Liberal Party’s efforts to place the Security Police under the ministry of
Gobernacion, against the efforts of the Villeda Administration to curtail
the role of the military by cutting the budget and against the manner
in which the Villeda Administration seemed to be running the country
into bankruptcy.
Colonel Lopez said that he understood that conditions had become
so serious that Villeda had recognized that a cabinet reshuffle was nec-
essary and that hence, the entire cabinet was soon to resign leaving
Villeda free to eliminate those members who had been most responsi-
ble for the present difficulties. He left the impression that in this cate-
gory were Roberto Martinez and Fernando Villar.
At this point Mr. Stewart observed that we too had been feeling
some concern about the way things seemed to be going in Honduras.
However, he added that the present events seemed to be following a
pattern which was not uncommonly seen in Latin America when new
governments take over. He went on to say that in many cases after a
year or two of stumbling and making mistakes many such governments

Honduras  807
had at last leveled off and managed to govern effectively. In the case
of Honduras, Mr. Stewart went on to say, we have seen some indica-
tions just within the last few weeks that the Villeda Administration had
become fully aware of the magnitude of the dangers and problems fac-
ing them and had taken some important first steps toward effecting a
remedy. He discussed the IMF program, which the Government now
has under consideration and expressed the view that if the Honduran
Government agrees to the conditions which the IMF program would
impose, Honduras would have made a long step toward stability.
Mr. Stewart then reviewed the events by which Honduras had insti-
tuted constitutional, democratic government in Honduras for the first
time and recalled what a favorable impression this made throughout
the hemisphere. He went on to say that he hoped that the understand-
able impatience of the Hondurans for more evidence of progress would
not lead them to any act of force or violence, because, he said, that once
such means were adopted, not only would Honduras lose a great deal
of esteem in the eyes of the world but it might also precipitate a chaotic
situation from which nobody would benefit.
Colonel Lopez agreed that it would be unfortunate for the Villeda
Administration to fail and he said that he intended to do everything he
could to help it succeed. He then went on to describe what he conceived
to be the role of the military as a guardian of Honduran democracy.
He claimed that it was essential for the military to stand behind the
Government to insure its stability.
Mr. Stewart said that the role of the military in Honduras during
the past year had indeed been highly constructive and said that he
hoped it would continue its splendid record of maintaining order until
the Villeda Administration could solve the current pressing problems.
HO–5.
Editorial Note
February 9, 1959
On February 9, 1959, Honduran rebels, under the direction of
Armando Velásquez Cerrato, the former Chief of Staff of the Honduran
Armed Forces, initiated a revolution against the government of
President Villeda Morales and invaded the Honduran province of Santa
Barbara. Reacting to the attack, Honduran authorities dispatched ele-
ments of the Honduran Army to Santa Barbara and ended the rebellion.
Documentation on the incident is in Department of State file 615.17 and

HO–6.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs
(Stewart)1
Washington, March 3, 1959.
SUBJECT
Expulsion of Colonel Velasquez from Nicaragua
PARTICIPANTS
Señor Dr. Céleo Davila, Ambassador of Honduras
ARA:OAP - C. Allan Stewart
Ambassador Dávila said that the Honduran Government on Friday2
had requested the GON to expel Colonel Velasquez and four other per-
sons, in view of their revolutionary activities against the Honduran
regime. Expulsions can be requested under terms of the agreement
signed by representatives of the two countries on February 26.3
Ambassador Dávila said that Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa had assured
him that Velasquez and his cohorts would be asked to leave the country
immediately after the signing of the agreement.
Dr. Dávila said that President Villeda had telephoned him this
morning to say that the expulsion action had not taken place. Dávila
said he would call it to the attention of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa but
the President had suggested that he talk instead with the Department.
I told Dávila that I had inquired of our Chargé in Managua4 yesterday
whether Colonel Velasquez had been asked to leave the country and
was told that as far as he knew no action had been taken at the time.
He said the Nicaraguan Government had informed him that when the
expulsions were affected the Embassy would be notified. The Chargé
said he had an appointment with President Somoza on March 3 and
would bring up the matter with him. I told Ambassador Dávila that if
the Department had no word from our Embassy on this matter before
the opening of business on March 4 we would again make inquiries.
I said we had been slightly concerned about a report that President
Villeda did not intend to take further action about inducing Honduran
emigres now being fed and housed by the Nicaraguan Government to
return to their homes. Ambassador Dávila said he had suggested to the
President this morning that the Honduran Government should make
every effort to assure means of transportation for those people who
2 February 27.
3 Documentation concerning United States interest in the negotiation of this agree-
4 Louís F. Blanchard.

Honduras  809
wanted to return from Nicaragua. The President said he planned to
make an earnest request of the emigres to return to Honduras and that
he would arrange for air and truck transportation. However, Dávila
indicated that Villeda would not make the call until the Nicaraguans
expelled Colonel Velasquez.5 I told Dávila that I thought the Hondurans
should live up to their word even though the other side might delay in
taking action against Velasquez and his co-­conspirators.
I informed Dávila that we had received reports that broadcasts
from the clandestine radio had ceased.
5 On March 13, the Department of State informed the Embassies in Nicaragua, Costa
Rica, Guatemala, Panama, and Honduras that Col. Velasquez had departed Nicaragua
HO–7.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Honduras1
362. Sevilla-Sacasa saw Rubottom May 14 and revealed Nicaragua
firmly convinced Villeda holding up ratification of Nicaraguan-
Honduran agreement because does not want to be held responsible for
airborne revolutionaries from Cuba who he said planned land in dis-
puted territory and be transshipped from there to Bonanza and La Luz
areas in interior Nicaragua where U.S. has extensive mining interests.2
Sevilla expressed belief Villeda playing part of fool in permitting
himself being used as tool for alleged invasion since Nicaragua will
take vigorous retaliatory action against Honduras if territory it nomi-
nally controls pending settlement of dispute is used for staging ground.
Sevilla said Nicaragua has called upon mixed military commission to
investigate rumored plan of invasion force to use vaguely defined air
fields in Gracias a Dios Department.
Department fully aware of numerous approaches made by
Ambassador to Villeda in effort obtain ratification Honduras-Nicaraguan
Agreement signed FEB 26 1959. In view of recurrent reports that
Drafted by Stewart, cleared with Dreier, and initialled by Rubottom. The telegram was
also repeated for information to Managua and Habana.
Nicaragua. For additional information on the attempted invasion, see the compilation on
United States relations with Nicaragua.

revolutionary movements continuing against GON, DEPT suggests
AMB make another approach to President pointing out that ratification
of Agreement soon by Honduran Congress would have calming effect
in CA area, especially at this time when invasion rumors again reaching
crescendo. Furthermore, you might wish tell President that U.S. must
soon begin to look with grave concern on long delay ratification and
that we have special interest in matter since we were involved in assist-
ing countries to arrive at an agreement when Villeda regime threatened.
We understand reluctance Honduran Congress pass on any agreement
involving Nicaragua, but believe Villeda, in interests of Honduran inter-
national relations, especially in posture before OAS, must insist Liberal
Congressional leaders that ratification necessary immediately. DEPT is
conveying above feeling to Ambassador Davila.
Regarding reports of air invasion Nicaragua on [text not declassi-
fied] May 6 had [text not declassified] report that such a movement was
in final stages of organization in Cuba and was being headed by NICA
communists.
Admitting that AMB Sevilla may have given us distorted version,
DEPT nevertheless views with concern GON’s report that Honduras may
be used in asserted movement emanating from Cuba. Embassy instructed
tell GOH that in view of fairly firm intelligence its forces should be on
special alert for any use of its territory, in violation international treaties.3
Dillon
the Department of State that, in the course of a conversation he had that morning with
President Villeda, he had told Villeda that concern was increasing within the Department
of State about the failure of the Honduran Congress to ratify the agreement with
Nicaragua, and that the Department of State was hopeful Villeda would take effective
HO–8.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Honduras (Newbegin)
to the Department of State1
438. In two-­hour session this afternoon first with President Villeda
and then with President of Congress2 and Foreign Minister,3 reviewed full
Sent to Managua as telegram 67.
2 Modesto Rodas Alvarado.
3 Andrés Alvarado Puerto.

Honduras  811
situation reference ratification Honduran-Nicaraguan Accord. Pointed
out as previously failure to ratify has put Honduras in unfavorable inter-
national position and one where at least as far as outside opinion con-
cerned Honduras could be accused of bad faith. Referred to Rubottom’s
conversation with Foreign Relations sub-­committee (Department
telegram 365)4 and increasing criticism of Honduran position in U.S.
Suggested if any incident should arise resulting in Nicaraguan appeal
OAS Honduran posture hardly favorable. Also pointed out that during
Velasquez crisis both Department and I had done everything possible to
assist Honduras and agreement with subsequent expulsion Velasquez
was part of these efforts. I would undoubtedly be handicapped in future
efforts to assist Honduras if no action taken.
Not withstanding these and other arguments Rodas Alvarado
made following points: 1) impossible because of technical requirements
for Congress to ratify Accord before scheduled closing tomorrow even
were deputies willing to approve. 2) He convinced that if agreement
were submitted to Congress at this time would definitely be rejected. He,
Alvarado Puerto and the President have all talked with various deputies
trying to convince them of necessity for Honduran ratification but have
not been successful. In addition to strong emotional prejudice against
agreement with Nicaragua, Rodas said that a majority of the deputies
had advised Villeda against signing the agreement and hence did not feel
any obligation when he proceeded contrary their advice. Deputies felt
that Nicaragua itself had been guilty of bad faith during whole Velasquez
incident since she and Honduras were already bound by previous inter-
national agreements to prevent just that sort of activity.
I am satisfied that President and Alvarado Puerto and possibly
Rodas Alvarado have made genuine effort to obtain favorable action.
Believe that if Rodas Alvarado’s conviction that Accord would be
rejected is correct, lack of action is preferable such outcome, which could
only further complicate Nicaraguan-Honduran relations. Alvarado
Puerto has assured me as emphatically as he can that not withstanding
lack of action on ratification, Honduras would act as though bound by
agreement and would under no circumstances permit use her territory
anti-Nicaraguan movements. He will also request Davila give similar
assurances to Department.
While Embassy distressed inability obtain ratification this time I
consider inaction essentially reflection basic public opposition Somoza
regime and not indicative any unwillingness observe existing noninter-
vention commitments.
Newbegin

HO–9.
Editorial Note
July 12, 1959.
On July 12, 1959, Armando Velásquez Cerrato, the former Chief
of Staff of the Honduran Armed Forces, attempted once again to over-
throw the government of President Villeda Morales, launching a full
scale revolt in Tegucigalpa with the assistance of disloyal police and
military units. The bulk of the Honduran Armed Forces remained
loyal to President Villeda and acted successfully to crush the revolt
and to force Col. Velásquez to seek asylum in the Costa Rican Embassy.
Documentation on this incident is in Department of State file 715.00.
HO–10.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Honduras (Newbegin)
to the Department of State1
Tegucigalpa, September 25, 1959.
No. 129.
Attn: The Honorable C. Douglas Dillon, Coordinator of Mutual
Security
SUBJECT
Mutual Security and Related Programs
Pursuant to the instructions contained in Circular 149, dated
August 19, 1959, the following comments are offered as to U.S.
Drafted by Carson, Director of the United States Operations Mission in Honduras.
recipients of this message to furnish succinct, analyses of how the Mutual Security and
related programs could help the United States achieve its objectives in countries such as
Mission that the President expected them to provide leadership and to exercise respon-
sibility for the effective coordination of various United States activities in each country
enjoying diplomatic relations with the United States. Specifically, the Chiefs of Mission
were responsible for administering and supervising the Mutual Security, agricultural,
with guidelines for the proper development of estimates for the FY 1960 Mutual Security

Honduras  813
objectives in Honduras, and the role of the MSP and other programs
in achieving them.
The basic objectives of U.S. policy in Honduras have not changed
since the submission of the ICA Master Program Book in August 1958.5
At that time they were stated in the following terms:
1) Promote political stability and develop democratic and repre-
sentative institutions;
2) Promote the sound development and expansion of the Honduran
economy, with emphasis to the extent possible on private enterprise;
3) Eliminate and prevent Communist penetration and influence;
4) Strengthen inter-American relationships with a view to improv-
ing the security system of the Western Hemisphere.
All agencies of the U.S. Government which are represented in
Honduras are working toward the realization of one or more of these
objectives, each in the manner dictated by its own authority and
capacities.
The U.S. Embassy, as the principal instrument of U.S. policy in
Honduras, works through normal diplomatic channels and its activ-
ities are necessarily limited to indirect influence except where U.S.
interests are immediately concerned. The Ambassador coordinates the
program of the various U.S. agencies from a policy standpoint, but,
normally, does not interfere with their specific operations. The Country
Team principle has been observed for some time in Honduras; rep-
resentatives of the ICA (USOM), Army Mission, and the USIS attend
the regular weekly Embassy staff meetings, as well as specific confer-
ences called to establish Country Team policy, or a unified approach to
a particular problem. The Country Team this year includes one mem-
ber having the dual capacity of D/USOM and Counselor of Embassy
for Economic Affairs6, thus insuring a more closely coordinated policy
Advisory group.
The U.S. Army and Air Force Missions in Honduras, through
the Military Assistance Program, are working especially toward the
achievement of the Objective (4), referring to the improvement of the
hemisphere security system. These Missions are relatively small. Their
continuation in Honduras depends principally on regional factors and
Department of Defense determination as to their necessity. The Embassy
has recently received a formal request from the Honduran Government
Douglas Dillon, the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, that the United States
Operations Mission in Honduras was transmitting the Master Program Book to him via
ICA channels. No copy of the Master Program Book has been found in Department of
State files.
6 Carson O. Crocker.

for an Advisor to the Military School and an informal request for an
Advisor to the First Battalion. The Embassy has strongly supported
the former. The latter is still in the preliminary stages. It is assumed
that these two Advisors would be under the general jurisdiction of the
Military Mission. This, together with the furnishing of personnel for
the Engineering Construction Unit described below under the Military
Security Program, is the full extent of any increase that is contemplated.
Apart from this, I do not personally recommend any further expansion
of the activities of the Missions.
By means of its program of news dissemination, the U.S. Information
Service contributes toward all four of the objectives stated above. The
same may be said of the cultural and educational exchange programs,
which it administers in the field. These programs are extremely import-
ant for Honduras and, in fact, deserve far greater emphasis and support
than they have received in the past year. For several months the USIS in
Honduras has been represented by one U.S.-­assigned officer, who has
had far too great a work load to handle without assistance. Apart from
the serious staffing weakness of the USIS itself, the bilateral cultural
center has been without a U.S. director for nearly a year. (This position
has just been filled.)
In terms of money spent, personnel employed, and direct influ-
ence on the achievement of the above objectives, the U.S. Operations
Mission, through its administration of the Mutual Security Program, is
of special importance. It should be noted that the technical assistance
part of this program has existed in some form in Honduras since 1942,
although the major part of the ICA activity dates from 1951. In recent
years there have been certain large-­scale loans and grants from Special
Assistance funds, but the backbone of the MSP in Honduras contin-
ues to be technical cooperation, and it is by this aspect that the agency
is best known. It may be said that although the USOM, through one
or more of its projects, attempts to realize all four of the major U.S.
objectives, through its emphasis on technical cooperation it is especially
effective with respect to Objective 2, the development of a strong and
expanding national economy.
The MSP in Honduras in the past has tended to follow the tradi-
tional lines of this program in Latin America, with emphasis on the
major fields of agriculture, public health, and education. Certainly
these activities are basic in Honduras, which needs help to realize its
legitimate aspirations for a better standard of living and higher level
of culture. I feel strongly convinced that a much greater emphasis
should be given to assistance in basic education. The illiteracy rate
in Honduras is very high and the level of education of those who are
literate is extremely low. The manpower requirements, not only for
mutual programs but for normal national activities, are impossible to

Honduras  815
meet from present human resources. This appears to be the priority
problem in Honduras, and this conclusion is reflected in the 1959 and
1960 Program submissions, which include a program for the building
of school rooms under the “aided self-­help” system. Whereas this is a
worthwhile effort and will coordinate well with the teacher education
project, it is my opinion that it will be long range in its expected effects
and will not be of sufficient impact to solve the problem. I have hopes
that a more effective and immediate solution can be found for this
grave situation, possibly a solution which will include adult education
programs on a very broad scale. Incidentally, in order to achieve the
greatest flexibility in the “aided self-help school program, I hope it can
be approved in the category of Special Assistance rather than Technical
Cooperation.
There are other problems, however, which should be recognized
if gains are to be consolidated, and if the country is to develop con-
tinuing institutions which will help it to help itself. I refer specifically
to the development of a better public administration and a tradition
of good government, and also to the activation of private enterprise to
permit sound development of the national economy. The USOM, which
has had a large scale turnover of personnel in the last year or two, has
been in the process of re-­evaluating its program, and I am pleased to
note that the above problems have been recognized in its current bud-
get submission; the program for FY 1961 calls for a somewhat broader
approach than before in the field of public administration, and there is
a proposed industrial development project which has for its purpose
the training of managerial skills and increase in industrial productivity.
Both of these activities are small scale, which I believe is appropriate
at this stage, until there has been more experience in local conditions.
In the case of the industry project, one of the conditions to be observed
is the effect of the recently adopted Labor Code, which may have an
inhibiting effect on both new and existing industrial enterprise.
A related project which has been rather successful in the past, and
which will continue, is the training of labor leaders. Selected trade
union officials have been sent to Puerto Rico and the United States for
observation and training in the responsibilities and obligations of dem-
ocratic labor leadership. This has been supplemented in the past two
years by labor training seminars for leaders at a somewhat lower level,
given to larger groups within Honduras. It is considered that these
activities have been very helpful in combating Communist attempts
to dominate the unions, and have resulted in more responsible trade
union leadership and improved labor management relations. The proj-
ect will be continued in FY 1961, but on a smaller scale than previously.
In the field of agriculture, no major changes in program are
foreseen, although the USOM in recent months has been making a

concentrated effort to improve the efficiency of its operations in this
field and to eliminate activities which are found to be no longer nec-
essary or practicable. One new project has been proposed for FY 1961,
a program of technical assistance in warehousing and marketing for
farmers.
Public Health requirements in Honduras are very great. In terms
of human needs, as well as impact on public opinion, the MSP health
programs are extremely important.
In the past, this program has been directed largely toward the
building of community water supply and sewage projects and envi-
ronmental sanitation, in general. The largest single element of the pro-
gram is currently the malaria eradication campaign, which is part of a
regional, and indeed a world-­wide campaign, to eliminate the disease.
Honduras is cooperating very satisfactorily in the technical aspects of
this program, though unable to contribute financially to any significant
extent.
The USOM, through the Health Services, has carried out numerous
engineering projects, which included the use of $1.25 million Smather’s
Loan Funds for community water supplies, which are nearing comple-
tion. These projects have been conducted without sufficient supervi-
sion, with the consequent errors and dangers to U.S. prestige. Strong
corrective measures are now being taken, and, upon completion of
these jobs, USOM will turn its attention away from this type of work
and place more emphasis on health education and training, on the
development of health centers, and on the creation of an adequately-­
trained nursing profession.
The MSP in Honduras also embraces projects in the field of trans-
portation, both air and ground. The development of Honduras has been
seriously handicapped by the mountainous terrain, and the majority of
the towns and communities are relatively isolated, being served only
by trails, unimproved roads, or light planes. A civil aviation project has
been in existence for some years, providing technical assistance to the
national civil air agency; with the use of the USOM air personnel it has
also been possible to establish an electronics training program and a
regional flight information center serving all of Central America. These
activities are continued in FY 1961 and are related to a regional ICAO
air traffic control program supported by all of the Central American
Republics and making use of the Tegucigalpa Training Center facilities,
which were established with ICA help.
In recent years Honduras has received considerable financial assis-
tance for economic stabilization and public works. In January 1959
Honduras obtained a standby loan for $4.5 million from the IMF for
currency stabilization and is complying with stipulations covering gov-
ernmental fiscal management practices.

Honduras  817
In addition to its participation in the Pan American Highway
project, for which it has received an Eximbank loan for $1.7 million,
Honduras has obtained approval for a total of loans from IBRD for
road construction and maintenance of $13.7 million, all obtained since
cover local currency costs on IBRD-­financed projects and is consid-
ering new requests for the same purposes amounting to $9.0 million.
The recently created Engineering Construction Unit, an ICA-­financed
project, will receive a total of $1.0 million in grant aid, which will be
matched by an equivalent amount in local currency, to be contrib-
uted by the GOH. Continuing projects financed with $3.0 million of
Smather’s Loan funds (the major portion of which has already been
used) consist of a road building program in the Guayape Valley and
a program to provide public water supplies to villages. This latter is
mentioned under the remarks on the Health Program.
Technical assistance has been provided by the U.S. Bureau of Public
Roads and by private U.S. construction companies, as well as by ICA
technicians in these projects.
It is apparent that Honduras is in great need of roads and that
these projects will be of direct and immediate benefit to the national
economy. It is my opinion, however, that to insure an efficient and
completely satisfactory performance in the construction of roads to be
financed with U.S. financial assistance, it would be advisable to nego-
tiate the work by contract to reliable engineering firms, thus avoiding
numerous serious drawbacks, which have been evident in the perfor-
mance of the Ministry of Public Works of the GOH.
The FY 1961 Mutual Security Program does not contemplate addi-
tional funding for the Engineering Construction Unit, except for a
limited amount of Technical Cooperation funds to backstop U.S. partic-
ipation in the operational phase of this project. Even this participation
by the USOM could be eliminated, or greatly reduced, at this stage,
if adequate technical support were provided by the Department of
Defense.
With respect to the ECU operation, I have certain reservations,
although I agree with the basic objective. Undoubtedly, the purpose of
utilizing military personnel to perform useful civilian work is appealing
and, if successful, could have favorable effects on the internal political
climate, as well as on the economy. My reservations may be expressed
as follows:
A full and satisfactory operation of the ECU unit might reduce the
military potential of the Armed Forces below the point of safety at a
time when it is evident that the influence of the military is essential
to insure the security of the present constitutional regime. The main-
tenance and operational expenses of heavy machinery are a burden

which the GOH, and particularly the Army, are not in a position to
meet without severe sacrifice. There is insufficient trained personnel
to meet the managerial and technical requirements of this operation.
In short, the project is a difficult one, and in case of incomplete success,
U.S. prestige will be involved. I therefore expect that the DOD and ICA
will give immediate favorable attention to the recent requests for man-
power for this operation.
With respect to coordination between U.S. agencies and non-U.S.
programs in the achievement of common objectives, the following
observations may be made. In the field of credit and other economic
policies, there has been good coordination with the local representative
of the IBRD, and, through him, with the other international lending
agencies. Cooperation with the Development Loan Fund has been less
effective because of lack of information and clearly defined responsi-
bility as to its activities in the field. Both CARE and UNICEF are active
in Honduras, and there are no complaints as to coordination. Relations
with WHO/PAHO in public health have been excellent. FAO generally
works well with the agricultural division of USOM. Certain basic differ-
ences in philosophy and approach have been noted between UNESCO
and the educational division of the USOM, although there has been
recent improvement in relationships. UNTAA activity has been con-
fined to public administration and social welfare; the USOM has no
activities in the latter field, and, in public administration, the projects of
the two agencies thus far have been complementary.
The welfare agencies food programs are now being carefully con-
trolled for efficient operation, after a period of rather loose manage-
ment. During the last two years UNICEF was responsible for the loss
of over 90 tons of dried milk due to incorrect handling. USOM is now
instituting a close surveillance of this program, as well as the CARE
program, which has been operating successfully under its own super-
visory personnel.
A commentary of this nature would be incomplete without some
general remarks on the problems of obtaining satisfactory cooperation
from the host country. Honduras has a history of political instability.
Changes of Government have been very frequent, and, of course, there
is nothing resembling a civil service system. Under these circumstances,
national agencies and institutions are notorious for their changes of
personnel.
Top and middle-­level officers of the Government have character-
istically been solidly behind U.S. efforts to improve local conditions
through cooperative efforts. This is true of all political parties. They
frankly recognize the usefulness of aid, as well as the instability of their
own institutions. The result of this situation is that such activities as are

Honduras  819
carried on by the Servicios tend to become permanent through lack of a
host institution which can take them over.
In an attempt to break this state of only partially satisfactory equi-
librium, the D/USOM will study possible methods of guaranteeing
successful turnover of projects which are ripe for delivery and are oper-
ating successfully. The present outlook is far from favorable for such
action, but it is felt that at least some intelligent trials should be made.
The principal difficulty will be to keep trained personnel from being
replaced by political favorites without qualifications.
As stated above, Country Team coordination has been greatly
improved, and I believe this improvement is due in considerable mea-
sure to the designation of the D/USOM as Economic Counselor. The
incumbent himself feels that at this time, and with present personnel, he
is unable to delegate USOM operational responsibilities without dan-
ger to those operations, and is, therefore, not fully complying with the
requirements of both positions. Since the Embassy Economic Section is
staffed with experienced officers, a great degree of accommodation has
been possible, and I feel that for the present it will be possible to operate
successfully.
Robert Newbegin
HO–11.
Editorial Note
October 26, 1959.
In an exchange of notes between the American Embassy in
Honduras and the Honduran Ministry of Foreign Relations on
Government and the Republic of Honduras entered into an agreement
to permit the exchange of third party amateur radio communications.
In a related note from the American Embassy to the Honduran Ministry
of Foreign Relations on February 19, 1960, the United States informed
Honduras that, according to the terms of the American note of October
the texts of the notes exchanged as well as the text of the related note,

HO–12.
Editorial Note
April 22, 1960.
In an exchange of notes between Ambassador Robert Newbegin,
and Andrés Alvarado Puerto, the Honduran Minister of Foreign
Government informed the Republic of Honduras of its desire to amend
and to extend for an additional period of time beginning on March
6, 1958, the United States Army and Air Force Mission agreements of
and the agreement entered into force on May 20, 1960, retroactive to
1507. Documentation concerning the negotiation of this agreement is in
HO–13.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, May 13, 1960.
SUBJECT
Unofficial Informal Visit to U.S. by President of Honduras
In January President Villeda Morales of Honduras was invited to
address the Chamber of Commerce of the Americas in Miami on May
30. More recently he has been invited to add New Orleans to his itin-
erary to enable him to visit a large pulp and paper operation similar
to one being planned in Honduras by two large American firms. Our
Ambassador in Tegucigalpa attempted to dissuade him from accepting
the Miami invitation, pointing out that it would be impossible to show
him any of the attentions and courtesies customarily extended visiting
Chiefs of State. President Villeda indicated, however, that he did not
expect any official attention as he would be in the United States in a pri-
vate, unofficial capacity. The fact that the invitation had been extended
by Gawf on May 10.

Honduras  821
was widely known in Miami, and for this reason it became clear that if
President Villeda were induced to refuse the invitation, his refusal would
be seriously damaging to our relations with Honduras. Accordingly,
our Ambassador was authorized to convey the Department‘s approval
of the Miami visit. Also, for similar reasons, our Ambassador has been
authorized to agree to the addition of New Orleans to President Villeda’s
itinerary, emphasizing in both instances that his trip must be completely
private and informal and that no question of official attention or a visit to
Washington is to be raised. President Villeda understands this condition
and accepts it.2
Although the duration of President Villeda’s visit is still somewhat
indefinite, it is estimated that he will be in the United States about a
week. Our Ambassador to Honduras, Ambassador Robert Newbegin,
will accompany him on the entire trip, and Mr. C. Allan Stewart,
Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs of
the Department of State, will go to Miami to meet the group.
While President Villeda does not expect any official attention, I
believe it would be desirable for you to send him a short letter to be
delivered personally by Mr. Stewart upon his arrival. Enclosed is sug-
gested letter which, if you approve, we will be glad to transmit.3
It is recommended that this message, if approved, be released only
on the initiative or President Villeda.4
DOUGLAS DILLON
Acting Secretary
2 President Villeda arrived in Miami on May 30 and proceeded with his visit as
planned. Documentation concerning Villeda’s visit to the United States is in Department
of State file 715.11.
3 In the draft of this letter to President Villeda, President Eisenhower conveyed
his greetings and welcomed Villeda to the United States; praised Villeda’s efforts to
strengthen and defend Honduras’ democratic institutions and to improve the well-­being
of the Honduran people; and expressed the hope that the close and friendly relations that
existed between the United States and Honduras would continue to grow and prosper.
4 According to two handwritten notations on the source text, the signed original
of this letter was received from the White House on May 27 and was given to Gawf for
transmission to President Villeda Morales.

HO–14.
Airgram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Honduras1
G-7. JOINT STATE-INFENSE MESSAGE
1. Grant equipment which U.S. plans for Honduras during FY 61
consists exclusively that required by infantry battalion Honduras
has agreed maintain for hemisphere defense. This program does not
include most items mentioned Embtel 174,2 1823. This small Army unit
approximating 650 men obviously could not absorb 3,000 rifles and
1,000 carbines. Unlikely U.S. can substantially increase fire-­power or
size unit, by providing tanks and artillery equipment, without pro-
viding immediate requests from Nicaragua and Guatemala for similar
equipment which U.S. does not contemplate providing them this FY.
2. Beyond grant equipment program discussed above, State and
Defense would consider country team-CINCARIB recommendation for
assistance, including ammunition, considered indispensable Honduran
requirement for maintaining law and order against communist-­Castro
fomented disorders. Any such recommendation should take into
account equipment already possessed by local police as well as armed
forces, since U.S. would not be prepared duplicate in one branch GOH
capability already possessed by another. Any grant equipment pro-
vided for internal security would necessitate prior Presidential deter-
mination required by law and raise U.S. financial problems difficult to
resolve in view limited funds authorized by Congress and available for
LA military assistance programs.
3. In view foregoing, Emb and CINCARIB should not encourage
Hondurans anticipate grant program of character and dimensions rec-
ommended Embtels 176, 182.
Merchant
and initialed by George O. Spencer, the Officer in Charge of Inter-American Security and
Military Assistance. The airgram was also repeated for information to Panama City for
the Commander in Chief, Caribbean.
informed the Department of State that the Honduran Army lacked sufficient ammuni-
tion to carry out its tasks, and that the Commander in Chief, Caribbean, had requested
the Joint Chiefs of Staff to make available the necessary supplies. In Franklin’s view, this
shortage was dangerous and required rectification, therefore, the Department of State
State that he supported an additional request from the Commander in Chief, Caribbean,

Honduras  823
HO–15.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1
Washington, November 2, 1960.
SUBJECT
Political Situation and United Fruit Company Plans in Honduras
PARTICIPANTS:
ARA—Thomas C. Mann—Assistant Secretary
AFL/CIO—Andrew McClellan
ARA/RPA—Mr. Henry Hammond
ARA/OAP—Mr. Chaplin—OIC­—Honduran Affairs
ARA—Mr. Pryce
Mr. McClellan, who had recently returned from a visit to
Honduras, requested an appointment to discuss the political conse-
quences of the reported plans of the United Fruit Company to with-
draw from some public services on the North Coast of Honduras and
to lease its banana farms to private Honduran producers. He said that
if United withdraws from the hospital, the schools and the commis-
sary, the Government will be unable to take them over, and the result
will be their collapse. The prospect of this withdrawal is causing great
anxiety in Honduras, and the plans to lease banana farms, to local pro-
ducers are viewed by the Fruit Company union, SITRATERCO, as a
maneuver to break the union.
Mr. McClellan stressed the unemployment, economic stagnation,
increasing political stability in Honduras, and the alarming growth of
influence of the pro-Castro, communist, and extreme left-­wing Liberal
groups. He said that, the Villeda Government is riddled with unreli-
able individuals, many of, whom are pro-Castro. He emphasized that
the reported plans of the United Fruit company to disengage from
its Honduran operations would have grave political consequences,
which might force Villeda to compromise with the extreme left fac-
tion of his party, or might result in his replacement by a pro-Castro
government.
Mr. Mann expressed his concern over Mr. McClellan’s reports,
and said that he would ask the Embassy to make an urgent assessment
of the political trend in Honduras.2 Mr. Mann called Mr. Sunderland,

President of the United Fruit Company, relayed the general substance
of Mr.  McClellan’s reports, and requested that Mr. Sunderland defer
execution of any new United Fruit programs for disengagement from
Honduras pending a discussion of their political impact. He said that he
would be in a position to discuss the matter as soon as the Embassy had
submitted a report now being requested. Mr. Sunderland agreed to defer
action and agreed to discussions with the Department in approximately
10 days.
Mr. Mann suggested that it might be productive if Mr. McClellan
were to go to Boston and discuss the Honduran problem with United
Fruit officials. Since Mr. McClellan was leaving shortly for Central
America, it was agreed to explore this idea further upon his return.
Mr. Mann observed that in principle, the United program to turn more
of its operations over to local operators was desirable, but serious polit-
ical and economic problems could arise, not only in Honduras, but in
other countries where United operates and may be planning similar
programs.
HO–16.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Honduras (Burrows) to
the Department of State1
Following estimate preliminary with despatch to be pouched
­soonest.3 Re United Fruit policies and prospective labor and polit-
Charles R. Burrows was appointed Ambassador to Honduras on August 27 and pre-
sented his credentials in Tegucigalpa on November 3.
3 On November 10, Ambassador Burrows transmitted the Embassy’s assessment of
the United Fruit Company’s operations and plans to the Department of State. (Desp. 159

Honduras  825
­airgram G-257. Latest information indicates company planning invest
eleven million dollars in planting 32,000 acres with disease resistant
banana varieties plus two million in paper box factory. Unknown
whether additional land investment anything more than replacement
for lands rapidly being abandoned to disease; and unknown whether
investment to be for company or independent operations. Latter
still primary labor concern. November 20. Hale told Labor Attache8
Sitraterco has lost approximately 1,000 dues-­paying members since
1958, probably half due to land turn-­over policies, remainder to
other company disengagement practices. Resultant deteriorating
labor situation places leaders under extreme pressure from mem-
bership. Labor’s immediate concern is fact GOH has not yet replied
their petition to apply collective bargaining rights to independents.
Meanwhile opportunists continue exploit situation, particularly
Tegucigalpa labor advisor Reyes Ayestas. Most ORIT-­oriented labor
leaders not likely to be seduced by Castro. Real danger is that there
may be ousted by membership unless effective combination GOH
and company policies and actions forthcoming soon.
Moderate liberal GOH leadership has generally resisted extremist
leftwing pressure, although always with indecisiveness which reflects
essential political weakness. Embassy repeats loss of organized friendly
labor support could well be critical in terms continuance present GOH
policies or, ultimately in terms survival present administration. In lat-
ter circumstance only armed forces could save administration. These,
although neutral in last 18 months vis-­a-­vis internal political groupings,
are overwhelmingly anti-Communist and anti-Castro. Their minimum
current requirements cited in points one-­three, paragraph 8, Embassy
despatch 79.9
Burrows
8 John H. O’Grady.
the Department of State of the Honduran Armed Forces’ minimum requirements of arms

HO–17.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1
Washington, November 17, 1960.
SUBJECT
United Fruit Company Plans in Honduras
PARTICIPANTS
ARA—Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann
Mr. Victor Folsom, General Counsel, United Fruit Co.
Mr. Joseph W. Montgomery, Director, United Fruit Co.
Mr. Alfred Giardino, Labor Consultant, United Fruit Co.
Mr. Dale McConkey, Personnel Director, United Fruit Co.
Mr. Jasper Baker, Wash. Representative, United Fruit Co.
Mr. Andrew McClellan, AFL/CIO
ARA:OAP—Mr. Higdon, Mr. Chaplin
ARA:RPA—Mr. Hammond
Mr. Folsom and his associates called on Mr. Mann at the latter’s
request to discuss the United Fruit Company’s plans for its Honduran
operations. Mr. Mann said that uncertainty over the company’s plans
in Honduras is so intense as to create a political problem. The problem
areas appeared to be in reduction of work force, leasing banana farms to
private producers, withdrawal from schools, hospitals, the commissary,
and possible turnover of the railroad to the Honduran Government.
Mr. McClellan said that the union (SITRATERCO) did not intend
to advise the company on plans for reorganization in the face of the
declining economic position of the Honduran banana industry, but felt
that the company had an obligation to arrange for transfer of the public
services it operates in such a way that these services will continue to
operate efficiently. He said that he hoped to arrange a meeting between
company officials and the union leaders.
Mr. Folsom outlined the grim outlook for the Honduran banana
industry, and noted that at the current rate of spread of the Panama
disease, United’s production of the Gros Michel variety will have been
reduced to virtually nothing in five years. United has an investment of
about $40 million in Honduras, and is doing everything it can to protect
that investment. The only solution foreseen at this time is the discovery
of a disease resistant banana variety.
The company’s counting on having discovered a disease resistant
variety before the existing Gros Michel production is wiped out. The
company has established experimental growths of Lacatan and Giant

Honduras  827
Cavendish varieties, and the associated boxing plants. It was empha-
sized that there are many shipping, marketing, and consumer accep-
tance problems to be resolved before the company could say that these
varieties are the solution to the disease problem. Mr. Folsom said that
the question of maintaining the various public services in effective
operation was basic in the company’s plans, but that it was obvious
that some of these operations were far more extensive than justified by
the current scale of operations, or were businesses which the company
should not be engaged. He pointed out that it was vitally important for
the company to have the hospitals and railroads continue in operation,
and the company was investigating every possibility for effective oper-
ation under private or public auspices. He said that United planned to
send a team to Honduras to explain the company’s plans in the near
future, and hoped that this team could allay the existing apprehension
about the company’s plans.
Mr. McClellan said that the union was in a position to take the
place of the company’s commissary operation, and the union would be
glad to cooperate in assisting the transfer of other public services.
Mr. Folsom said that a mission of Mr. Albert Maverick and
Mr. Giardino would go to Honduras in the next three weeks to explain
the company’s plans to government and union officials. He said that
some of the uncertainty reflected in the Honduran situation was a con-
sequence of the uncertainty of the company’s own policies. He hoped
that a wide range of firm programs would have been decided upon
before the visit of the mission to Honduras.
Mr. Mann said that Mr. Folsom’s exposition had been very reas-
suring, and that a similar discussion in Honduras should have desir-
able effects. He added that he was reassured that the farm leasing,
or associate producer, program was being set up in such a way that
the farms were large enough and potentially sufficiently profitable so
that the operators would be in a position to pay normal wages to their
employees.
The urgency of the problem in Honduras was restated, and
Mr. McClellan said that he would immediately cable the head of
SITRATERCO that the United Fruit Company would be sending a mis-
sion to Honduras to discuss company plans in the next three weeks,
and that he hoped this news would be reassuring. Mr. Folsom said that
the company would proceed with its Honduran programs which had
been deferred at Mr. Mann’s request, and would make every effort to
present a complete, detailed exposition of company plans to interested
groups in Honduras.

HO–18.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Honduras (Burrows) to
the Department of State1
This is day of national rejoicing and at least momentary politi-
cal unity in Honduras.3 Orderly manifestations and celebration have
continued since 6 a.m. with participation all shades political spectrum
and with official holiday declared. Examples of prevailing spirit were
appearance at Plaza Morazan of ex-President Galvez together with
Villeda Morales and joint manifesto signed by Villeda Morales, former
Presidents Galvez and Carias plus members of 1956 junta hailing jurid-
ical victory and peaceful return of disputed territory.
Some voices calling for immediate and unilateral implementation if
necessary of court decision but indications have been since character of
decision first known here on November 14 that Honduran Government
does not intend endeavor force untimely or disorderly takeover of terri-
tory. This has been clear from conversations with Foreign Minister4 and
with private secretary of the President5 among others. This morning,
when I conveyed substance reference telegram, President confirmed
this attitude, gave me copy his message to Somoza translated below,
and professed readiness work closely with Nicaraguan authorities
toward orderly transfer of territory. In answer suggestion that students
or Guardia Civil might move precipitously he pointed out students or
others could not possibly arrive at border without air transportation
which definitely would not be provided.
Military and civil authorities interested only in continuation to
final conclusion of legal orderly process which has so successfully been
begun.
also to Managua.
2 In telegram 231 to Tegucigalpa, the Department of State informed Ambassador
Burrows that it had received a report for Exised Managua that should the International
Court of Justice adjudicate the Nicaraguan-Honduran boundary dispute in favor of
Honduras, the Government of Nicaragua feared that Honduran students and elements of
the Honduran Guardia Civil would provoke an incident in the disputed area. To prevent
such an incident, the Department of State requested the Embassies at Tegucigalpa and at
Managua to convey promptly the hope of the United States Government that Honduras
and Nicaragua would make every effort to carry out promptly and without incident the
upholding Honduras’ claims against Nicaragua to the disputed area known as Gracias a Dios.
4 Andrés Alvarado.
5 Juan Agurcia.

Honduras  829
President said that if he were to receive message from Somoza indi-
cating readiness to participate in such orderly transfer of authority he
would reply in like vein. Impression I received is that Villeda Morales
would be happy participate in procedure which might be example for
entire area and, perhaps, beginning of new era of improved relations
between Nicaragua and Honduras. That, at least, was atmosphere
in presidential palace today; a personal meeting on border between
Somoza and Villeda Morales to formalize agreed procedure and to
demonstrate spirit of collaboration was even discussed in my presence
by several ranking officials of GOH.
Now, it was also suggested, only dispute over Swan Islands is with
U.S.6 Foreign Minister and others insisted to me that Swan Islands is
basis for different kinds of disagreement which they satisfied can and
will be resolved by friendly discussion. Meanwhile, however, there
have been repeated references in radio broadcasts and by sound trucks
to Swan Islands issue and even to protest meetings.
“ICJ resolution calling for execution of royal arbitration award
of 1906, which settled frontier dispute between our countries, is
motive patriotic jubilation and Central Americanist satisfaction for the
Government and people of Honduras because, in this manner, bonds
of affection and understanding between two sister republics are fully
restored. Justice never one-­sided, wherefore I am sure you will join our
celebration of judicial sentence which definitely eliminates cause of
resentment between our peoples and rebuilds between Honduras and
Nicaragua bases of traditional and unbreakable friendship. I hope as we
raise again symbols of Honduran sovereignty in localities which until
now have been subject de facto occupation, our two peoples, united
in brotherhood since their political emancipation, may strengthen their
economic, social and cultural bonds in noble aim of Central American
integration. I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to you (sic) the
expressions of my high (sic) and distinguished consideration.  Ramon
Villeda Morales, President of Honduras.”
Burrows
Eisenhower, Document HO-22.

HO–19.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Honduras1
structive statesmanlike response by President Somoza to ICJ deci-
sion. Dept believes Somoza-Villeda border meeting of type outlined
Tegucigalpa’s 392 might be highly desirable from standpoint reduc-
ing tensions and possibly lead to solution other outstanding problems
through improved personal relations between Chiefs of State.
In your discretion, you may wish encourage Presidents Somoza
and Villeda along these lines.4
Herter
Chaplin and initialled by Charles E. Higdon, Deputy Director of the office of Central
American and Panamanian Affairs. The telegram was also transmitted to Managua.
the Department of State of Nicaragia’s willingness to comply with the decision of the
that President Villeda hoped to meet soon with President Somoza of Nicaragua to
work out procedures to govern the transfer of authority in the disputed territory.
celebrate the peaceful settlement of the long-­standing border dispute. For further infor-
mation, see the article entitled “Honduras Pushes Boundary Rights” in The New York

Honduras  831
HO–20.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1
Washington, November 30, 1960.
SUBJECT
Financial Difficulties of the Standard Fruit Company
PARTICIPANTS
Acting Secretary Douglas Dillon
Representative Hale Boggs
Dr. Thomas S. D’Antoni—President,
Standard Fruit Co.
Mr. Robert Smith Standard Fruit Co.
Mr. D. J. Kirchhoff Standard Fruit Co.
Mr. Kenneth H. Gormin—Bauerlein Inc.,
New Orleans
ARA—Deputy Assistant Secretary Milton
Barall
ARA:OAP—Mr. Chaplin
Representative Boggs said that he had requested the appointment
at the suggestion of Mr. Waugh of the EXIM Bank, who felt that the
political implications of Standard Fruit’s financial problems should be
brought to Mr. Dillon’s attention.2
Dr. D’Antoni related the history of the Standard Fruit Company,
the circumstances of its critical financial condition, the fact that some
50,000 people in Honduras were directly or indirectly dependent on
company operations, and presented a memo3 showing that the com-
a result of low banana prices. Mr. Dillon questioned Dr. D’Antoni to
clarify that the primary reason for the banks’ refusal to renew credits to
the company was the depressed banana market, with Latin American
political conditions being a contributory factor.
Mr. Boggs suggested that if Standard were to cease operations, the
consequent economic dislocation in Central America would give rise to
demands for U. S. assistance far in excess of the amount needed by the
company.
Theodore L. Eliot, Jr., the Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State, initialled his
approval of this memorandum on December 2.
D’Antoni had outlined the Standard Fruit Company’s financial problems to Assistant
Secretary of State Mann and had raised the possibility of obtaining financial assistance
for the company from the United States Government. In the course of this conversa-
tion, D’Antoni revealed that Standard Fruit was no longer able to secure financing from
American banks, that the company had a $5.6 million note with the Chase Manhattan
Bank that the bank was unwilling to renew, that Standard Fruit required $10 million
in new financing to continue operations, and that he was meeting with Waugh on
November 29 for the purpose of trying to obtain assistance from the Export-Import Bank.
3 No memorandum concerning such matters has been found.

Mr. Dillon commented that this situation was one which the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation might have been able to remedy,
but that it was not clear that the U. S. Government now has a legal avenue
by which it could come to the company’s aid with loans, either through
existing lending institutions or through Mutual Security Act funds.
Mr. Dillon said that the critical political and economic consequences of
the bankruptcy of the company demanded that the Department inves-
tigate carefully every possibility by which the company could be aided.
Mr. Barall said he would discuss the matter with the appropriate offices
in the light of Mr. Dillon’s feelings, and communicate the results to Dr.
D’Antoni on the following day.4
4 No record of such a communication from Barall to D’Antoni has been found in
Department of State files.
HO–21.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1
Washington, December 6, 1960.
SUBJECT
Standard Fruit Company Financial Difficulties
PARTICIPANTS
ARA—Assistant Secretary Mann
Mr. Roger Keefe, Vice President, Chase Manhattan Bank
Mr. John Donalson, Loan Officer, Chase Manhattan Bank
Mr. Douglas Smith—DLF
Mr. Ralph Golby—DLF
E—Mr. Anthony Geber
ARA—Mr. Rosenson, Mr. Chaplin
Mr. Mann outlined the problems of the Standard Fruit Company
and the acute political and economic problem for the U.S. in Honduras
if Standard were to cease operations. He asked what were the plans of
the Chase Manhattan Bank as the company’s largest creditor.

Honduras  833
Mr. Keefe said that the Bank’s interest was not limited to the
$5.6 million loan to the company, but included additional loans of over
$1 million made to a Dutch corporation to finance refrigerated ships
chartered to Standard. Standard is obligated to prepay charter fees if
the borrower is unable to make payments on the ship loans. If Standard
were to halt operations, there would be no charters for the ships, thus
no payment on the ship loans, and the sale of the ships would not real-
ize the amount of the outstanding loan balances on them. He added that
the bank was looking for a purchaser for Standard’s collateral, stock in
two breweries and a soap factory, but that it might take some time to
find a satisfactory purchaser. He said that no matter how Standard’s
financial problems may be resolved, he felt that the company should
rid itself of the breweries and soap factory. The two crucial questions
regarding Standard’s future in the bank’s eyes are how to overcome
the political risks in Honduras, and will it be possible for Standard to
stop its current losses. As matters stand, the company will be unable to
meet its payrolls by the middle of January. Chase Bank itself does not
engage in foreign loans, and the original loans to Standard were made
against domestic assets which have now disappeared. Mr. Mann was
then called away from the meeting.
Mr. Donalson said that an examination of the cash flow projection
for 1961 indicates that the company should show a slight cash profit
on its Honduran operation over the entire year, but that exclusive of
debt payments becoming due, the company would need approximately
Mr. Smith and Mr. Golby of DLF said that ICA or DLF are in a posi-
tion to give guarantees against expropriation and civil disturbances,
and asked what types of guarantees would be necessary for the bank to
continue its financing of the company.
Mr. Keefe said that even if the political risks were covered, the
grave commercial risk remained, and the key to the bank’s continued
financing. If the ability of the company to stop its losses. If losses could
be stopped, the bank would be willing to continue to carry the com-
pany, however the company needs additional funds to operate until it
is known whether or not losses can be stopped.
Mr. Golby suggested that the bank might be able to consider DLF
political guarantees for the $5.6 million coming due, with repayment
guarantees for up to a given amount of new loans necessary for work-
ing capital. This situation would not involve a U.S. agency in financial
supervision of the company and would appear to accomplish our pol-
icy ends. Mr. Keefe said this proposal was satisfactory as a basis for

negotiation, and he would plan to return to Washington on December
8 for further discussions.2
officials of the DLF informed Keefe and other representatives of the Chase Manhattan
Bank that the DLF representatives had secured negotiating instructions along the lines of
the proposals discussed on December 6 and were prepared to make specific proposals to
the bank regarding political and repayment guarantees for any loans that the bank might
make to the Standard Fruit Company. Keefe responded that the bank did not believe the
DLF or ICA could offer political risk guarantees that would in practice satisfy the needs of
Chase Manhattan. After an extended discussion of the question of economic guarantees,
those present agreed that DLF would draft a guarantee agreement for the bank’s review.
summarized the results of the discussion that had occurred on December 8, informed the
ambassador of Under Secretary of State Dillon’s determination to prevent Standard Fruit
from going bankrupt, and stated that efforts were continuing to arrange a government
loan if Chase Manhattan refused to offer additional financing to Standard Fruit. (ARA
HO–22.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, December 8, 1960.
SUBJECT
Submission of the Dispute with Honduras concerning Sovereignty over Swan
Islands to the International Court of Justice.
A long-­standing dispute between the United States and Honduras
concerning sovereignty over two small Caribbean islands, the Swan
Islands, is now becoming so inflamed in Honduras that it threatens U.S.–
Honduran relations, and even the stability of the moderate administra-
tion of President Villeda Morales. For almost 100 years, the islands have
been occupied by United States citizens and utilized by United States
interests. The Cuban Government, in its general propaganda campaign
against the United States, has been agitating the dispute throughout the
hemisphere, partly to aggravate an issue between the United States and
Honduras, and partly because of anti-Castro broadcasts being made by
a commercial radio station on one of the islands.
The Hondurans have convinced themselves that their claim to
these islands is unassailable. However, the U.S. has long claimed the
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Confidential.

Honduras  835
islands, and after careful study, we believe the U.S. has the better claim.
A memorandum discussing more fully the dispute over sovereignty is
enclosed.2
There is no way to resolve this issue by compromise, since each
side believes that it has sovereignty. The only method by which it
can now be resolved, in my judgment, is to have the question of sov-
ereignty decided by an impartial tribunal, the International Court of
Justice. High officials of the Honduran Government have given indica-
tions that Honduras would probably agree to this course. A statement
regarding the relevance of the Connelly Amendment3 is enclosed.4
It is likely that the United States will win the case if it is submitted.
However, even if this were not the situation, I believe it would still
be highly desirable for the United States to manifest, particularly in
its relations with a small country such as Honduras, its readiness in
appropriate cases to accept the resolution of a dispute by an impartial
tribunal in accordance with international law.
Submission of the Swan Islands dispute to the International Court
of Justice appears to offer the best available course of action for the
United States in its relations with Honduras, and it has been the policy
of the United States to support and foster the peaceful settlement of
disputes by the International Court of Justice in appropriate cases. The
Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency have no
objection to such a course of action.
I request that you authorize me to seek agreement with the
Government of Honduras for the submission of this dispute to the
International Court of Justice.5
Christian A. Herter
2 Not printed.
the United States under certain conditions, to accept the jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice. In the course of the Senate’s consideration of this resolution, Sen. Tom
Connally (D.-Tex.) obtained the adoption of an amendment to the resolution that permit-
ted the United States to reserve the right to exempt all disputes from the ICJ’s compulsory
jurisdiction that involved the domestic jurisdiction of the United States and to determine
the definition of the term “domestic jurisdiction.” For the text of Senate Resolution 196,
Document 34.
4 [The text of footnote 4 is missing in the source text.]
5 According to a handwritten notation on a carbon copy of the source text, the
Department of State was authorized on December 9, 1960, to proceed with this course of
action. (Eisenhower Library, Project Clean-Up)

Nicaragua: U.S. Relations with Nicaragua
NI–1.
Letter from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to the
Officer in Charge of Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1
Managua, February 11, 1958.
Dear Henry:
Bill Hudson will be getting out a despatch the last of the week on
what I am telling you.2
President Luis and General Tachito are convinced that an attempted
invasion from Honduras with a probable assist from Costa Rica will
occur this month or in early March. They say that the invasion will be by
ex-Caribbean Legionnaires and Nicaraguan exiles who now realize that
since Echandi’s election they will no longer have it easy in Costa Rica.
President Luis says that the election in Costa Rica3 handed them
a jolt and that now they will not wait for Bautista’s downfall in Cuba.
He also states that everyone is pretty much in agreement that success in
Nicaragua would assure them a base of operations.
As of now I do not believe there will be either an invasion or a rev-
olution. There may be an assassination or an attempted one. I rule out
the revolution because there are no empty bellies—a shortage of labor
exists and the landowners, most of whom are in the opposition, want to
market what has turned out to be a good crop. In addition to that, the
little guys don’t want to fight and the big ones are too careful.
The General thinks the Guardia are 75–80 per cent loyal to him and
95 per cent loyal to his brother Luis, the President.
Amb. Whelan Nicaragua 1958.” Confidential; Official-Informal.
2 There is no record in Department of State files of a despatch summarizing the
Ambassador’s impressions contained in his letter to Taylor on February 11.
3 On February 2, Mario Echandi, candidate of the National Union Party, was elected
President of Costa Rica.

Nicaragua  837
Our Military boys think that the appraisal is fair. The hierarchy of
the Catholic church is satisfied and the Bishops are cooperating with
the Administration.
The Liberal Party - a tight, daily functioning organization, has
plenty of money and a very efficient precinct setup. The publicity that
President Luis has given the supposedly revolutionary and invasion
plans and his calling of the contributors (of whom he has a list) and
advising them to be careful because this time there will be no fooling in
the way they will be treated, is having its effect. He seems to be doing
all right with Labor.
At a party of some 80 couples of the old-­time Conservatives last
Thursday night, at which Mrs. Whelan and I were the only outsiders,
we could see the evidence of Luis’s conferences with the opposition.
Now, here are some thoughts on the negative side:
We have had friends of at least five would-­be candidates for the
presidency if Luis was overthrown, ask us what we thought of their
boys.
We also see where some of the people who secured visas before the
1954 attempted revolution are getting visas again, but it may be routine.
In addition, there has been a stepped-­up press and radio campaign.
I don’t know how I can be so far off in my appraisal as against
that of the President, the General and some of the Cabinet members
who have discussed it with me, but the solid members of the oppo-
sition cannot get excited about the rumors. I hope I am right. I have
suggested to the President that when, as and if he has definite proof
that an invasion is going to take place, he first try to prevent it by asking
President Villeda Morales and President Figueres to meet with him at
their respective borders and give them the information that he has.
When are you coming down?4
Sincerely yours,
Thomas E. Whelan
4 No record of Taylor’s reply was located in Department of State files.

NI–2.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Nicaraguan Affair (Taylor)1
Washington, February 21, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
Dr. Alfonso Ortega-Urbina, Counselor of Embassy of Nicaragua
ARA - Assistant Secretary Rubottom
MID - Mr. Taylor
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa called to discuss President Somoza’s
fear of an invasion against his Government from Nicaraguan exiles
residing in Honduras and Costa Rica. The Ambassador said that he
had had a recent conversation with President Somoza in which Somoza
asked him to discuss this matter with the Department. He said the revo-
lutionary Nicaraguan exile leaders were Pedro Vivas and Gomez Flores
in Honduras, and General Cuadro Pasos in Costa Rica.
The Ambassador said that in Honduras, according to Nicaraguan
intelligence reports, Nicaraguan exiles were organizing near the bor-
der for an attack. He said that although Honduran President Villeda
Morales had given assurances to President Somoza that he would not
permit the exiles to launch such an attack, it was feared that Villeda
was not completely informed of the present activities of the Nicaraguan
exiles. He indicated that although President Somoza had confidence
in the good intentions of Villeda, there was doubt in his mind as to
whether such key figures in his government as Oscar Flores, Villa
Bermudas, and Alvarado Puerto were of the same mind. Sevilla-Sacasa
stressed that Pedro Vivas was the brother-­in-­law of Alvarado Puerto,
the new Honduran Foreign Minister, and that because of this rela-
tionship it was feared any attempt of Vivas to organize the exiles for
an attack in Nicaragua would not be effectively discouraged by the
Foreign Minister.
Sevilla-Sacasa stated his Government felt sure that in Costa Rica,
when Echandi assumed the Presidency, he would not permit the
exiles to remain in the country such as Figueres has done. He said the
Nicaraguan exiles were aware of this and that fear of not being per­
mitted to remain  in Costa Rica would force them to make a move
against the Nicaraguan Government within the next two months.
The Ambassador said that the activities of the exiles in Costa Rica were

Nicaragua  839
being correlated with those of the Honduran exiles and the plan of
attack called for the two groups to move simultaneously against the
Government of Nicaragua.
The Ambassador also stated he had information that three air-
planes would fly shortly from Mexico to Costa Rica with armaments for
the Nicaraguan exiles. He said that two of the planes would leave from
Miami proceeding first to Mexico to meet the third plane and then all
three would fly to Costa Rica. Mr. Rubottom asked the Ambassador if
he could give the Department any information concerning the reported
two planes scheduled to leave from Miami in order that the Department
could check into the matter. The Ambassador said he would give the
information he had to Mr. Taylor.
The Ambassador said his Government was concerned over the
threat of a movement of exiles against it. He said his Government had
expected the exiles to move on February 21, but thought perhaps they
had delayed knowing that President Somoza was on the alert for such
a move. He deplored the bloodshed and difficulties which would ensue
if the exiles were permitted to launch an attack against Nicaragua. He
then asked Mr. Rubottom if our respective Ambassadors in Honduras
and Costa Rica could draw the respective Presidents’ attention to
the dangers of permitting the exiles to prepare for an attack against
the Nicaraguan Government. Mr. Rubottom agreed to inform our
two Ambassadors, but said he would leave the action taken to their
discretion.
Mr. Rubottom informed the Ambassador that he appreciated the
information he had given him. He said that we would continue to remain
alert to such possibilities outlined by the Ambassador of an attack on
his Government from Nicaraguan exiles. However, he pointed out to
the Ambassador that the revolutionary exiles lived on such rumors and
deliberately generated them without foundation in hopes of keeping
Governments in a state of agitation. The Ambassador agreed that the
Nicaraguan exiles had been generating like rumors for years.
In closing, the Ambassador said he had heard it was the intention of
the new Honduran Foreign Minister to renounce the agreement to have
the Nicaraguan-Honduran border dispute settled in the International
Court of Justice. However, he did not believe this could be true.

NI–3.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to
the Department of State1
Managua, March 18, 1958.
No. 414.
SUBJECT
The Invasion Plot and Relations with Honduras
President SOMOZA and his brother are still expecting the
Nicaraguan exiles to make an invasion attempt from Honduras. If it
comes, they intend to smash it bloodily, in order to prevent the devel-
opment of a situation like the one in Cuba. General SOMOZA told the
Military Attaché last weekend that he will use a regimental combat
team for this purpose.
While President Somoza has consistently refused to credit rumors
that the exiles are getting help or encouragement from President
VILLEDA Morales, he has been concerned by reports that Foreign
Minister ALVARADO Puerto and other associates of President Villeda
are helping the exiles behind Villeda’s back. He was somewhat reassured
on this score during the past few days by a report from Tegucigalpa that
President Villeda had called in certain unspecified Honduran officials
and “laid down the law” to them.
The President said yesterday that he had been in touch with Villeda
and they had agreed to have a meeting soon after Easter. The Embassy
believes such a meeting would help produce harmony and tolerance in
their future relations.
The Embassy has today seen a report from Tegucigalpa, dated
March 15, transmitting information obtained from a usually-­reliable
source concerning rather concrete invasion plans of GOMEZ Flores.
We trust this report is being distributed to all recipients of our des-
patch 403.2
For the Ambassador:
William P. Hudson
Counselor of Embassy
belief that the Nicaraguan exiles were planning an invasion of the country and expressed
concern that the Embassy in Honduras had decided not to approach President Morales in

Nicaragua  841
NI–4.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in
Nicaragua (Whelan)1
Washington, April 7, 1958.
Dear Tom:
The always thorny question of a visit by President Luis Somoza
to the United States arose last Thursday at lunch with Guillermo who
took the initiative, both in the invitation and in the subject matter we
discussed. I sat on him rather hard at first, saying that the visit was sim-
ply out of the question in the foreseeable future for a variety of reasons,
several of which he knew. He looked quite unhappy and, having given
him the medicine, I proceeded to sugar-coat it as much as possible for
the next half hour. Actually, we discussed the kind of letter that I would
write to you on this subject, so I suppose that this goes back to earlier
conservations which the two of you have had in Managua.
Luis has won commendation from all of us who are interested in
Latin American affairs in Washington, and he has done surprisingly
well in obtaining the respect and good will of most of his neighbors.
However, most of the publicity media in the United States still tend
to lump him with the other “dictators” of Latin America and the same
treatment is accorded him throughout most of South America. In that
continent, especially in Colombia, Venezuela, Uruguay, Argentina and
Chile, the current against anything smacking of state control is very
strong indeed, and Luis’ family name hurts him no matter what he
does. I do not cite the above as reason for not inviting him to the United
States, but it is an aspect of the problem which has to be considered.
It seems to us in the Department that the following points should be
given weight in any consideration of this problem, since they indi-
cate both that Nicaragua and President Somoza are well regarded by
the United States and also that there are reasons other than the one
listed above for going slow on an invitation to him; (1) The treatment
accorded President Tacho Somoza following his shooting and at the
time of his death clearly revealed the extent of United States friend-
ship toward Nicaragua (and has been used to our detriment by some
elements);2 (2) The President’s brother, General Tachito Somoza, was
invited to the United States last year and accorded full honors during
Informal. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 Documentation on the assasination of President Anastasio Somoza in September
Central and South America, Chapter 6.

his trip, including a chance to see the President briefly albeit on the golf
course; (3) You have been left in Nicaragua as Ambassador now for
seven years, and this has been interpreted widely as United States sup-
port of the Somoza family, including President Luis, because of your
well publicized and quite understandable affection for them; (4) Any
invitation to President Luis prior to the complete settlement of the
Honduran-Nicaraguan boundary dispute would immediately be inter-
preted as moral support of the Nicaraguan side of the issue no matter
what we might say, unless the Honduran President were invited at the
same time, and this we simply cannot do; (5) The schedule for state vis-
its is crowded to overflowing and represents one of our most difficult
problems in dealing with our colleagues in the Department and those
in the White House who are responsible for such planning; the sched-
ule is tight for an indefinite time ahead as well; and (6) The visits of
Presidents-­elect on an informal basis is a completely different kettle of
fish from that of an official visit by a President, involving infinitely more
detailed planning, more time of our highest officials, more expense, and
more problems resulting from the inferences drawn by those Presidents
who have not been able to get invitations.
Guillermo specifically alluded to the spot that President Luis
would be on should we invite President Villeda Morales or President
Lemus. You can rest assured that we do not contemplate inviting
President Villeda Morales in the foreseeable future. Our plans with
respect to President Lemus are not that definite, but we will face that
problem if and when it arises.
I realize that this is a subject which will continue to plague you,
and me, too, but it is not the only tough one in the book. I know that we
can count on you to handle your side of it in your usual Whelan-­style
diplomacy, which is as good as any I know.
With best regards and looking forward to seeing you in June,
Very sincerely yours,
R.R. Rubottom, Jr.
PS: Two letters have just arrived on my desk from you bearing on the
above. The one of March 313 mentions the less secure position which
Guillermo now holds in Nicaragua. I certainly agree with your estimate
of his cooperative attitude here and personally would dislike seeing
him transferred. Frankly, I cannot imagine that Luis would be contem-
plating such a move although I don’t doubt that certain Nicaraguans
might be sniping at Guillermo. I certainly hope that he is ordered home
3 A copy of Whelan’s letter of March 31, dealing with Sevilla-Sacasa’s position, is in

Nicaragua  843
for consultation during Dr. Eisenhower’s visit in June,4 but I doubt that
we should make a request for such action. This, incidentally, brings
up a point (7) which I should have included in the body of my letter
in paragraph 2, i.e., the fact that Dr. Eisenhower is visiting Nicaragua
should take some of the heat off Luis (and Guillermo) to have a visit
to the U.S. While Guillermo hardly deserves credit for arranging the
Eisenhower visit, although I believe he has spoken to Dr. Eisenhower
several times about it, certainly no one else can take credit away from
him for the idea.
On the basis of my contact with Vice President Nixon and my
knowledge of his tight schedule,5 Irving Davidson would have to pull
something besides rabbits out of the hat to arrange for the V.P. to visit
Managua. This is in response to your other letter of March 31 which
arrived today.6
6 A copy of Whelan’s March 31 letter concerning the possibility of Nixon’s visit to
NI–5.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1
Washington, April 8, 1958.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA: Activities of Nicaraguan Exiles in Honduras
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
ARA—Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary
MID—C. Allan Stewart, Deputy Director
MID—Henry L. Taylor, Nicaragua Desk Officer
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa said that at the request of President
Somoza he had called to discuss the activities of Nicaraguan exiles
­residing in Honduras. He told Mr. Rubottom that his Government

­continued to receive information (see memo of conversation dated
sion from the exiles was imminent. He said that his Government
had received reports that arms were being moved from Costa Rica to
Honduras for use in the invasion, and that Nicaraguan exiles resid-
ing in Costa Rica were joining the exiles in Honduras. According to
Sevilla-Sacasa his Government had reason to believe that the exiles
were gathering for the invasion just east of Teotecacinte in the disputed
border area.
The Ambassador said President Somoza believed that Honduran
President Villeda was sincere in his declarations of intention not to per-
mit the exiles to launch an invasion from Honduras. However, President
Somoza had information leading him to believe that Honduran
Cabinet Ministers Milla Bermudez, Alvarado Puerto, Oscar Flores, and
President of the Congress Rodas were working with the Nicaraguan
exiles, behind Villeda’s back. Sevilla-Sacasa then asked Mr. Rubottom
if our Embassy in Honduras would impress upon Villeda the need to
take appropriate measures to prevent the exiles from carrying out their
planned invasion. He expressed the belief that Villeda was not com-
pletely apprised of the exiles’ activities and consequently was not fully
aware of the threatened danger to Honduran-Nicaraguan relations
being caused by these activities.
Mr. Rubottom told Sevilla-Sacasa that the Department had received
full reports regarding this subject from our Embassies in Honduras
and Nicaragua. He said that we were concerned over these reports
and the possible effect they might have on Honduran-Nicaraguan
relations. He cautioned Sevilla-Sacasa against any rash action on the
part of Nicaragua, such as sending troops into Honduran territory to
ferret out the exiles. Mr. Rubottom said he understood Villeda had
announced publicly his willingness to cooperate with Nicaragua in
attempting to locate and prevent any exiles from launching an inva-
sion into Nicaragua. Sevilla-Sacasa indicated this was correct, and
assured Mr. Rubottom that Nicaragua had no intention of sending
troops into Honduran territory in the disputed area in search of exiles.
Mr. Rubottom informed Sevilla-Sacasa that our new Ambassador to
Honduras would be there in the next few days and would discuss this
problem further with Villeda. He then expressed his appreciation for
Sevilla-Sacasa’s frankness and thanked him for his call.
2 See Document NI–2.

Nicaragua  845
NI–6.
Editorial Note
On April 25, 1958, a group of Nicaraguan exiles, led by Manuel
Gómez Flores, launched a plot to invade Nicaragua. After stealing an
aircraft in Miami, two Nicaraguan air force officers, already implicated
in an earlier invasion attempt, flew to Honduras and rendezvoused
with Flores and his followers. The plot was frustrated by units of the
Honduran armed forces who seized the aircraft, an arms cache, and
arrested Flores and some of his followers. Documentation on the inci-
NI–7.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to
the Department of State1
302. During past week public opinion in this country re Nixon
­incidents2 has somehow veered around nearly 180 degrees. After view-
ing U.S. few days ago as the offended they are now analyzing U.S. as
the offender on basis revival all the old myths about our economic
aggression and neglect of Latin America plus in case of opposition here
the old canard about our supporting dictatorships. Such press material
from other LA countries as I have seen suggests this phenomenon has
occurred in greater or less degree throughout hemisphere.
By dedicating ourselves to a re-­examination of our LA policies we
have given a fine example of Christian humility but Latinos seem to be
mistaking this for admission of basic guilt and are responding to it as
children would. Some sort of spanking seems called for to sober them
up and bring them to realization they bear a large share of respon-
sibility for cracks in hemispheric solidarity. It is time they did some
­re-­examining too.
While I am confident Doctor Eisenhower can be protected in this
country from gross discourtesies shown Nixon in South America,
I fear unless we can do something to regain psychological offensive
and awaken Latin Americans to necessity for constructive unemotional
Priority.
2 For the demonstrations in Caracas on May 13 during the course of the Vice

evaluation their economic social political problems, their own responsi-
bilities toward solving them, and the extent of past U.S. assistance to LA
and burden to U.S. taxpayers, his visit this area may turn into a round
of debates in which he will appear be only on defensive and which will
serve largely to confirm Central Americans in the irresponsible tendency
to blame U.S. for their troubles. One factor which should be brought to
Latinos attention is possible adverse public reaction in U.S. to incessant
cries for more aid for LA in view apparent ingratitude many Latinos
for aid they have received. Among possible measures several policy
speeches by Congressional leaders and high officials on themes men-
tioned above before suitable forums such as OAS might help prepare
ground for positive results visit. Reactions to speeches could be used in
preparation statements for Doctor Eisenhower during visit.
Whelan
NI–8.
Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs1
Washington, undated.
SUMMARY OF DISCUSSIONS DURING DR. EISENHOWER’S
VISIT TO NICARAGUA2
Discussions in Managua were held with President Luis Somoza,
members of his Cabinet, General Anastasio Somoza, representatives
of various political groups, Government supporters and opposition
parties, labor and management, Chamber of Commerce, and others.
Similarly, others in Dr. Eisenhower’s party met with various Nicaraguan
officials. Neither the President nor General Somoza put forth specific
proposals in their talks with Dr. Eisenhower. President Somoza seemed
genuinely concerned with the accusations of being a dictator levelled
against him and anxious to prove that he was returning the Nicaraguan
Government to democratic practices.
“Eisenhower, Milton-Nicaragua 1958.” Confidential. The source text indicates no date
or drafting officer.
2 Dr. Milton Eisenhower, brother of the President and Personal Representative of the
President with the rank of Special Ambassador, visited Nicaragua during the course of a
three-­week fact finding trip to Panama, Honduras, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
and Puerto Rico. See Document NI–4, footnote 4.

Nicaragua  847
It was notable that members of the political opposition spoke
quite freely and unrestrictedly to Dr. Eisenhower concerning the
Somoza Government. On the first day, when Dr. Eisenhower visited
the Bi-National Center, a small crowd carried posters denouncing the
Government in various forms and General Somoza himself translated
these signs for Dr. Eisenhower. Similarly, during the meeting with the
University graduates, one of them, Dr. Zelaya, made a sharp attack on
United States policy paralleling the Communist Party line. At first, it
was alleged that he was speaking on behalf of the University graduates,
but this was subsequently denied. Considerable reference was made
by these same opposition groups not merely to alleged United States
support for the Somozas but also to similar alleged support for other
dictators.
Among the points raised by the Nicaraguans were what they
believed to be unfair competition regarding the marketing of cotton.
Complaints similar to those encountered in other Central American
countries were made regarding the instability of the coffee market and
the low prices thereof. Some belief was expressed by Nicaraguan busi-
nessmen that the United States because of its enormous wealth could
absorb the financial cost of lost cotton markets. Again there appeared
the belief that the United States fixes industrial and agricultural prices.
Some feeling was also expressed that through Marshall aid the United
States had stimulated coffee production in Africa which was competi-
tive with Central American coffee.
Business and other private sectors expressed concern regarding the
great increase in the Government’s expenditures without correspond-
ing increase in the country’s productive capacity. Recognition was given
of technical and other assistance rendered by the United States. These
same circles complained that the persistent fear of Government inter-
ference, increases in taxes, bureaucracy, and scarcity of credit facilities,
greatly hamper the economic growth of the country. The agricultural
production which is the basis of the country’s economy was suffering
severely from depressed international prices. Some complaint was
made of the size of the military budget and President Somoza on two
separate occasions referred to the fact that he had been able to reduce
military expenditures on two occasions due to the cooperation of his
brother who was the Commander of the National Guard.
Coffee growers of Nicaragua presented a special memorandum
to Dr. Eisenhower relating to the problems of coffee which earned
approximately half of Nicaragua’s foreign exchange.3 There are some
4,800 plantation owners out of a population of nearly a million and a
half. In the opinion of these coffee growers, the present difficulties were
3 No memorandum matching the description here was found in Department of
State files.

due to internal and external causes; Internal: inadequate credit, high
cost of production, lack of rural roads, high taxation. External causes:
low prices in world markets, high sales cost to the American consumer,
low  world consumption, lack of preferential treatment for Central
American coffee by the United States, lack of a broad scale United States
assistance program for Latin American countries. To remedy the situ-
ation they recommended United States cooperation for stabilization of
prices and volume of sales, granting of long-­term credits at low rates
of interest to improve the coffee industry (current rates being from 9%
to 13%), and long term credit to the Government of Nicaragua for the
construction of rural roads.
The labor groups received by Dr. Eisenhower expressed their con-
cern at the low standards of living in the country and the acuteness of the
housing shortage. They expressed great interest in an ICA-­sponsored
program for self-­help, low-­cost houses to be built by the prospective
inhabitants of the houses during their spare time. With labor being
furnished by the prospective inhabitants and the land donated by the
Nicaraguan Government, the only cost would be for materials. It was
indicated this would run between $800 and $1500 per house.
The Government’s presentation was made through the National
Economic Council. It indicated that at the present time public as well
as private investment had reached the highest level in Nicaragua’s his-
1954. Industrial production rose three-­fold in the same period. During
the same period there was a 53% rise in the cost of basic foodstuffs. In
1956 Nicaraguan economy suffered a severe setback in all fields. The
drop in coffee prices became more severe and the Government resorted
to measures of fiscal and monetary correction which tended to reduce
the country’s economic activity. During this period the number of
unpaid debts to the National Bank (which controls 80% of the credit in
the country) rose to some $12 million. This is a sum equivalent to one-­
third of the outstanding agricultural credit in the country.
The Nicaraguan Government stated that it had maintained an
unchanged policy of cordiality toward foreign investors. The general
law for exploitation of natural resources as well as the law of incen-
tive and protection of interest gives equal treatment to foreigners and
Nicaraguans. The foreign investment law of 1956 guarantees the right
to send profits abroad and the Nicaraguan Government states that it
recognizes that private investment flows only to those countries where
attractive conditions prevail. Nicaraguans stated they believed Central
American economic integration was indispensable and that only the
formation of a common market would permit satisfactory economic
development. The National Economic Council requested assistance in
measures to stop price declines and in measures to diversify national

Nicaragua  849
production and place its traditional crops in a better position to com-
pete internationally. The ravages of the Panama disease practically
destroyed banana production in the Atlantic Coast area and this is a
seriously distressed area within Nicaragua. The Nicaraguans, in sum-
ming up, requested the United States to view the following favorably:
(a) broad financial assistance in solving the problems confronting the
country; (b) assistance in stabilizing coffee prices; (c) special consid-
eration for the problem which confronts Nicaragua in the sale of its
cotton; (d) help in securing a higher sugar quota for Nicaragua on the
world market; (e) assistance to the Central American countries in mov-
ing toward economic integration.
Request for assistance in a general way were as follows: $7,700,000
for economic development programs of the National Development
Institute, $8,500,000 for special works such as hydroelectric power and
water supply programs, and $10 million for school construction and an
undetermined amount for public health.
There appeared to be among Nicaraguans of all classes the usual
misconception concerning the role of the United States in determining
commodities prices and industrial prices. There appeared particularly
on the part of opposition groups the same misconception regarding
United States policy in regard to non-­democratic regimes. There was no
recognition of any possible failure on the part of the Latin Americans
in regard to their policies with respect to the United States. Where fault
was found it was always with United States policy.
CONCLUSIONS: — Requests for financial assistance were made
as specified above. Requests were made for United States assistance in
stabilizing coffee and cotton prices. Criticism was addressed by oppo-
sition groups to alleged United States support for the Somoza regime.
Widespread support was found for the idea of Central American inte-
gration. The usual belief that the resources of the United States were
unlimited and that all problems could be solved if only the United
States would be less “stubborn” was encountered. There was some
grudging consent on the part of the opposition groups to the idea that
the President may be moving toward the democratization of the regime.
Labor groups carefully took no position for or against the Government
and there seemed to be a generalized feeling that United States assis-
tance thus far had not filtered down to the masses.
In Nicaragua, as in other countries visited, there seemed to be a
need for a broad inventory of national resources, both human and mate-
rial. Similar needs exist for adequate study of the feasibility of agricul-
tural diversification, for an analysis and appraisal of the potentials of
domestic and foreign markets, including tourism, for more organized
planning with respect to government policies in the economic field, for
a review of the tax and trade policies of Nicaragua, and for an examina-
tion of the structure and functioning of governmental agencies.

NI–9.
Letter from the Ambassador to Nicaragua (Whelan) to the
President’s Personal Representative (Eisenhower)1
Managua, September 16, 1958.
Dear Milton:
The morning you left I promised to give you the results of your
visit to Nicaragua. I have purposely delayed so as to be absolutely sure
of the reactions obtained. Here they are:
1. The President is pleased; the Cabinet and the Government are
happy.
2. The business interest, as a result of you frank and hard-­hitting
reply, are well satisfied.
3. The opposition political parties, who had a chance to sound off
without interruption, are now convinced that you have taken their sto-
ries to President Ike and they are happy.
4. The press, because of equal treatment to both American and
local representatives, are happy.
5. The students found out they had made a mistake and sent a del-
egation around two weeks ago to tell us so and at the same time to pick
up a little money for their annual celebration.
6. The so-called intellectuals who were abusive in their visit with
you, have been very apologetic. As a result the speaker who, as you
know, was very much to the left, has been removed from office and
the Medical Association overwhelmingly defeated his candidate for the
presidency.
Your colleagues, Messrs. Rubottom, Waugh, McIntosh and
Coughran contributed greatly to the success of the visit.
In short, everyone is satisfied. We just have not been able to pick
up any antagonistic statements. Your visit resulted in much good for
the United States, this Embassy and myself. Thank you.
With kindest personal regards,
Sincerely,
Thomas E. Whelan
Amb. Whelan Nicaragua 1958.” The source text was transmitted under cover of a letter
dated September 22, from Whelan to Rubottom; it is a carbon copy bearing Whelan’s typed
name.

Nicaragua  851
NI–10.
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central
American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Washington, November 26, 1958.
SUBJECT
Our attitudes toward a possible U.S. visit by President Somoza
In connection with Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa’s recent approach
to Dr. Eisenhower concerning the desire of President Somoza to receive
an invitation to make a formal visit to the United States next spring,2 it
is the recommendation of OAP that no such invitation be extended. Despite
President Luis Somoza’s trend towards a more democratic type of
Government and public declarations that he will not succeed himself
in the presidency, he is still viewed by many Latin Americans as part of the
dictatorial “Somoza Dynasty”. Undoubtedly if he were to receive such an
invitation from President Eisenhower, Latin American liberals would
accuse us of favoring a dictatorship or the remnant of one. Such accusa-
tions would probably be fanned by communist elements, and the end
results of such an invitation might well prove detrimental, at this time,
to our efforts to assure the Latin American people that the United States
has a real interest in improving their welfare.
On the other hand OAP has no objections to informal arrangements being
made for President Somoza to see President Eisenhower, should he come to the
United States for a medical checkup. In view of his recent illness3 it would
not appear unusual for Somoza to come to the United States for a med-
ical examination. The fact that while in the United States he called on
the President and other Government officials, should not lend credence
to any accusations that the United States favors the “Somoza Dynasty,”
as might be the case if he were to receive a formal invitation to make
such a visit.
In view of the constant support we have received from Nicaragua
in the UN and the OAS, the official informal visits of Ydígoras and
Echandi prior to their inaugurations as Presidents of Guatemala and
Costa Rica respectively, and the forthcoming official formal visit of
memorandum was drafted by Taylor.
2 The Nicaraguan Ambassador made the approach to Milton Eisenhower in a
conversation on November 19. A copy of the memorandum of the conversation is in
3 On June 23, the Embassy at Managua reported that President Somoza was hospital-
ized with the possibility of a coronary infarct—a condition from which he soon recovered.

President Lemus of El Salvador, it does appear that if Somoza decides
to make a trip to the United States for medical reasons that he should be
encouraged to come at a time when it will be possible for him to have a
short visit with President Eisenhower.
Recommendation:
1) That no invitation be extended at this time to President Somoza
to visit the United States, but that, if possible, it be arranged for him to
see President Eisenhower and have conferences with other government
officials should he elect to make an informal visit to the United States
for a medical check up.
2) That we take no further action at present beyond informing
Dr. Eisenhower of our position on this matter.4
4 There is no indication on the source text that Rubottom approved the recommen-
dation. On January 30, 1959, in a memorandum to Brig. General Andrew J. Goodpaster
at the White House, John A. Calhoun, Director of the State Department’s Executive
NI–11.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in
Nicaragua (Whelan)1
Washington, January 31, 1959.
Dear Tom:
We have been unable to reach an agreement with ICA about
the ­designation of an USOM Director in Managua and I feel that the
best way of settling the matter is for you to come to Washington for
consultation as soon as Louis Blanchard finishes his temporary assign-
ment as Departmental escort officer for ex-President Lásaro Cárdenas.
I expect that this will be in early February. We will send your travel
orders and I hope that you can arrange to be in Washington for a week
or ten days.
Your presence here will be particularly helpful because we feel that
President Luis Somoza faces a difficult situation in the near future and
“Nicaragua.” Confidential; Official-Informal. This letter was drafted by Stewart and
cleared by Dreier, Murphy, Wieland, and Bernbaum. There is no indication on the source
text that the letter was sent. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Rubottom’s typed
name.

Nicaragua  853
your experience and advice is needed to assist us in adopting a policy
that will be best for United States interests.
We have been impressed by President Somoza’s sincere desire to
lead the Nicaraguans to a type of government more democratic than
that which existed under his father. If Luis is able to continue his present
policy of ample civil liberties, and adheres to his promise of ending the
so-­called “Somoza dynasty” when his term is completed on April 30,
1963, I think our interests and those of Latin America as a whole will
be served. However, the emergence of the Betancourt and Castro
Governments has created a new situation. Tacho’s campaign against
Betancourt while the latter was in exile in Costa Rica, and the sale of
armored cars to Batista by the present Government have not endeared
Luis’ regime to the current rulers in Venezuela and Cuba. Nicaraguan
exiles who worked closely with Cuban and Venezuelan revolution-
aries are already clamoring for help to overthrow the Somozas. We are
receiving reports that Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic are likely
to be targets of revolutionary groups which may assemble either in
Cuba or Venezuela. We have reports that men are being trained in Cuba
now for an invasion of Nicaragua and we are making a check. This
seems unlikely; nevertheless, when the new Venezuelan and Cuban
Governments become organized they may do so, or at least encour-
age and supply arms to anti-Somoza groups. Castro already had made
threats against the Nicaraguan Government.
We will attempt to dissuade these or any governments from
encouraging armed attacks against friendly regimes in this hemisphere
and if Nicaragua should be invaded we would support, of course, the
immediate application of the provisions of the Bogotá Pact2 and the Rio
Treaty.3
If we have judged President Echandi’s policies correctly, I doubt
that he will permit any invasion to originate on Costa Rican soil.
The obvious staging point, it would appear, will be either of the two
­countries above named or Honduras. I think the Somozas would be
making a grave error if they interfered in Honduran affairs in an effort
to overthrow President Villeda and see installed a government consid-
ered more friendly. These are my reasons:
1. The United States has gone on record in support of Villeda, since
he is a symbol of a new era of constitutional Government in Honduras.
2 The Charter of the Organization of American States was signed at Bogotá,
3 The Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty) was signed at
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on September 2, 1947, by the representatives of the United States
and eighteen Latin American countries. It was ratified on December 12, 1947 and entered

We recognize fully that Villeda is weak and vacillating but we are doing
everything in our power to induce him to correct his errors, particularly
his indifference to anti-Somoza revolutionary plots in Honduras.
2. Villeda is the darling of the liberal group which included Muñós
Marin of Puerto Rico; Figueres; Betancourt, and possibly Castro. Any
attempt to overthrow his Government will incur their active enmity. He
is also popular in the United States.
3. I do not think Nicaragua can depend too much on any
Government that would succeed Villeda Morales, be it run by Carias,
the Army, either Gálves, Williams, or anybody else. The overthrow
of Villeda would immediately or eventually precipitate a civil war in
Honduras with help to the Liberal Party from the same outside groups
that are anti-Somoza in sentiment.
The above assumptions would lead one to believe that we consider
the Somozas already dedicated to the overthrow of Villeda. Perhaps
they are innocent of such intentions but while Colonel Velásquez is in
Nicaragua they are suspect. We have a recent report that the clandes-
tine radio station which attacks Villeda daily is on Nicaraguan soil. In
any event, there are many who want to point the finger of suspicion at
the Somozas.
In the light of a changing balance of power in the Caribbean basin,
I think that the Somozas should give some serious thought to a policy of
using Villeda as a possible “shield” against outside interference, rather
than as a person to be eliminated before the heat really is put on by their
enemies. I admit that this may be distasteful to the Somozas, who feel
strongly that Villeda did not clamp down on Nicaraguan exile activity
last year until he was pressured into it. However, the Somozas must be
aware that we kept constant pressure on Villeda through Ambassador
Newbegin in Tegucigalpa to take some action against men like Pedro
Vivas, Colonel Gómez Flores, and others. It may also be argued that
the Nicaraguan Government might be thoroughly double-­crossed by
Villeda if it attempted to work out an agreement whereby both coun-
tries would actively discourage revolutionary activities. However, it is
in our interests to maintain Central America in the relatively peaceful
state it now enjoys and we would be exerting our influence in keeping
both sides honest should an agreement be reached.
Let me say now that if the Somozas are caught in the act of trying
to depose Villeda we would consider they committed a most unwise
and foolhardy act and it would influence our attitude toward their
Government. Moreover, if Nicaragua were haled before the OAS again
on charges of this kind, we would probably have to join in the censure
that most certainly would result if it were found guilty.
I will greatly appreciate your comments in an early reply, taking
into account the new situation created by the overthrow of Batista and

Nicaragua  855
the approaching inauguration of Betancourt.4 I have the uneasy feel-
ing that Nicaragua is in for serious trouble which will be accentuated
if it attempts to counteract the balance of power by mixing into the
internal affairs of any central American country, especially with more
and more attention being paid the Somoza regime by the roving groups
of revolutionaries who have been invited, in Castro’s own words, to
come to Cuba and receive haven and assistance. It would be a shame if
the progress made thus far by President Somoza should be undone and
the country thrown into confusion and chaos.
Incidentally, I think that President Somoza used good judgment
in turning down the request for assistance from Generalíssimo Trujillo.
I wonder why the Somozas do not let it be known that they are not in
the Trujillo camp?
Sincerely,
R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
4 No record of Whelan’s reply was found in Department of State files.
NI–12.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Costa Rican and Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1
Washington, March 30, 1959.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA: Visit of General Somoza
PARTICIPANTS
General Anastosio Somoza – Director of the Nicaraguan Nacional Guard
His ­Excellency Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
ARA : REA—Mr. Turkel
ARA : OAP—Mr. Taylor
Nicaraguan-Honduran Relations
General Somoza said he was very pleased to see Mr. Rubottom again
and that he wanted to express his appreciation for the Department’s
part in the signing of the recent Nicaraguan-Honduran refugee
Official Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

agreement.2 The General stated that his country desired no trouble
with Honduras and expressed the hope that the new agreement3 would
put an end to the recent difficulties his country had experienced with
Honduras over the activities of the Honduran refugees. He said that
such friction gave the wrong impression of Nicaragua’s desire to main-
tain friendly relations with Honduras and indicated that Nicaragua did
not want anything to occur which would affect the adjudication of the
Nicaraguan-Honduran border dispute now before the International
Court of Justice. He remarked, however, that it was almost a traditional
feeling on the part of the Hondurans to be against Nicaragua. He said
that Honduran President Villeda Morales had misrepresented the facts
concerning the difficulties between the two countries and had not kept
good faith with his premises to the GON. General Somoza then men-
tioned he had received reports that Villeda had been sounded out on
the possibility of 60 Nicaraguan revolutionaries coming to Honduras
from Cuba. He said that reportedly Villeda’s reaction was that if they
come to Honduras he didn’t want to know about it.
Mr. Rubottom expressed the hope that the recent refugee agree-
ment between the two countries would materially help in easing the
tension. He pointed out that there were undoubtedly two sides to the
Honduran-Nicaraguan situation. He said that often times the U.S. pol-
icy is misunderstood in that some critics fail to realize that our policy
in Latin America is not supporting one country against another. In this
respect he said that we deal with all countries on an equal basis. In
return, he said, we do not look for any of these countries to act against
us when our back is turned.
President’s Health
Mr. Rubottom then asked about President Somoza’s health. The
General said that recent electrocardiogram tests showed that the
President was coming along alright. He said that the President was car-
rying on his duties in a normal manner, but that he had been placed on
a rigorous diet.
Observations Central America
Mr. Rubottom then asked if the General had any comments to make
about conditions in Central America. The General said he was concerned
over the activities and attitude of Castro, which were keeping things
2 General Somoza was in New York City visiting his wife who had been in the
United States since February.
3 On February 26, the Governments of Nicaragua and Honduras signed an agree-
ment in Washington on territorial asylum covering the treatment of asylees and the pre-
vention of subversive activities. Additional documentation on the agreement is in the
compilation on Honduras.

Nicaragua  857
stirred up in the area. He remarked on Castro’s declaration that Cuba
would assume a neutral position in the cold war between the U.S. and
Russia. He said this was contrary to the Rio Pact. He then said he had
been asking himself what was the reason for the downfall of Batista. He
observed that a small group headed by Castro had landed in Cuba and
had been able to build up their forces to a point where they had become
powerful enough to cause the fall of Batista. Mr. Rubottom said that he
would give him his opinion as to how this had occurred. He said that
the Batista Government had been in reality a house of cards; that venal-
ity had existed from the top officials to the lowest; that the army had
no motivation which would inspire a will to fight, it was ill-­trained and
poorly led and had no deep-­seated loyalty to the Government; and that
the Government did not truly represent the will of the majority of the
people. The General remarked that Batista had no real political party
structure and that he had not been the head of a political party such as
President Somoza is. He observed that the Government of Nicaragua
did not parallel that of former President Batista. He remarked that he
thought Betancourt had changed for the better since 1948.
Internal Affairs
The General then turned to Nicaraguan affairs. He said there were
3,500 members of the Guardia Nacional, who were well trained and
loyal to the GON. He said they had been training in guerilla warfare
tactics and were well prepared to handle any invasion attempt made
against the country. He observed there was no place for an invasion
force to go, once it had landed, except back to sea again. He did not
appear to be worried about any such attempt taking place in the near
future, and indicated his Government was well prepared to take care of
itself. He said the majority of people were with the Government.
The General then said presidential elections would take place as
scheduled in 1963. He remarked that the members of the ­opposition
party (Conservatives) did not turn out to vote in the last ­elections,
because they knew they would not win. He stressed that his
Government was interested in the welfare of the Nicaraguan people,
and said he had learned from his civic courses, while studying in the
U.S., that a ­successful Government must cooperate with its people
and be constructively interested in their welfare. He pointed out that
in Nicaragua there was freedom of the press, freedom of expression,
and freedom of assembly. He remarked that the reporters of opposition
newspapers were not permitted by the owners to report the news in
an ­unbiased manner. He said owners of the opposition papers did not
want to give the Government credit for any good acts. He added that
on the other hand the pro-­government newspapers swing too far over
in the other direction. He said there was really no newspaper reporting
in an unbiased manner.

Military Equipment
The conversation then turned to armaments. The General said his
country had enough armaments for its needs for the next four or five
years. However, he said that he would like to receive the 200 Browning
automatic rifles (BARs) which had been ordered from the U.S. some
time ago. Mr. Rubottom said that we were reviewing our policy with
regard to the sale of armaments and indicated there would be a greater
tightening up of such sales to the Central American countries.4 The
General indicated this was most understandable and recognized it as a
good move. He said that, with the exception of the 200 BARs, and occa-
sional purchases of training ammunition, Nicaragua would not need
anything further in this line.
Housing Project
The General then commented on the ICA aided self-­help housing
Servicio. He said this project had been well received by the Nicaraguans
and had dealt the Nicaraguan Communists a blow, as they had been
agitating for a socialized housing project to be carried out by the
Government.
Figueres’ Activities
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa then turned the conversation to the
activities of Figueres, former Costa Rican President. He said that
Figueres was participating in a plot to overthrow the Somoza’s. The
General remarked that Figueres had long been interested in overthrow-
ing the Somoza’s. Sevilla-Sacasa pointed out that, as Figueres no longer
had official status, he could participate more freely in such activities.
He said that President Echandi was following through with his pol-
icy of doing away with the military, while Figueres with his personal
resources was purchasing arms. He added that Echandi was concerned
over Figueres’ activities, and that, whereas Figueres had the funds to
purchase armaments, the Government of Costa Rica was low on funds.
Mr. Rubottom then mentioned the Figueres-Castro rift arising from the
recent speech Figueres gave in Cuba.
Economic
The General then said he wanted to discuss for a moment
Nicaragua’s economic problems. He said that the low prices of cot-
ton and coffee were contributing to economic difficulties within the
4 In January 1959, the Department of State received a request from the Nicaraguan
Government for permission to purchase two Navy aircraft for the exclusive use of
the Nicaraguan Air Force. As of March, the request was still under consideration.
(Memorandum from Taylor to Rubottom, March 30, 1959, not printed; ARA/REA Files,
Lot 61 D 248, “Nicaragua”)

Nicaragua  859
country. Mr. Rubottom informed the General that he was aware of this,
as well as some of the projects for which the GON had submitted loan
applications to the EXIM and IBRD for economic improvements within
the country. The General said his Government had plans to reduce the
area planted in cotton by 30,000 to 40,000 manzanas. When asked if
this area would be planted in corn and beans, he replied that it would
probably be used for raising cattle. He said that owing to the drop in
the water table it was difficult to get products other than cotton to grow
on much of this land. Mr. Rubottom said he understood that the GON
had been circumspect in its financial policies. He said that, although
he could not speak for the various loan entities, he could assure the
General that careful and sympathetic consideration would be given
the loan applications.
Future Political Plans
The General than said that he wanted to mention that he and
President Somoza felt that at the end of the President’s term somebody
other than a Somoza should be the next President. He said that during
this month the proposed amendment to change the Constitution to pro-
hibit a President from succeeding himself or any member of his family
succeeding to the Presidency would be passed through the Congress
a second time and then become law. He said that he had no idea who
the next President would be, but thought he would come from the
Liberal Party. He based this on the observation that the majority of
Nicaraguans were traditionally Liberals and for this reason he doubted
if the Conservatives would poll enough votes to win the election.
He stressed that the 1963 elections would be absolutely free. He said
there should be a new name in the Presidency, which would give the
people a chance to compare his effectiveness with that of the Somozas.
He said that, speaking as a politician, this would be a sacrifice, but as a
student of civics in the U.S., he felt a change would be in the best inter-
est of the country.
Interest in Engineering Battalion
The General then expressed interest in the possibility of setting
up, under M&P, an engineering battalion similar to that in Honduras.
Mr. Rubottom said that we have set up only two such battalions on a
trial basis, and that we would look into the matter. The General said an
engineering battalion would be helpful in the construction of roads and
would provide opportunities for some of the unemployed.
Mr. Rubottom thanked the General for his visit and expressed
appreciation for his frank and interesting remarks. He asked the
General to give President Somoza his regards.

NI–13.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, April 4, 1959.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA: Visit of General Somoza
PARTICIPANTS
ARA-Mr. Rubottom
General Anastasio Somoza – Director of the Nicaraguan National Guard
In addition to the points made in the memorandum of conversa-
tion of March 30,2 in my discussions with General Somoza I also talked
to him along the following lines in a private conversation following the
luncheon at the Nicaraguan Embassy:
1. The United States felt that Nicaragua simply had to keep itself
absolutely clean in its dealings with its neighbors in Central America
and elsewhere or it can encounter serious complications in the OAS
and in public opinion throughout the Americas.
2. It would be desirable for Nicaragua to desist in its efforts to pur-
chase arms in the United States, since we did not want to call undue
attention to this subject at this particular time.
3. It is unfortunate that the thing of which the Somoza brothers
are the most proud, their name, is a serious political liability; they
should recognize that public opinion throughout the Americas simply
is unable to accept the fact that Nicaragua is being governed with a
moderate hand and that the people have civil liberties.
The General seemed to accept all this in a friendly way and he even
acknowledged the veracity of the points made.
2 See Document NI–12.
NI–14.
Editorial Note
On May 31 and June 1, a group of approximately fifty Nicaraguan
exiles from Costa Rica launched an invasion in the hill country of central
Nicaragua. At the request of the Nicaraguan Ambassador, Sevilla-Sacasa,
the Organization of American States met in Washington on June 2.

Nicaragua  861
On June 4, the OAS approved sending a fact-­finding mission to report on
the situation. Neither the Nicaraguan Ambassador nor President Somoza
formally charged the Costa Rican Government with complicity in the
invasion, but instead levelled charges against the Government of Cuba.
By June 12, after several engagements with the Nicaraguan National
Guard, the invaders either surrendered or were isolated and driven into
the jungle. Documentation on the invasion attempt is in file 717.00. The
text of the OAS resolution on Nicaragua is printed in the Department of
NI–15.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Nicaragua1
333.
FOR AMBASSADOR
Your consistent viewpoint that popular support/lacking for attempt
overthrow present government borne out by failure ­revolutionary
group rally adherents its cause. However it is DEPT’s considered opin-
ion that dedicated oppositionists will not cease attempting overthrow
regime or assassinate PRES Somoza as long as they receive friendly
support, moral or otherwise, from U.S. and Latin American liberals,
extremists in Cuba, as well as communists everywhere, latter whom
anxious only create chaos in Nicaragua.
So-­called anti-­dictator forces in hemisphere appear to be girding for
showdown with Trujillo and because of long dictatorial record of Luis
Somoza’s father are prone associate present Nicaraguan regime with
that of GDR. DEPT believes Luis Somoza has brought Nicaragua long
way toward democracy and he deserves more favorable consideration.
Your valued assessment of present climate for a deal between
PRES Somoza and the responsible opposition (EMBTEL 371)2 is
hereby requested. If AMB Drefer has any free time in Managua he will
undoubtedly wish to discuss the matter with you. He has participated
Stewart; and initialled by Rubottom.
impressions of the attempted overthrow of Somoza’s government and a brief report on

in numerous ARA examinations Nicaraguan situation and has good
idea DEPT views.
Judging from inquiries made of DEPT, next move of PRES Somoza,
leading as it were from strength, being watched most closely everywhere.3
following:
With invasion danger to Nicaragua about eliminated and continued control coun-
try assured, Department is of opinion that GON still faces a serious problem.
For reason set forth Deptel 333 Luis Somoza Government prone be viewed by various
elements as continuation dictatorial regime despite democratic trend in Nicaragua. If non-­
communist opposition forces continue attempts to overthrow Somoza Government with
cry it dictatorship much of Luis Somoza’s good work will go unrecognized in atmosphere
created by emotional dictator vs. democracy storm building up in OAS.
Department believes it is in best interest of GON to make every feasible effort reach
agreement with responsible opposition leaders and thus bring about unity in efforts to
solve internal problems. This solution would also have practical effect of making it easier
for GON thwart efforts of outside-­supported groups with doubtful ideologies to make
overthrow attempts.
Seems to Department that our suggested course of action would be looked upon
favorably by those elements now critical of Somoza Government and should do much to
discredit any accusation that present Government is dictatorship. Your views on Nicaraguan
NI–16.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to
the Department of State1
482. DEPARTMENT PASS DA FOR ACSI. Midnight conversations
between General Somoza and MA subsequent EMBTEL 4022 indicated
both Somozas convinced committee OAS indisposed provide effective
assistance to prevent attacks on Nicaragua.
In view foregoing premise and faced with the massive threats
from both north and south which GON is convinced are INTL in char-
acter, and furthermore believing that U.S. Government will do noth-
ing to displease Nicaragua’s enemies, General seriously considered
(1) air attacks of his own against hostile forces based in Costa Rica; (2)
possibility bombing Havana and (3) arming Honduran revolutionary

Nicaragua  863
expedition led by Velasquez to strike at Honduras in order to remove
threat of invasion from that country.
Philosophy behind General’s planning revolves around thought
that Nicaragua would be unable resist undisturbed concerted onslaught
assisted or engineered by enemy governments and that he and his
brother in that event might as well at least go down fighting.
[illegible in the original] and MA both report overhearing
General’s portion of telephone conversation with President from which
it appeared latter does not subscribe to General’s views. It was also
observed that apparently President’s counsel still prevails.
Embassy believes President’s moderation will continue over rule
General’s impulsiveness as long as President feels there is some hope
U.S. Government and OAS are not determined because of supposed
unpopularity his regime to disregard availability evidences of foreign
plotting and actions against GON. Should his remaining doubts be dis-
pelled that OAS and USA intend to give him no assistance it is very
likely that President may authorize General to take some form of retal-
iatory action calculated to give GON at least temporary advantage of
fighting outside Nicaragua.
In view Figueres, Marshall, Aguiluz insubordination to GOCR
directed against GON and reasonable conclusion that Cuban, Honduran
and Venezuelan elements closely associated with governments those
countries are actively assisting and conspiring current anti-GON move-
ments Embassy believes only forthright statements by OAS and USA
can now avert INTL hostilities the result of which would be disas-
trous regardless of winning side. In Embassy’s view U.S. Government
would now be fully justified in urging OAS investigating committee
in the interest of area peace to make speedy declaration that the case
of Nicaragua clearly comes within the provisions of Article 6 of Rio
Treaty. Following closely on such a declaration U.S. could announce its
intention fully to support collective assistance to the attacked state in
the event of an armed attack.
Urgently recommend action along foregoing lines before it is
too late.
Whelan

NI–17.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to
the Department of State1
55. Following Embassy conclusions reached after Ambassador’s
personal attention Department’s telegram 36.2
1. In view current Caribbean unrest, only “responsible” opposi-
tion in terms of U.S. standards is that which has refrained from active
steps looking to violent overthrow GON. This particular segment
Conservative and Independent Liberal opposition believed to be
small part total opposition. It is only moderately influential political in
­financial and other economic circles but is aspiring to greater if not pre-
dominating influence assuming this position can be attained as result
intransigent Conservative and Independent Liberal attitude in face
GON’s overwhelming strength.
Embassy has valid reason believe only small minority so-­called
responsible opposition leaders identified this category would not at this
time vocally object to EXIM loan. All others this classification would
either be highly critical of loan or adopt resentful attitude toward U.S.
in protest over alleged U.S. economic intervention in support Somoza’s
dynasty and economic domination. Most representatives this category
have in past repeatedly told Embassy their choice between (A) peaceful
coexistence with GON assisted by U.S. loans and (B) economic deterio-
ration implicit in other groups active efforts for exchange of government
by any means including total isolation from U.S., would unequivocally
be latter. Hardship to themselves involved this choice they contend
would be assumed as their contribution eventual welfare Nicaragua.
Basis past experience Embassy believes however, these same patri-
ots if loans were granted would not refuse share directly or indirectly
in its benefits.
2. Brief comment other opposition elements follows: Hard-­core
Conservatives and its offshoot Conservative Youth. Both are estimated
to be so basically opposed Somoza regime on emotional grounds regard-
less damage to country or odds against them that any consideration
to GON however slight will be interpreted as direct U.S. opposition
Distribution. Information on the source text indicates that the telegram was not for distri-
bution outside of the Department of State.
Bank was considering a loan to Nicaragua and solicited the Embassy’s evaluation of the
“responsible” opposition’s attitude toward the United States if the loan were granted.

Nicaragua  865
their aspirations. Because they have shown themselves so resentful
of U.S. dealings with GON in minor matters, it is inconceivable to
Embassy that these groups would not as full resent EXIM loan under
any conditions approximating those now applying to Nicaraguan sit-
uation. On occasion recent contemplated $12 million bond issue to be
underwritten by U.S. banks spokesmen this group publicly said new
government would not honor debt. Such statements would seem good
indication irresponsibility.
3. Independent Liberal Lacayo Farfans violent reaction to loan
negotiations set forth Department telegram 383 can be taken as reli-
able indication dedicated opposition Independent Liberal faction. In
this connection Embassy reasonably certain that lacking issue of loan,
Lacayo Farfans’ supporters would seize upon any pretext attack U.S.
if they feel would help their cause against Somoza psychologically.
Embassy does not regard Lacayo Farfans group responsible as pres-
ently constituted.
4. In Embassy’s opinion balance opposition composed adventur-
ers clearly linked with foreign international schemers and Communists
and devoid any claim responsibility. Many of this group working with
classification three above. Their attitudes toward loan will of course be
completely adverse to U.S.
Despite general impression of considerable opposition to loan cre-
ated by foregoing evaluation Embassy wishes emphasize its conclusion
that substantial majority Nicaraguan people who have not abandoned
task of forming nation through constructive effort would welcome loan
as measure greatly needed bolster economy in difficult circumstances.
It is this majority which in last analysis will eventually assert itself in
present difficulties and for benefit of which Embassy strongly recom-
mends loan be granted soon.
These views offered as careful evaluations based on Embassy’s
intimate knowledge opposition motivations rather than as result cur-
rent inquiries. Embassy convinced that any inquiry to groups above
mentioned however discreet in present circumstances would be taken
as opportunity wage anti-­loan campaign in which U.S. would be prom-
inently featured and as result of which country’s future economic pros-
pects would be further aggravated. For this reason Embassy earnestly
recommends it be excused from requirement making inquiries to ascer-
tain viewpoints.
to Rubottom in which the former protested the U.S. plan to extend Export-Import Bank

In conclusion with reference Department’s information to effect
that opposition Somoza regime has increased because of shooting Leon
students,4 Embassy points out that example opposition statements
to contrary there is no evidence to support their exaggerated claims.
Internally vast majority Nicaraguans remain unmoved politically by
deplorable Leon occurrence. Student demonstration reactions are nat-
ural result of involvement their own numbers and in view of known
Communist agitation in university circles it was indicated that distur-
bances would sooner or later occur with or without shooting incident.
Whelan
4 On July 23, the Embassy at Managua reported that a communist inspired univer-
sity student demonstration at León, having antagonized the National Guard, resulted
in the Guard’s killing of at least four students. (Telegram 26 from Managua, July 23, not
NI–18.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1
Washington, October 5, 1959.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA: Visit of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa
PARTICIPANTS
His Excellency Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
Assistant Secretary R. R. Rubottom Jr.
Dr. Juan Lugo Marenco, Minister of Economy
Dr. Francisco Lainez, Manager of Nicaraguan National Bank
Dr. Enrique Delgado, Former Minister of Economy
Mr. Ricardo Parrales, Commercial Attaché, Nicaraguan Embassy
Mr. Henry L. Taylor, OAP/N, Officer in Charge, Nicaraguan Affairs
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated that the purpose of his call was
to introduce Nicaragua’s new Minister of Economy, Dr. Juan Jose Lugo
Marenco, and the new Manager of the National Bank, Dr. Francisco
Rubottom initialled his approval of this memorandum.

Nicaragua  867
Lainez, to Mr. Rubottom. The Ambassador said these two men were
representing Nicaragua at the current IMF and IBRD meetings, and that
Dr. Lugo Marenco had signed last Friday a loan agreement with the
Eximbank in the amount of $8 million for agricultural diversification
projects. The Ambassador then expressed his appreciation on behalf of
his Government for the favorable consideration which had been given
this loan application.
Mr. Rubottom said he was pleased that the loan agreement had
been worked out to everybody’s satisfaction. He then pointed out
that such a loan was to help the people of the country. He said that
Nicaragua’s economy, like that of many other Latin American countries,
would be benefitted by some diversification. Mr. Rubottom then made
reference to the fact that Argentina had recently received a $10 million
Eximbank loan, (constituting a specific portion of EXIM assistance to
Argentina) to be utilized through the Banco Industrial for small and
medium Argentine business loans. He stressed that equal opportunities
and consideration would be given to all categories of businessmen with
regard to availability of the money for loan purposes. He said he hoped
the same would be true with regard to the EXIM funds made available
for agricultural diversification in Nicaragua. Dr. Lugo Marenco said
there was no limitation as to whom agricultural loans were available
and that the “little man” would receive the same consideration as the
“big man”.
Dr. Delgado then said that Nicaragua was making all out efforts to
develop a sound agricultural program, and pointed out that the loan
from the EXIM bank would be put to good use in enabling a switch-­
over to crops other than coffee and cotton. Dr. Lugo Marenco said
he anticipated that 1960–61 would be a hard year for Nicaragua and
added, however, he did not think Nicaragua would need a stand-­by
drawing at the end of this year from the IMF.
Mr. Rubottom asked about President Somoza’s health. He was
informed that the President was getting along very well. In this respect
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa remarked upon how appreciative President
Somoza was of the recent visit of Dr. Dudley White. He said Dr. White
had examined him and had recommended that he reduce the number
of pills he was taking and increase his amount of exercise.
The conversation was concluded with Mr. Rubottom expressing
pleasure over the Ambassador’s courtesy call.

NI–19.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to
the Department of State1
Department circular telegram 1493
Overall U.S. objectives Nicaragua in country team’s view describ-
able following terms:
(A) Encouraged development stable political systems along dem-
ocratic representative anti-Communist lines without damage to all
important principle nonintervention. Progress in attainment this objec-
tive believed indispensable for maintenance attitudes this country
friendly to U.S. and for retention Nicaraguan Government’s and peo-
ple’s support U.S. world policies.
(B) Encourage development strong, self-­reliant economy based
free enterprise system in ultimate U.S. interest.
(C) Complementary to (A) and (B) above and looking to facilitation
those aims, strengthening of U.S. ties by demonstrating friendly, help-
ful interest in peoples welfare through advances in education, health,
sanitation and in field of labor, which will result in more efficient use
human resources.
(D) Foster U.S. concepts of responsibility for hemispheric defense
of and internal security.
(E) Maintain before Nicaraguan people accurate reflection of what
U.S. is and stands for as means explaining our policies and obtaining
better understanding their aims. Similarly, diffusion of cultural activi-
ties intended to gain wider acceptance U.S. ideals in educational, intel-
lectual and artistic matters.
No single program among those now existing or contemplated
1961 in Nicaragua is dedicated to achievement overall political objec-
tive stated in (A) above. Analysis all proposed U.S. programs, however,
as well as observation past U.S. activities reflect important continu-
ing contributions from all program sources without exception toward
2 No copy of this military telegram was found in Department of State files.
view on the U.S. role and objectives in Mutual Security Programs and non-U.S. programs

Nicaragua  869
accomplishment this aim. To cite only few examples for purposes illus-
tration this conclusion borne out by following factors:
(1) Administration of assistance as well as counsel and training
accorded by MAAG and military missions to national guard consis-
tently reflect institutional, representative, apolitical character of ideal
military establishment thus contributing to fulfillment of essential role
in achievement objective (A) in important military segment. This pro-
gram of course primarily seeks objective (D) and modest FY 1961 plan
estimated to provide adequately for fair gains in both principal and
contributory roles.
(2) Capital loans, present and in prospect for FY 1961 are deemed
essential for accomplishment objectives (B) and (C) and important in
pursuing objective (A). Export Import Bank and IBRD credits for agri-
cultural diversification and hydroelectric projects for instance should
assist towards both political and economic stabilization through devel-
opment of new or improved sources production with consequent
appreciation of U.S. interests in solution of country’s problems.
In same connection technical cooperation programs in agricul-
ture, transportation, health, education and housing are each in their
respective fields cooperating toward achievement objective (A) (B) (C)
and (E) with FY 1961 program seen as no exception. UN, UNICEF and
MASB programs in equivalent projects are viewed as useful in light
Nicaragua’s needs and as generally contributing to fulfillment final
U.S. objectives through improvement social standards.
(3) Information, cultural and educational exchange programs
for FY 1961 regarded as logical continuation present efforts achieve
­objective (E) and greatly contributory to progress in attaining all
other objectives. This especially exemplified by enthusiastic response
to teacher and ­student grants, workshop projects and consistently
pro-U.S. press.
To date there has been no indication of ineffective coordination
among MSP elements or between MSP and other programs and FY 1961
programs show no such conflicts.
Whelan

NI–20.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1
Washington, March 31, 1960.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA; Courtesy call of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa and Dr. Quintana,
­Minister of Government.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
Dr. Julio C. Quintana V., Nicaraguan Minister of Government
ARA – R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary
OAP – Henry L. Taylor, Officer in Charge, Nicaraguan Affairs
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa said he had called with the Nicaraguan
Minister of Government, Dr. Julio Quintana, in order that the lat-
ter could pay his respects and personally express his appreciation
for the medical treatment he had received at Walter Reed Hospital.
Dr. Quintana then expressed in warm terms his thanks for the medical
treatment he received. He said that had it not been for the excellent
attention he received, he would have lost his left arm. He said that he
would be returning to Nicaragua on Sunday. Mr. Rubottom expressed
pleasure over the satisfactory manner in which Dr. Quintana had
responded to the medical treatment. He expressed the hope that his
arm would continue to improve.
The conversation then turned to the recent remarks made by
Secretary Herter before the Foreign Relations Committee on last
March 22,2 in which it was reported that the Government of Nicaragua
was alluded to as a dictatorship. Mr. Rubottom said that he hoped
the amplification of the Secretary’s remarks made by Link White at a
press conference on March 28 clarified the meaning of the Secretary’s
statement. Mr. Rubottom told Quintana that we were well aware of
the ­democratic measures President Luis has placed into effect and
stated they clearly evidenced a trend away from the dictatorial type of
Government carried on by his father. Mr. Rubottom then said we had
instructed our Ambassador to deliver a note in reply to that received by
our Embassy from the Nicaraguan Foreign Minister, and that he believed
this in addition to the above statement of clarification, would remove
any misunderstanding. Mr. Rubottom added that it was regrettable
Official Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 The Department conveyed the text of Herter’s statement regarding Nicaragua to

Nicaragua  871
that an erroneous interpretation had been placed on the Secretary’s
remarks and hoped this would be a passing thing in our friendly rela-
tions. Mr. Rubottom spoke of the friendship we had for the Nicaraguan
people and asked the Minister to express this feeling again to President
Luis and to let the President know we felt he was doing a good job. He
asked the Minister to convey to President Somoza his warm regards
as well as those of Secretary Herter. The minister expressed apprecia-
tion for Mr. Rubottom’s remarks and said he would convey the above
to his President. Mr. Rubottom also mentioned to Quintana the fine
work Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa was doing not only in the capacity as
Nicaraguan Ambassador, but as Dean of the Diplomatic Corps. He told
him that Sevilla was held in high esteem by his colleagues.
Mr. Rubottom then asked if it was correct that Quintana had been
working to bring about an understanding between the Government
and the opposition parties. Quintana said this was true and mentioned
that he had been working particularly with the Independent Liberal
Party prior to his automobile accident. He said that the situation had
been complicated by the Micro parties (four small political groups)
joining in a coalition with PLI, in that one group in particular, the
Movilizacion Republicana, was communist lead. He mentioned the leftist
swing of PLI leader Puenaventura Selva and Icaza Icaza and spoke of
the trip they had made to Costa Rica a few months ago to talk with
Lacayo Farfan (Nicaraguan exile opposition leader) on this matter. He
said the PLI leaders were not in complete accord as to what policy they
should adopt, but that he would continue in his efforts to bring about
an understanding, wherein the opposition would agree to work peace-
fully toward their objectives. Mr. Rubottom told the Minister he hoped
that he would continue with his efforts to effect a conciliatory under-
standing between the opposition and the Government. Dr. Quintana
reiterated Nicaragua would have free and honest elections in 1963 and
that the Government would be turned over without any question to
the winner. In answer to an inquiry from Mr. Taylor, he said the elec-
toral law was in the process of being changed to enable the political
parties to register more easily as legal parties, but added that of course
those which were communist dominated would not be permitted legal
registration.
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa then went into a rather involved dis-
cussion of the history of the PLI, which became a splinter from the
Government party (Partide Liberal), and mentioned President Somoza’s
progress and serious intent in trying to bring democracy to his country.
Minister Quintana concluded the conversation expressing again
his appreciation for the medical attention given him at Walter Reed
Hospital.

NI–21.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Nicaraguan Affairs (Godfrey)1
Washington, June 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA: Visit of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa to discuss Nicaraguan-­
Honduran Relations and Request for Asylum by Pro-Batista Exiles.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
ARA—Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary
OAP—Richard A. Godfrey, Nicaraguan Desk Officer
1. Nicaraguan-Honduran Relations
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated that he had been instructed by
President Somoza to acquaint the Department of State with certain
views of the President on current Nicaraguan-Honduran relations. The
GON continues to view with great concern the continued presence in
Honduras near the Nicaraguan border of revolutionary groups, which
from time to time have made incursions into Nicaragua, the last cited
example being that of April 27, 1960. The GON expects the GOH to take
immediate, effective measures to eliminate these revolutionary groups.
Should the GOH continue, what the GON considers an evasive attitude
on the elimination of these revolutionary groups, then the GON pro-
poses, (1) to withdraw from the Mixed Military Mission now meeting
in Tegucigalpa, and (2) to withdraw its Ambassador from Tegucigalpa,
since his continued presence there served no useful purpose. President
Somoza had also expressed the opinion that President Villeda was mis-
leading the U.S. Ambassador by stating that the GOH lacked sufficient
facilities to search out and eliminate these revolution groups. President
Somoza had stated that the location of the groups was well-­known to
the GOH, and that members of these groups had circulated freely in
Tegucigalpa and had even visited with certain GOH officials. After
presenting the above views of President Somoza, Ambassador Sevilla-
Sacasa requested that the U.S. Government use its good offices through
the U.S. Ambassador in Tegucigalpa to press for prompt and decisive
action on this matter by the GOH.
Mr. Rubottom observed that President Somoza has every reason
to feel as he did in the face of the continued provocations and harass-
ments by these revolutionary groups and he was justified in expecting
the GOH to take effective action against those groups using Honduras

Nicaragua  873
as a base of operations. However, Mr. Rubottom emphasized that, even
though sorely tried by these provocations, it is hoped that President
Somoza will bear in mind that Hemispheric obligations constrain all of
us to exercise infinite patience and forbearance rather than jeopardize
the notable gains we have thus far achieved. This applies particularly
to Central America which has experienced during the past few years
a series of minor miracles in evolving toward stable, democratic gov-
ernments. Mr. Rubottom illustrated these gains by pointing out (1) that
Honduras now enjoys a stable government after years of near-anarchy,
(2) that Panama has just experienced the most exemplary election in its
history, (3) that the democratic system in Costa Rica continues to flour-
ish in spite of President Echandi having to face a majority opposition
in the Costa Rican Assembly and (4) that Guatemala had rid itself of a
Communist government and together with Nicaragua and El Salvador
are all progressing toward more democratic forms and practices.
Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the patience of the United States was
also being sorely tried in our current relations with Cuba but that we
have chosen the path of patience and forbearance, rather than a course
of direct action. He expressed the hope that President Somoza would
bear all of these things in mind in his current relations with President
Villeda and that he would not resort to withdrawal of his Ambassador
or of the Nicaraguan members of the Mixed Military Commission. In
the meantime, as we have done in the past, the United States will con-
tinue to use its good offices in behalf of resolving frictions between
Nicaragua and Honduras.
The Ambassador thanked Mr. Rubottom and promised to inform
President Somoza of our views.
2. Request for Asylum by Pro-Batista Exiles
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa said he would also like to mention
another matter not related to Nicaraguan-Honduran relations but a
matter which had been brought to the fore by the request for asylum
in Nicaragua of a group of pro-Batista Cubans now in the Dominican
Republic. He stated he had been told by the Dominican Ambassador in
Washington, Dr. Luis F. Thomen, that as a result of an “understanding”,
or “truce”, between Trujillo and Fidel Castro, some sixty pro-Batista
exiles in the Dominican Republic had been given the choice of either
leaving the country or being placed in prison. A group of twenty or
more of the Cubans have requested President Somoza to grant them
asylum in Nicaragua, which request Somoza is reluctant to grant.
Another development of which Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa was
also informed by the Dominican Ambassador, is that Aureliano Sanchez
Arango, a Cuban exile, formerly pro-Castro but now in Venezuela, is
making a visit to the Dominican Republic. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa
stated he was at a loss as to how to interpret such a trip by Sanchez

Arango, except that President Betancourt is somehow interested in
the current “understanding” between Trujillo and Castro or might be
attempting some sort of understanding himself with Trujillo.
Mr. Rubottom stated that in his opinion President Somoza should
take great care in the matter of granting asylum to a group of pro-­
Batista exiles, since such a development would undoubtedly have
many repercussions unfavorable to Nicaragua. He said he wished it
to be clearly understood that, whatever should happen in Cuba, the
United States does not want to see another Batista-­type regime in Cuba.
[text not declassified] The GON should consider well before taking any
action which would favor in any manner the pro-Batista exiles.
NI–22.
Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge
of Nicaraguan Affairs (Godfrey)1
Washington, June 24, 1960.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA: Visit of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
Dr. Julie Cesar Alegria, Minister Counselor, Nicaragua Embassy
ARA—Lester D. Mallory, Deputy Assistant Secretary
OAP— C. Allan Stewart, Director
OAP—Richard A. Godfrey, OIC—Nicaraguan Affairs
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa indicated that a primary purpose of
his visit was to express the pleasure and satisfaction of his govern-
ment over the successful conclusion of the negotiation with the IBRD
and the DLF of the loans for the Rio Tuma hydroelectric project. He
stated that he was particularly pleased with the favorable terms of
the $2.5 million DLF loan, the formal signing of which was scheduled
for July 1, 1960. In relation to the DLF loan, the Ambassador stated
that he wished to make a courtesy call on Mr. Rubottom next week
and that he would be accompanied by the Nicaraguan Minister of
Finance, Carlos Rueck.
The Ambassador stated he had just received word that there had
been another border incursion into Nicaragua from Honduras by the
Confidential.

Nicaragua  875
Nicaraguan revolutionary group led by Alejandro Martines Saenz. He
considered this was an act of desperation on the part of the group since
he felt that the group was on the point of exhaustion from lack of sup-
plies. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated that while his government was
fairly well satisfied with the recent actions taken by the Government
of Honduras in this matter, he still believed there should be additional
forceful and coordinated action by the two governments to eliminate
these rebel groups which constitute a threat to the good relations of the
two governments. He stated that President Villeda was being misled
at times in the matter of these rebel groups by his Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Andres Alvarado Puerto, whom the Ambassador claimed had
Castro leanings—­feelings which he felt President Villeda also shared.
With regard to the charges made by Castro regarding the activities
of Chester Lacayo, the Ambassador stated that if the Unites States pre-
sented the matter to the IAPC, then Nicaragua was ready to state how
absurd was the Castro charge that the United States was a participant
in any revolutionary plot directed against Nicaragua and that this was
merely another attempt by Castro to upset the Caribbean. He added that
the Lacayo affair was another example of abuse of the good faith of the
Unites States by such people as Chester Lacayo. He described Lacayo
as crack-­pot with visions of grandeur as evidenced by his adopting the
title of “Colonel”. At this point Mr. Stewart interposed the observation
that the Department also had considered Lacayo to be an irresponsible
trouble-­maker and for this very reason we had refused to receive a visit
from him here in the Department.
According to Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa, the recent bombing
incident in Managua which caused the death of a watchman had
been perpetrated by four teenage students. He claimed the students
had been indoctrinated with such ideas by the recently ousted Cuban
Ambassador to Nicaragua, Pinoa Machado. The ambassador stated
that Nicaragua was prepared to present these facts to the IAPC as addi-
tional evidence of Cuban meddling in the internal affairs of Nicaragua.
Mr. Mallory expressed his agreement that such evidence should be pre-
sented to the IAPC by Nicaragua and stated that he hoped the other
Central American countries would do likewise.
With further reference to the Chester Lacayo affair, the Ambassador
claimed that Fernando Arguello, a Nicaraguan leader of the “Sandino
revolutionist movement” in New York, had induced his brother-­in-­
law, Francisco Cardona of “La Prensa” in New York, to have published
in his paper certain statements about Chester Lacayo’s contacts with
Department of State officials. According to the Ambassador, these pub-
lished statements by Cardona in “La Prensa” tended to substantiate the
Castro charge that Lacayo had in fact maintained such contacts as had

forced the basis of the charges against the United States made by Fidel
Castro.
[Note by Reporting Officers with regard to the last statement
above, an article signed by Francisco Cardona was published in the
June 11, 1960 issue of “La Prensa” which in summary stated that
Chester Lacayo was no “mercenary” in the pay of the U.S. but that
Lacayo had addressed two letters, dated December 15, 1959 and April
20, 1960 respectively to the Secretary of State outlining in the name of
the Movimiento Revolucionario Nicaraguenso the purposes and objectives
of that Nicaraguan revolutionary movement.]
NI–23.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Nicaraguan Affairs (Herndon)1
Washington, October 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
NICARAGUA: Courtesy Call At Department By General Somoza
PARTICIPANTS
Brigadier General Anastasio Somoza Debayle, Director of Nicaraguan Guardia
Nacional and Chief of Nicaraguan Air Forces
Ambassador Guillerno Sevilla-Sacasa, Nicaraguan Ambassador to the United States
Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary, ARA
Charles E. Higdon, Acting Director, OAP
Richard M. Herndon, OTC Nicaraguan Affairs – OAP
General Somoza expressed his thanks to Mr. Mann for U.S. coop-
eration and understanding extended to Nicaragua. With regard to his
current visit at the invitation of the USAF, he said he had found the tour
of USAF installations valuable in acquainting him with recent technical
developments.
In response to Mr. Mann’s question regarding the Cuban threat,
General Somoza said he considered it is a serious matter throughout
Central America. In Nicaragua, he considers it about three times as
difficult now to take effective action against pro-Castro opposition as
in the past. Formerly, pro-Castro elements were found in each of the
opposition parties; now they are coalescing. The tactics followed are the
1960.” Official Use Only.

Nicaragua  877
same as those used in Cuba itself. They seek to provoke incidents which
will create mass repression. He said he found it necessary to explain
constantly to the police who is truly responsible for these incidents
in order to avoid taking rigorous action against those who are merely
being used to perpetrate them. In General Somoza’s opinion Castro
exercises a great influence in Central America and he must be stopped.
The General realizes that denunciations of the Somozas propounded
by pro-Castro elements are in themselves unimportant and, in fact, are
to be expected by a person in political life. He considers the supplying
of funds to these people through Cuban sources a much more serious
matter and stated that Cuba is furnishing about $100,000 per month to
pro-Castro people throughout Central America.
General Somoza states that the pro-Castro opposition has adopted
the flag of the late opposition leader-­bandit, Sandino, as its symbol and
pays homage to Lopez Perez, the assassin of his father, as its leader. He
estimates that the strength of this group once reached about 4,000, but
since the shooting of a policeman and subsequent uncovering of a plot
he feels that the number has dwindled to about 600.
Mr. Mann stressed the importance of timing in the matter of taking
action against Cuba. He feels that public opinion in Central America
is beginning to turn against Castro, an opinion with which General
Somoza agrees. The General thinks the other Latin American countries
will follow the sample of the U.S. in respect to trade controls on Cuba.
General Somoza also noted that the U.S. has done a very fine ser-
vice to the hemisphere through training Latin American military offi-
cers at the U.S. Army School, Fort Gulick, C. Z. He stated that Latin
Americans appreciate the opportunity it affords and as a result of its
successful operation the U.S. now has 2,000 propagandists throughout
Latin America.
NI–24.
Editorial Note
On November 11, 1960, a group of Nicaraguan insurgents, esti-
mated between 150 and 300, staged a number of armed attacks against
administrative and National Guard facilities in the towns of Jinotepe
and Diriamba. Within the next twenty-­four hours, the Nicaraguan
National Guard retook the two cities and were engaged in subduing
the insurgents. By November 15, about fifty rebels, pursued by the
National Guard crossed the border into Costa Rica. Documentation on
the uprising is in file 717.00.

NI–25.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to
the Department of State1
delivered diplomatic note dated 15th substance as follows:4
1. Preamble refers past invasions Nicaraguan territory by merce-
naries supported by Communist Castro regime in connivance some
Nicaraguans purpose subvert public order and violent overthrow
freely elected democratic government substituting by government
Communist ideology.
2. Such efforts presently continuing and armed forces concentrated
Costa Rican territory continuing receive Cuban aid.
3. Foregoing demonstrates existence imminent danger Cuban
aggression and intervention Nicaraguan internal affairs seriously alter-
ing peace and security American continent.
4. GON supported by virtually all citizens proposes resistance
above threat but efforts in danger through superior numerical forces
and more abundant and modern war material.
5. In circumstances and view obligation preserve country’s peace
GON formally requests U.S. Government patrol borders and coasts
Nicaragua with air and naval forces to prevent invasion by forces
assisted Castro Communist regime and prevent sending of arms and
other aid those forces.
Limited Distribution. Repeated for information to Guatemala City and San José.
concern about Communist involvement in the recent disturbances in Costa Rica,
Nicaragua, and Guatemala. It also instructed the Embassies to inform the presidents of
their respective countries that the United States was prepared to consider their written
requests for air and sea assistance to seek out and prevent attempts at reinforcing rebel
conveyed to Somoza and that he indicated that Nicaragua would make a written request
to the U.S. Government. The telegram also reported that Somoza was particularly inter-
ested in air and sea patrol off the Atlantic coast. According to the Embassy, Somoza
believed that Communist involvement could be established but proof of Cuban partici-
4 The text of the note in Spanish and an English translation were transmitted in

Nicaragua  879
Re DEPTEL 1365 Department will observe [illegible in the original]
clear indication existence proveable Castro Cuban Communist partici-
pation or [illegible in the original] in olive green uniforms with insignia
“Patria Orpto Muerte”. In radio address to nation evening 14th President
also stated no foreign elements involved in [illegible in the original]
internal actions. He has however informed Embassy statements made by
captured Communist or Communists participating these internal actions
establish Communist purpose to use conservative and other opposition
groups and when GON overthrown latter would be liquidated.
In common with opening statement DEPTEL 134 President is
known to regards simultaneous character CA disturbances as part of
systematic Cuban Communist plan, see EMBTEL 142,6 but Embassy
[text not declassified] unable cite single instance Cuban involvement.
Lastly GON desire for U.S. patrol of borders appears logical in
view Costa Rica’s inability pérform this function and its reluctance to
have GON do so effectively. Some situation in much more aggravated
form applies Honduran border where boundary dispute would render
any independent attempt at effective surveillance entirely impractical.
GON awaiting Department’s decision.
Whelan
5 [illegible in the original]
“In face widespread public assumption Castro responsibility or complicity in revo-
lutionary activities your area and in anticipation early investigation through OAS Dept.
urgently needs your current evaluation of evidence tending show Cuban involvement.
Sources of information and basis for Embassy’s appraisal will also be useful in consid-
eration here of likely credibility in international forum. Request roundup all informa-
tion this nature coming available through November 15 by cable to be received here
6. [illegible in the original]
NI–26.
Editorial Note
On November 17, 1960, President Eisenhower’s press secretary,
James C. Hagerty, issued the following statement on behalf of the
President: “In response to requests of the Governments of Guatemala
and Nicaragua, surface and air units of the United States Navy are
in a position in which they could assist these Governments, should

it become necessary, to seek out and prevent intervention on the part
of Communist-­directed elements in the internal affairs of Guatemala
and Nicaragua through the landing of armed forces or supplies from
abroad.” The text of the statement is printed in the Department of State
In response to questions from the press concerning legal grounds
for United States action in the event that it implemented the measures
contemplated in the President’s statement, Lincoln White, Department of
State press spokesman, issued the following statement on November 17:
“Any assistance which may be given in conformity with the
President’s announcement will be in response to a request which the
respective governments concerned have every right in their sovereign
capacity to make and which the United States in its sovereign capacity
has a right to provide. It would be carried out within the national juris-
diction of the requesting government. Naturally we shall be prepared to
provide other governments members of the Organization of American
States with information regarding actions which might be taken.” The
Department conveyed the text of the statement to all Latin American
As a result of Eisenhower’s directive, the U.S.S. aircraft carrier
Shangri-La, together with a number of destroyers and naval aircraft
positioned themselves off the coast of Guatemala and Nicaragua. On
December 7 after the two Governments involved had decided that the
emergency had passed, the President ordered the withdrawal of the
American units. See the press release issued by the White House on
December 7, printed in the Department of State Bulletin, December 26,

Panama: U.S. Relations with Panama
PM–1.
Editorial Note
On May 2, 1958, Panamanian students entered the Panama Canal
Zone and planted Panamanian flags in front of the Administration
Building and other predetermined public places in Balboa in support
of their “Operation Sovereignty” and urged Ernesto de la Guardia, Jr.,
the President of Panama, to initiate negotiations with the United States
to have the Panamanian flag flown in the Canal Zone. President de la
Guardia, in an effort to appease student demands, sought the advice
of Panama’s National Council of Foreign Relations concerning the
most convenient approach to such negotiations. Representatives of the
Republic of Panama, however, did not initiate a request to negotiate.
Documentation concerning these events is in Department of State files
PM–2.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Panama1
489.
Cur 470.2 Inform GOP President signed appropriations bill H.R.
cludes appropriation entire $20 million for construction bridge which
is to remain available until expended and fulfills United States treaty
William E. Price of the Office of Middle American Affairs and initialled by Herbert B.
Leggett, Officer in Charge of Central America and Panama Affairs.
3 For the text of the Department of Commerce and Related Agencies Appropriation

commitment this respect.4 Department releasing appropriate statement
to press.5 Assume USIS will publicize.
Dulles
4 Under the terms of the Treaty of Mutual Understanding and Cooperation and
Memorandum of Understandings Reached, which representatives of the United States
and the Republic of Panama signed on January 25, 1955, the United States agreed to
seek the legislative authorization and the necessary appropriations for construction of
a bridge over the Pacific end of the Panama Canal at Balboa, Canal Zone. For the text of
both the Treaty and the accompanying memorandum, see United States Treaties and Other
5 For the text of the Department of State press release announcing the enactment of
PM–3.
Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Inter-American
Affairs1
Undated.
SUMMARY OF DISCUSSIONS IN PANAMA DURING
DR. EISENHOWER’S VISIT2
In Panama contacts between Dr. Eisenhower’s Mission and the
Panamanians were limited to Government officials and labor unions.
Principal discussions took place in a meeting with President Guardia,
members of the Cabinet and Ambassador Arias in the Presidential Suite
at the El Panama Hotel. The Panamanians made a series of requests
for financial assistance and appeared to be just a little confused as to
which credit agency they should apply to for the various loans they
were hoping to obtain. President Guardia and some of the other min-
isters who spoke apparently attempted to secure a special position for
Panama, saying that the other Latin American countries realized that a
special relationship existed and that anything done for Panama would
have favorable repercussions throughout the Continent.
“Eisenhower, Milton Nicaragua 1958.” Neither the drafter nor the date is indicated on
the source text, which is a carbon copy.
2 For additional documentation concerning Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s trip to Central

Panama  883
Reference was made to the fact that in Panama the rate of pop-
ulation growth was higher than the growth of national income, thus
a climbing index of productivity was coupled with a drop in real per
capita income and this was resulting in a deterioration of the standard
of living. Similarly, the Panamanians pointed up the fact that the prox-
imity of the Canal Zone should be an additional stimulus for the United
States to render special assistance to Panama. President Guardia made
passing reference to the internal political situation by saying that 60%
of the population were under 25 years of age and with the impatience
of youth coupled with the drop in per capital income to which he had
previously referred, this created an atmosphere propitious to fanning
anti-U.S. sentiments.
The Panamanians broadly indicated there were two classes of
things the U.S. should do, some in the political field and some in the
economic field. In the political field were some matters which really
belonged in the economic field. Among these were the matters relating
to making the Canal Zone market available exclusively to Panama and
the United States. They mentioned the discontent created in Panama
by the purchase of Australian and New Zealand meat and felt that
the wording of the 1955 agreement should limit the Canal Zone mar-
ket to the United States and Panama. When it was pointed out that
the amount of meat purchased from abroad was extremely small, the
Panamanians indicated that it was not the quantity but the fact of pur-
chase from abroad that aroused resentment.
In the political field, the President mentioned two further items
which he brought up with some embarrassment. They related to the
flying of the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone and the use of Spanish
as an official language in the Canal Zone. The President emphasized
that if the U.S. would offer to do this spontaneously, the overall effect
would be far more beneficial than if it were done grudgingly at a later
date. The President then made a statement that if the U.S. might have to
do more than Panama, Panamanians would nevertheless try to recipro-
cate as they felt a moral obligation on their part to assist in preserving
the free way of life.
Passing to the economic area, the President said that he felt there
were no real problems in the economic field if time were not a factor.
However, the young people who make up such a large part of the
national population, particularly the University youth were impatient
for speedy solutions.
Education—In the field of education, which was an extremely
important area in Panama, they would like to secure a loan for
$12 ­million to push through a school development program. The rent
now being paid-on leased schools could service the amortization of

such a loan. Such a gesture on the part of the United States would have
great psychological impact throughout the area.
Agriculture—The Panamanians expressed a desire for a $7 ­million
loan to make available additional loan capital to the Institute for
Agricultural Development. Because of the shortage of such capital, the
Institute had had to curtail its credit.
Sewage and Water—Panamanians expressed a hope that a loan
could be obtained to improve the water system and extend sewage con-
struction. The Smathers loan3 had been helpful and they would like to
handle this on the same basis.
Electric Power—In this field, it was stated that Panama was stag-
nating. Power available was greatly below that required. A hydro-
electric project to supply Panama and Colon was badly needed. The
Panamanians made it quite plain they would be perfectly happy either
to do this themselves or to have American and Foreign Power do it, or
a combination of both. This willingness was cited by the President as
an indication that the Panamanians were receptive to private enterprise
and capital investment.
Roads—Panama was expending a great deal of money to complete
the Inter-American highway but a great many feeder roads were nec-
essary and further credit facilities would be required. In the meantime,
they were anxious to obtain training of engineering units and opera-
tors of road building equipment. They had requested such assistance
through the International Cooperation Administration and hoped that
this matter could be expedited.
Housing—The Panamanians indicated that this was a very seri-
ous problem considering the fact that, on the average, in Panama City,
to create a housing institute and initiate a low-­cost housing program.
Initially this would be done with government funds but as the pro-
gram gathers momentum, the government will welcome credit from
any source to go ahead with this program.
Development of the Bay of Panama—It was pointed out that there
were no pier facilities except through the Canal Zone and the number
of shrimp and fishing boats as well as pleasure craft was increasing
constantly. The construction of the new bridge will further emphasize
this problem. Land reclamation will make available land which could
3 The amendment to the Mutual Security Act of 1956, which was named after its
sponsor, Sen. George A. Smathers (D-Fla.), provided for the use of a portion of the defense
support funds authorized in the Act for health, education, and sanitation projects, and for
land resettlement programs in Latin America. For the text of the Mutual Security Act of

Panama  885
be sold for some $10 million and credits to finance this operation would
be a sound investment.
Extension of Tocumen Runway—The Panamanians had been notified
by the Civil Aeronautics Authority and a number of U.S. airlines that
Tocumen airport would soon begin to be used by jet transports. This
would require an extension of the present runways there and the cost
of this extension will approximate $530 thousand. They felt that as the
U.S. Armed forces would have the free use of this airfield in time of
war, that it was only fair that some share of the cost of construction be
borne by the United States.
Point 4—The President expressed a desire for a broadening and
enlarging of the Point 4 program. The Panamanians recognized that
Point 4 has made a great contribution to the economic progress of the
country and are anxious that this program be broadened in scope. There
were many fields of endeavor where prospective profits were too small
or too insecure to justify investment, nevertheless, many of these activ-
ities were vital to the further economic development of Panama and
they would hope that an institution such as Point 4 would be available,
capable both of assuming risks and making grants.
Quotas and Preferential Tariffs—Panamanians felt that with a lim-
ited economy of their type it was not unreasonable to hope they would
be given a larger sugar quota then they had at present (3,000 tons).
Similarly, they hoped that they might be made the beneficiaries of any
preferential tariffs permitted by the laws of the United States.
Telecommunications—It was indicated that as a result of a study4
conducted by Col. Grey, it appeared that the telecommunications net-
work of the Republic of Panama was nearing a total breakdown. The
study recommended the construction of an open wire network at a cost
The Government expressed strong support for the position
assumed by the United States in the international arena, particularly
insofar as the action in Lebanon5 was concerned.
CONCLUSIONS: In Panama broad requests were made for further
financial assistance from the United States. Willingness was expressed
to seek such assistance not only from Government credit organizations
but also from private investors. Not only was no hostility expressed
towards private foreign investment, but it was stated that this would
4 Not found in Department of State files.
5 For documentation on U.S. policy with respect to the crises in Lebanon and Iraq in
1958 including the rebellion in Lebanon in May, the revolution in Iraq in July, the dispatch
of American troops to Lebanon, and the role of the United Nations, see 	Foreign Relations,
East Region; Iraq; Iran; Arabian Peninsula, Chapter 4.

be welcomed. Requests for loans for which specific amounts were men-
Runway extension, half a million dollars, and an unspecified amount
was hinted at for the Panama Bay development program and addi-
tional highway projects.
The various projects appear to have been prepared in the various
ministries concerned without an overall coordinated effort at establish-
ing a national plan. If Panama is to achieve a viable economy as a basis
for political stability, there must be an accelerated development of the
production resources. This is a broad task. Under the political system
in Panama, the primary burden for economic development rests with
private enterprise. The three main pillars of the economy are agricul-
ture, industry, and trade. The Government, however, must support,
encourage, serve, and regulate private enterprise in the public interest
to achieve national goals. The Government has undertaken to do this
in various fields but so far, despite the mounting costs to the people,
increased national production has fallen far short of expectations. This
seems partially due to poor planning and inadequate personnel and
organization to make available technical knowledge and get decisions
in dealing with these problems. In order to plan effectively, the follow-
ing would seem to be needed:
1. An inventory of the nation’s assets, both human and natural.
2. A study to determine the viability of new industrial enterprises.
3. A study of domestic requirements and possible sales on foreign
markets, including tourism.
4. Establishment of standards and levels for essential govern-
ment services in developing, supporting, and regulating private
activities.
5. Formulating the necessary finance, tax, and trade policies to
serve the economic development programs and a study of the orga-
nization and functions of Government agencies working in this field.
The President of Panama has taken an interest in this matter and
arrangements have been made for a Mr. Alvin Mayne of the Puerto Rico
Planning Board to advise and assist the Panamanians in these matters.
Pro-Communist and anti-U.S. activities appear in Panama as in other
countries in the area to be centered in the University.

Panama  887
PM–4.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy
in Panama1

68. Deliver soonest following message to President de la Guardia.
“The White House, Washington, July 25, 1958, His Excellency Ernesto
de la Guardia, Jr., President of the Republic of Panama, Presidential
Palace, Panama; Republic of Panama. I am pleased to inform Your
Excellency that I have today affixed my signature to an Act2 which
authorizes and directs United States Government agencies in the
Canal Zone to conform their employment and wage practices to the
principles agreed upon and set forth in Item one of the Memoran-
dum of Understandings Reached, attached to the Treaty of Mutual
Understanding and Cooperation of 1955, between the United States
and Panama. By this Act the United States completes the fulfillment of
its commitments to Panama under the Treaty of 1955, so far as specific
legislation may be required.
I shall issue an Executive Order3 shortly which will establish the
administrative criteria by which operation of the provisions of the Act
will be facilitated.
I sincerely hope that enactment of this legislation forges one
more link in the long chain of friendship, cooperation and mutual
respect that has traditionally bound our Governments and citizens
together.4
2 For the text of the United States-Panama Wage and Employment Practices Act
the text, see 23 Federal Register 9627.
a memorandum to Brig. Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, the President’s Staff Secretary,
informing him that Panamanian Ambassador Arias on August 5 had handed Under
Secretary of State Christian A. Herter a telegraphic message from President de la Guardia
for President Eisenhower that was in response to the President’s telegraphic message
of July 25. Howe also indicated that he was transmitting the original of the message as
received from Ambassador Arias and an official translation as enclosures to his mem-
record copy of Howe’s memorandum, but both are attached to the original sent to the
White House. According to the official translation, President de la Guardia expressed
his fear that the United State would enact wage standards that would, in fact, discrim-
inate against Panamanian workers and would also pursue employment practices that
would have the effect of reducing employment opportunities for Panamanian citizens.
(Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers)

Dwight D. Eisenhower”
Upon delivery above message obtain GOP concurrence simultane-
ous release text Washington and Panama.
Dulles
the Department of State that Panamanian Foreign Minister Miguel Moreno approved the
PM–5.
Editorial Note
In an exchange of notes between Ambassador Julian F. Harrington
the United States Government and the Republic of Panama con-
cluded an agreement that entered into force on August 16, 1958, to
extend the agreement of August 5, 1957, authorizing the inspection by
Panamanian nautical inspectors of vessels of Panamanian registry in
UST 1146. Documentation concerning the negotiation of this agreement
is in Department of State file 611.19.
PM–6.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Panama1
87. Verbatim Text.
Deliver soonest following telegraphic message from the President
to President de la Guardia.
“August 19, 1958. I thank your Excellency for the kind message for-
warded to me by the Department of State after its delivery to Governor
Herter by Ambassador Arias on August 5, 1958.
Priority.

Panama  889
I assure you that my Government appreciates your comments on
the implementation of the recently signed Act concerning employment
and wage practices in the Canal Zone, and they will be kept in mind
while preparing the regulations under which the Act will operate. It is
the intention of my Government that the interpretation and application
of the Act will be one more step by which we strengthen the ties of
friendship which already unite our countries. Dwight D. Eisenhower”
No public release this message planed here. In view Department’s
decision not to release text de la Guardia message delivered Department
August 5 believe decision should be left to GOP whether release this
message. If GOP decides release, please advise 2 hours in advance
release time.2
Department of State that President de la Guardia was pleased to receive President
Eisenhower’s message and planned to release all but the first paragraph of it to the press
PM–7.
Letter from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for International Security Affairs (Irwin) to the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, September 22, 1958.
Dear Mr. Rubottom:
Our letter of 27 November 19562 requested that negotiations be
resumed with the Republic of Panama for the acquisition of two radar
sites to be used for anti-­aircraft purposes. It has now been determined
that for the present no action should be taken to modernize the anti-­
aircraft defenses of the Panama Canal. It is requested therefore, that no
further effort be made at this time to secure the sites in question.3
Sincerely yours,
Deputy Assistant Secretary
South America, Document 167.
3 The following handwritten notation appears at the bottom of the source text:
“Note: This is an example of what happens to many an issue we take up with a foreign

PM–8.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of
the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs
(Leggett)1
Washington, October 8, 1958.
SUBJECT
U.S.-Panamanian Relations and the Canal Zone
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
His Excellency Señor Lic. Miguel J. Moreno, Minister of Foreign Relations
of Panama
His Excellency Señor Don Ricardo M. Arias E., Ambassador of Panama
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
OAP—Mr. Leggett
Calling at his own request, Foreign Minister Moreno began by
expressing his admiration for the skill and firmness displayed by
the Secretary in dealing with the current crisis in the Far East2 and
stated that his Government fully endorsed the position adopted by the
United States.
He then turned to certain aspects of U.S.-Panamanian relations
concerning the Canal Zone, and expressed his appreciation at having
received the opportunity to bring this matter to the Secretary’s personal
attention. He said that his Government was under severe pressure from
student groups and other elements and that these pressures, although
political in expression, were basically economic in origin. They repre-
sented, the Foreign Minister went on to say, a desire for better education,
improved living conditions, and a higher standard of living. To meet
these demands, the Panamanian Government found it essential, he said,
to achieve a more favorable economic relationship with the Canal Zone.
The basic difficulty lay in the differing interpretation placed by
United States Government agencies and the Government of Panama
on the Treaty of 1955 between the two governments and the related
Memorandum of Understandings Reached. Of primary importance to
Panama, he went on to say, were the questions of importation of mer-
chandise for resale in the Zone, manufacturing and processing activities
in the Zone, application of the single wage scale to all Zone employees,
remission to the Government of Panama of duties collected on liquor
sold in the Zone, and the question of the location of the proposed new
passenger terminal by the Panama Railroad Company.
2 For documentation on U.S. policy with respect to the Chinese offshore island crisis
Laos.

Panama  891
The Foreign Minister asked Ambassador Arias if he would not like
to expand upon the problem involved in imports of merchandise from
third countries for sale within the Zone. The Ambassador began by say-
ing that the Panamanians did not question the U.S. interpretation of the
1955 Treaty as being perfectly logical and consistent, from our point of
view. However, he said, Panama regarded the matter from a different
angle. Panama was a small state which, although having benefited greatly
from the Canal, nevertheless felt itself entitled to, and of necessity was
obliged to obtain, even greater benefits. With no minerals or other natu-
ral resources apart from its geographic position, Panama was obliged to
rely very heavily on revenues derived directly and indirectly from the
operation of the Canal. He stated that he was absolutely convinced of
the correctness of this view, despite the theory advocated by some prom-
inent Panamanians that the country should endeavor to develop other
sources of income in order to lessen its dependence upon the Canal. He
went on to point out that the Canal had been constructed with United
States resources, in Panamanian territory, and was, in his view therefore,
an entity which was effectively the concern of our two nations alone.
For this reason, he said, the Canal Zone market should be reserved for
Panamanian and U.S. suppliers, and the introduction of Australian beef
and Ecuadoran rice, for example, encroached on Panama’s right to sup-
ply this natural market. Panama’s was a dollar economy, he added, and
could not hope to achieve the low-­production costs of such countries as
Ecuador. In short, the Ambassador said that frankly what Panama con-
sidered itself entitled to was a “captive market”.
The Secretary observed that we did not subscribe to this theory
with respect to our own domestic market and mentioned the Reciprocal
Trade Agreements policy3 as evidence of our attitude. The Foreign
Minister replied that nevertheless the United States found it necessary
on occasion to take protectionist sentiment into account, citing the recent
imposition of quotas on lead and zinc imports as an example.4 In a brief
digression, the Foreign Minister and the Ambassador both compli-
mented the Secretary on his decision to announce the lead-­zinc quotas
before the recent Washington meeting of Foreign Ministers5 convened,
empowered the President to lower unilaterally existing tariff schedules by as much as
50 percent for those nations willing to make reciprocal trade concessions. In the Trade
Congress granted the President another extension of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements
on lead and zinc imports into the United States, effective on October 1. For the text of the
White House press release containing the President’s announcement, see the Department
5 The Latin American Foreign Ministers met informally in Washington on
eration, including the establishment of an inter-American economic development institution.

and the Foreign Minister commented upon the satisfaction expressed by
his colleagues during the opening sessions of UNGA in New York over
the Secretary’s remarks in Washington to the Foreign Ministers.
The Ambassador then reverted to the problem of the Canal Zone
and raised the question on the wage rate paid Panamanian employ-
ees of the Zone. The Secretary stated that he thought that this matter
had been settled by the recent legislation enacted by the United States
Congress implementing the single-­wage provisions of the 1955 Treaty.
The Ambassador replied that it was true that the legislation in question
had established a given wage for a given job, regardless of whether
the job was filled by a Panamanian or an American, and that he hoped
that the Executive Order putting this into effect would be promulgated
shortly. The broader question which remained unsolved, he said, was
not the question of base pay but the difference in the total amount actu-
ally paid Americans and Panamanians working side by side and doing
the same kind of job. He did not see how the United States could indef-
initely maintain one real wage scale for its people in one part of the
world and another scale elsewhere.
Mr. Rubottom pointed out that, in order to recruit employees for
work in the Zone, it was necessary to offer them certain financial incen-
tives. He also pointed out that were we to raise base wages in the Canal
Zone to U.S. levels for all employees, regardless of citizenship, the
resulting contrast with the relatively low wage-­scale level in the repub-
lic would bring tremendous pressure on the Government of Panama
for wage increases which it could not possibly grant. Mr. Rubottom
reminded the Foreign Minister that we had, at the Panamanian
Government’s request, withdrawn commissary privileges from
Panamanian employees of the Zone. While that action had benefited
Panamanian industry and commerce, it had also the effect of reducing
the purchasing power of the Panamanians working in the Zone.
We were very conscious of Panama’s financial and economic
problems, Mr. Rubottom continued, and were giving careful and
serious consideration to the development projects outlined in the
Memorandum presented to Dr. Milton Eisenhower6 during his visit to
Panama. Mr. Rubottom also mentioned a recent conference in which he,
Assistant Secretary of Army George H. Roderick, Governor Potter, and
Ambassador Harrington had discussed Panama’s problems. Finally,
he stated that Mr. Robert Burroughs and Mr. Ralph Cake, members of
the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company, together with
Governor Potter, had called on the Under Secretary last week to present
their views on Panama’s need for economic and social betterment. It was

Panama  893
evident, he added, that the various United States Government agencies
concerned were giving the most serious consideration to the matter.
The Foreign Minister spoke again briefly, making particular men-
tion of imports of such luxury items as diamonds, French perfumes,
and Persian rugs for resale in the Zone, from which Panama derived no
financial advantage. The Ambassador commented on the vast contrast
in the standard of living in the Zone and that in the Republic and the
impression this contrast made on the people of Panama. The preferred
position in supplying the Canal Zone market, together with other ben-
efits being sought, should be financed, in the Ambassador’s opinion,
from the revenue derived from the operation of the Canal. He pointed
out that Canal tolls had not been raised since 1914, despite increases in
freight rates, wages, and so forth in the interim, although he admitted
that any increase in the tolls which we might decide to make would
become a major international problem.
The Secretary concluded the discussion by pointing out that the
Department and the White House had been much concerned over the
delay in the passage of legislation implementing the 1955 Treaty. Now,
he said, it appeared that the problems posed by the Foreign Minister
concerning interpretation of the provisions of that Treaty were not of
a legal character, but dealt rather with the manner in which the Treaty
provisions were applied in detail. No immediate reply could be given,
he added, but he said that he and Mr. Rubottom would undertake a
serious study of the points the Foreign Minister had raised and would
ascertain if something could not be done.
On his departure, the Foreign Minister handed the Secretary an
envelope which, he stated, contained an Aide Memoire7 on the subjects
discussed.
PM–9.
Editorial Note
On December 18, 1958, the National Assembly of Panama enacted
Law No. 58 which extended to twelve miles the breadth of the terri-
torial waters of the Republic of Panama. Responding on January 9,
1959, the Department of State, through the Embassy at Panama City,
protested this action and informed the Ministry of Foreign Relations
that the United States Government was under no obligation to recog-
nize a territorial sea limit of more than three miles and hoped that the

Republic of Panama would reconsider its action. In its reply of January
21, 1959, the Ministry of Foreign Relations rejected the arguments that
the Embassy had advanced in its note of January 9. Documentation on
this subject is in decimal file 719.022.
PM–10.
Editorial Note
In a series of notes from Ambassador Julian F. Harrington in
Panama, to Foreign Minister Moreno, on February 17, March 23,
and September 22, 1959, the United States Government informed
the Republic of Panama of its desire to amend the United States
Army Mission agreement of July 7, 1942, as extended. In his reply of
November 6, 1959, Moreno accepted the American proposals, and the
agreement entered into force on November 6, 1959. For the texts of the
notes exchanged, see 12 UST 718. Documentation concerning the nego-
tiation of this agreement is in Department of State file 719.58.
PM–11.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting
Secretary of State1
Washington, April 1, 1959.
SUBJECT
Suggested Reply to Letter President Eisenhower Received from President de la
Guardia of Panama
Discussion
The President of Panama, Ernesto de la Guardia, Jr., addressed
a letter dated March 7, 1959 to President Eisenhower which was per-
sonally delivered by Ambassador Ricardo Arias of Panama on March
19, 1959, together with an attached memorandum. (Translations
March–May 1959.” Official Use Only. Drafted by Price.

Panama  895
at Tab B)2 In his letter President de la Guardia refers to Item 1 of the
Memorandum of Understandings Reached attached to the Treaty of
Mutual Understanding and Cooperation of 1955, between the United
States and Panama (Tab C)3 and expresses his concern and apprehension
as to the manner in which the United States is implementing its provi-
sions. President de la Guardia claims the administrative Regulations do
not properly implement the provisions of Item 1 of the Memorandum
and he specifically cites several points which he considers to be at vari-
ance with, and some even in violation of, the provisions of Item 1 of the
Memorandum. In summary these are: 1) a dual wage scale system still
prevails for Panamanian employees in certain categories and is discrim-
inatory; 2) the merit system is incorrectly administered; 3) the unlimited
use of the “security” concept unduly excludes Panamanian employees
from positions classified as security positions, and 4) the establishment
of other unauthorized exceptions violates the principles of equality of
compensation, opportunity and treatment to Panamanian employees.
The memorandum attached to the presidential letter sets forth in
some detail additional cases of alleged violations.
Because the substantive matters raised in the letter and memoran-
dum require detailed study, a suggested reply has been prepared for
President Eisenhower expressing his interest in the matters brought to
his attention and assuring President de la Guardia that a reply will be
made later through regular diplomatic channels after the specific prob-
lems have been studied and determinations made by this Government.
Recommendation
That you sign the attached memorandum6 transmitting for
the President’s consideration a suggested reply to President de la
Guardia’s letter.7
2 Not attached to the source text. Neither the letter nor its translation are printed, but
the translation of President de la Guardia’s letter is filed in Presidential Correspondence,
Lot 64 D 174. No copy of the memorandum attached to de la Guardia’s letter has been
found.
3 Not attached to the source text. Item 1 of the Memorandum of Understandings
Reached outlined the wage practices and procedures the United States was willing to
implement as part of the settlement negotiated in the Treaty of Mutual Understanding
and Cooperation. For the text of Item 1, see the Department of State Bulletin, February 7,
4 Not attached to the source text, but see Document PA–4.
6 Not attached to the source text. The memorandum, however, is filed under deci-
7 For the text of President Eisenhower’s reply to President de la Guardia, see
Document PM–12.

PM–12.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Panama1
338. For Ambassador.
Deliver following message to President de la Guardia. Inform
Department date and time of delivery:
April 6, 1959
“Dear Mr. President:
I have carefully read your letter and enclosed memorandum
of March seventh,2 which were personally delivered to me by His
Excellency Ambassador Ricardo Arias on March nineteenth.
In your letter you refer to the manner in which the United States
is implementing the provisions of Item 1 of the Memorandum of
Understandings Reached attached to the Treaty of Mutual Understanding
and Cooperation, entered into by Panama and the United States in 1955.
I understand the importance of the matters which you so frankly
and forthrightly present for my attention involving and affecting the
close and friendly relations that exist between our two countries.
As I am deeply interested in the status of relations between Panama
and the United States and your statements are of such import, I have
asked the appropriate agencies within this Government to undertake a
careful and detailed study of the problems you present. The determina-
tions made as a result of these studies will be made known to you and
your Government at an early date.
I extend my warmest personal regards to you, Mr. President, and
to your Government and the Panamanian people.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower”
White House does not desire make foregoing public. Notify
­Department as much as possible in advance should de la Guardia wish
do so.3
Herter
Distribution.
the Department of State that he had presented President Eisenhower’s letter to President
de la Guardia that morning, and that de la Guardia did not intend to release the text to

Panama  897
PM–13.
Despatch from the Chargé in Panama (Acly) to the
Department of State1
Panama City, April 9, 1959.
No. 519.
SUBJECT
Delivery of Note on Treaty Problems and Other Points at Issue Raised by Panama.
Following consultation with the Governor of the Canal Zone and
the Commander in Chief, Caribbean Command, a note, copy of which
is enclosed, was handed to the Foreign Minister by the Ambassador on
the copy an appropriate reference was made to the letter from President
de la Guardia to President Eisenhower4 and that in the first sentence in
the last paragraph on page 1 the wording has been modified slightly in
accordance with a suggestion by the Commander in Chief.
There is also enclosed a copy of a memorandum from the
Ambassador regarding an oral statement made to the Foreign Minister
when the note was presented.5 This statement was in substitution for
an addition to the note itself which was proposed by the Governor in
R. Austin Acly
Chargé d’Affairs ad interim
2 In agm. A-140, the Department of State transmitted a draft of a diplomatic note
that the Embassy at Panama City was to deliver to the Panamanian Ministry of Foreign
Panama City to deliver to the Panamanian Ministry of Foreign Relations the note trans-
4 The reference is to President de la Guardia’s letter of March 7; see Document
PM–11, footnote 2.
5 Not printed.
6 Not printed.

[Enclosure]
Note from the Ambassador in Panama (Harrington) to the
Panamanian Foreign Minister (Moreno)7
Panama City, April 9, 1959.
No. 424.
Excellency:
I have the honor to refer to the Foreign Ministry’s note P.r.e.u.
dated October 8, 1958,9 which you handed to the Secretary of State
in Washington, and the Memorandum received in the Department of
State under cover of a note from the Embassy of Panama in Washington
dated November 13, 1958,10 concerning implementation and interpreta-
tion by the Government of the United States of certain provisions of the
Treaty of 1955 and related Memorandum of Understandings Reached,
together with certain other matters relating to the Canal Zone. A num-
ber of the matters mentioned in these communications were subjects
of discussion by President de la Guardia with Dr. Milton Eisenhower
during the latter’s visit to Panama in July 1958.
In keeping with the traditionally close ties of cooperation and
friendship which have characterized relations between our two coun-
tries, my Government has carefully and sympathetically considered the
comments and opinions expressed by Your Excellency’s Government
on the issues raised. On behalf of the United States Government I
am authorized to reply as follows to the points raised in the several
communications.
Implementation of the Wage Scale Legislation:
Under the provisions of Item 1 of the Memorandum of
Understandings Reached, the United States agreed to seek legislation
which would authorize each agency of the United States Government
in the Canal Zone to establish a uniform wage system providing
a basic wage for each grade level and to provide a uniform retire-
ment benefit system for employees, applicable alike to citizens of the
United States and of Panama. Also, in Item 1 of the Memorandum of
Understandings Reached, the United States agreed to afford equality
7 The source text is an unsigned copy. Official Use Only.
8 The Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of the Foreign Ministry’s note

Panama  899
of opportunity to citizens of Panama for employment in the Canal
Zone, save for security positions. Further, the United States agreed
to evaluate, classify and title all positions in the Canal Zone without
regard to the nationality of the incumbent or proposed incumbent and
provide opportunity for participation in any training programs. The
necessary legislation was passed by the Congress (Public Law 85–550,
implementation of this law two informal meetings have taken place
in the Foreign Ministry and helpful suggestions were made by the
Panamanian participants. The points raised by the Panamanian partic-
ipants were further discussed in Washington and clarifying informa-
tion will be made available to the Government of Panama as soon as
possible. In this connection, further representations have been made
by His Excellency President de la Guardia in a letter sent directly to
President Eisenhower, under date of March 7, 1959, to which a direct
reply will be forthcoming shortly.
Item 5 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached: 11
During the First Session of the 85th Congress, the Congress
appropriated $750,000 to defray the costs of the initial engineering
studies and testings, drafting of plans and other preliminary work
related to the contemplated construction of a high-­level bridge
over the Panama Canal at Balboa, legislation which the United
States had undertaken to seek under Item 5 of the Memorandum
of Understandings Reached. Legislative action on a bill requesting
an additional appropriation of $19,250,000 for construction of the
bridge was completed on June 17, 1958, and the President approved
the bill on June 25, 1958. In complying with this undertaking, my
Government has provided $20,000,000 for a project which will
make substantial immediate and long-­range contributions to the
Panamanian economy.
Item 8 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached:
My Government has given further consideration to the provi-
sions of Item 8 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached but
adheres to the correctness of its interpretation of the meaning and
intent of the provisions of Item 8, including the definition of the word
“feasible”, which is that in certain instances purchases in third coun-
tries may be made. Item 8 provides “In general connection with the
matter of the importation of items of merchandise for resale in the
sales stores in the Canal Zone, it will be the practice of the agencies
11 For the text of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached, see the Department

concerned to acquire such items either from United States sources
or Panamanian sources unless, in certain instances, it is not feasible to
do so.” (Underscoring added). The wording of the provisions of Item
8—“in certain instances, it is not feasible to do so”—­is sufficiently
broad to permit purchases in third countries. My Government consid-
ers that the provisions of Item 8 in general recognize the preferential
position of United States and Panamanian sources over other sources
in the supplying of goods for resale in the Canal Zone. However, that
preference, while considered to be real and important, is not absolute
or unlimited. Conversely, the provisions of Item 8 are not regarded
as precluding or prohibiting the acquisition of merchandise from
third countries “in certain instances” for sale in the Canal Zone. Your
Excellency’s Government of course is aware of the obligations of the
United States Government in this respect as a party to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the good will of the United
States has already been demonstrated by the considerable increase
in purchases by Canal Zone agencies from Panamanian suppliers,
and by the interest of the Canal Zone Government expressed in the
development of Panamanian production capable of being used in
the Canal Zone. The volume of third-­country purchases for resale
is now a minute percentage of the total value of such purchases.
However, desirous of eliminating areas of disagreement between
the two Governments, the Canal Zone authorities are so supervis-
ing their procurement procedures as to afford Panamanian suppliers
increased opportunities to supply their goods. In addition, United
States Government agencies are cooperating, and intend to continue
to cooperate, in increasing the volume and variety of Panamanian
production. These efforts, augmented by Panamanian enterprise,
should serve further to decrease the already small volume of third-­
country purchases.
Tire Recapping, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning Services:
As the Government of Panama has been previously informed, my
Government does not consider tire recapping, laundry and dryclean-
ing to be activities within the purview of Item 9 of the Memorandum of
Understandings Reached inasmuch as they are services as distinguished
from the manufacture and processing of goods within the coverage of
Item 9. Notwithstanding the fact that these services are not subject to
the commitment contained in the Memorandum of Understandings
Reached, my Government will continue to afford full opportunity to
Panamanian industry to compete in these fields of activity.

Panama  901
Item 9 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached:
I refer to Your Excellency’s note P.r.e.u. 505/1021 dated September
the closing of the Mindi Dairy and Mount Hope processing plant. Under
the criteria of Item 9, the Government of the United States undertakes to
terminate the manufacture and processing of goods for sale to or con-
sumption by individuals whenever and for so long as such goods “are
determined by the United States of America to be available in the Republic
of Panama on a continuing basis, in satisfactory qualities and quantities,
and at reasonable prices.” As a result of the request by Your Excellency’s
Government, and in the light of these criteria, the Canal Zone authori-
ties have given consideration to the problem of the supply of milk and
milk products which loom so importantly in the lives of the people both
in Panama and in the Canal Zone. My Government has concluded that,
despite a certain progress that has been achieved by Panama’s dairy indus-
try in recent years, circumstances still oblige the Canal Zone to rely on the
Mindi Dairy for a portion of its milk supply. Therefore, my Government
considers it must defer termination of the activities of the Mindi Dairy
and Mount Hope processing plant until the public milk supply of Panama
is produced under proven conditions fully assuring that supply in accor-
dance with the criteria of Item 9. In order to help the Government and
dairy industry of Panama achieve a record upon which the Canal Zone
might rely in applying the criteria of Item 9, the United States will, of
course, continue to give assistance and advice when so requested by Your
Excellency’s Government.
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages:
The Government of Panama has sought the cooperation of Canal
Zone authorities in eliminating contraband activities said to exist at the
present time in the sale of alcoholic beverages by Panamanian dealers
to consumers in the Canal Zone. This matter has been discussed with
the Governor of the Canal Zone and the Commander-­in-Chief of the
Caribbean Forces, and I am happy to assure Your Excellency that the
authorities in the Canal Zone will gladly give consideration to any prac-
tical system that the Government of Panama might suggest to ensure
a more effective control, such as the establishment of a single outlet in
Panama on each side of the Isthmus.
Luxury Merchandise:
It has been and continues to be the opinion of my Government
that there are no provisions under existing treaties and agreements
12 The Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of the Foreign Ministry’s note

which preclude the importation and sale of so-­called luxury merchan-
dise in the Canal Zone. However, it has been, and will continue to be,
the policy of the responsible authorities in the Canal Zone to encour-
age greater benefits to Panama through purchases of such merchandise
from Panamanian sources.
Requested Wage Increase:
While it was pointed out in Your Excellency’s note P.r.e.u. 489/
1958, that the majority of Panamanians working in the Canal Zone
were not qualified to receive the ten per cent pay increase approved by
the Congress on June 14, 1958, for United States Government federal
employees in classified Civil Service jobs,14 the suggestion was made
that granting of this pay increase to all employees might be justified on
the basis of the constant and progressive rise in living costs.
The recent statutory ten per cent increase in salaries applied to
positions subject to the Classification Act. All persons employed in
the Canal Zone, regardless of citizenship, who held positions subject
to the Classification Act or who were paid at rates based on that Act
received the increase. The rates of pay for other positions are adjusted
from time to time independently of rate increases for positions subject to
the Classification Act. It will be recalled that adjustments in these rates
were effected immediately prior to the adjustment of the Classification
Act salaries. In this connection, it should be pointed out that total wages
paid non-United States citizens by the Canal Zone agencies in Fiscal
rable figure had risen to $27,841,000. It might be pointed out that the
consumer price index published by the Department of Statistics and
Census of Your Excellency’s Government has indicated a substantially
consistent decrease in the cost of living in Panama since the inception of
the index in 1952.
Site for the Proposed Panama Railroad Passenger Terminal:
In accordance with the obligation undertaken under Item 2(b) of
the Memorandum of Understandings Reached that the Panama Canal
Company should remove its railway terminal operations from the City
of Panama, a new freight station is now being constructed in the
Canal Zone and a tentative site had been chosen for the location of the
new passenger station. Your Excellency’s Government, however, has
13 The Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of the Foreign Ministry’s note
14 The reference is to the Federal Employees Salary Increase Act of 1958 (Public Law

Panama  903
expressed concern about the proposed location for the new passenger
terminal and has asked my Government, not as a treaty obligation but
as a measure of cooperation, to reconsider this matter. Your Excellency’s
Government is informed that the passenger terminal will not be located
on the site originally intended. Current plans contemplate its location
on a site considerably closer to the new freight terminal now in course
of construction.
Your Excellency may be assured that my Government will con-
tinue to have an active interest in the economic and general well-­being
of the Government and people of Panama.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my most distin-
guished consideration.
PM–14.
Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow) to the Acting
Secretary of State1
Washington, May 1, 1959.
SUBJECT
Resume of Panamanian Situation.
A group of some 80 armed revolutionaries, mostly Cubans,
landed on the north coast of Panama in the Mandinga Bay area on
April 25. The invaders thereafter moved west and captured the village
of Nombre de Dios.
Prior to the invasion, the Panamanian Ambassador in Washington
had been receiving reports of invasion threats through his and our
sources and had been keeping the Organization of American States
informed of developments on an informal basis. On April 27 he
appeared before the OAS, apprised the member states of the situation,
pointed out that this action posed a threat to hemispheric peace and
asked for invocation of the Rio Treaty.2 On April 28 the OAS passed
a resolution in which it recognized the immediate threat to Panama
by Price.
2 The Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance was signed at Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, on September 2, 1947, by the representatives of the United States and eighteen
countries of Latin America. It was ratified on December 12, 1947, and entered into force

and to the peace of the hemisphere and authorized appointment of a
committee to investigate “on the ground” and report. The investigat-
ing committee, composed of representatives from Argentina, Brazil,
Costa Rica, Paraguay and the United States, departed for Panama on
April 28.
On April 16 our Embassy in Panama had received an urgent request
from the Panamanian Government for a quantity of arms, ammunition,
and other military equipment and supplies valued at approximately
$100,000. The Department approved the transaction on April 23 and on
April 27 CINCARIB transferred arms and equipment valued at approx-
imately $75,000 to the Panamanian National Guard.
Two Cuban Army officers sent by the Cuban Government arrived
in Panama on April 27 to negotiate with the invading group and per-
suaded them to accept a temporary truce.
The truce arrangement, the arrival of the OAS investigating
committee and the transfer of arms, had a calming effect on the
Panamanian populace but it has been noted that the Government was
slow to assume the initiative and seemed loathe to use the resources
immediately available to it to repel the invaders. The stability of
the regime has been due entirely to the energetic action of the OAS
committee.
Under the authority granted it by the OAS Council, the commit-
tee requested member states to furnish surface vessels and aircraft for
patrol and surveillance operations along the coasts of Panama. Our
Government responded by furnishing aircraft and two patrol boats
while it is understood that Guatemala, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Ecuador
and Colombia are offering aircraft. We are endeavoring to persuade
the Colombians to provide two destroyers to assist with the patrolling.
The committee hopes by this means to discourage any further landing
attempts. Intelligence reports indicate that at least one more vessel with
armed revolutionaries aboard may have left Cuba on April 28 headed
toward Panama.
Information received from our Ambassador in Panama this after-
noon indicates all but five of the invading group have surrendered to
the National Guard. Further details of the surrender are awaited.
The Department is in constant communication with our Embassy
in Panama and our representative on the OAS committee there3 as well
as with the OAS Council here.
3 Ambassador John C. Dreier.

Panama  905
PM–15.
Memorandum from John O. Bell to the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for International Security Affairs (Irwin)1

Washington, May 13, 1959.
SUBJECT
Determination of Eligibility for 120-­day Credit Terms under Section 106(b) of the
Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended2 Panama.
Reference is made to the recent request of the Government of
Panama to purchase certain military materiel under Section 106 of the
Mutual Security Act in connection with its efforts to buttress its defensive
capabilities in the light of the present unstable situation in the Caribbean
area. The United States has indicated its readiness to meet this request.
The Panamanian Government has requested credit assistance in making
such purchases, which have been valued at approximately $100,000.
Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me and under
the legislative provisions of Section 106(b) of the Mutual Security Act
of 1954, as amended, I hereby determine the Government of Panama
eligible to pay for purchases of military equipment from stock up to 120
days after delivery. This determination is limited in application to the
purchases described in the paragraph above.
John O. Bell
the Special Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination to the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs. Drafted by Robert L. Burns of Bell’s staff on May11. The Source text is an
unsigned carbon copy.
military equipment and materials at fair value to any nation or international organiza-
tion provided that he deemed such a sale in the best interests of the United States. The
Mutual Security Act of 1954 was amended by the Mutual Security Act of 1958 (Public
PM–16.
Editorial Note
In an exchange of notes on May 20, 1959, between Ambassador
Harrington in Panama and Panamanian Minister of Foreign Affairs
Moreno, the United States Government and the Republic of Panama
concluded an agreement effective on May 20, whereby the United States
agreed to sell military equipment, materials, and services to Panama,
subject to certain conditions. For the texts of the notes exchanged, see
10 UST 1000. Documentation concerning the negotiation of this agree-

PM–17.
Minutes of Cabinet Meeting, White House1
Washington, May 22, 1959.
The following were present:
President Eisenhower
Vice President Nixon
Under Sec. Dillon for Sec. Herter

Gen. Persons—­in part
Sec. Anderson

Gen. Goodpaster
Actg. Sec. Thomas S. Gates for

Mr. Hagerty—­in part
Sec. McElroy

Maj Eisenhower
AG Rogers

Mr. McPhee—­in part
Dep. PMG Edson O. Sessions

Mr. Kendall

for PMG Summerfield

Mr. Robert Gray
Sec. Seaton

Capt Aurand—in part
Under Sec. True D. Morse for

Mrs. Wheaton
Sec. Benson

Mr. Morgan—in part
Under Sec. James P. O’Connell for

Mr. Merriam
Sec. Mitchell

Mr. Randall
Under Sec. Frederick Mueller for

Dr. Paarlberg
Sec. Strauss

Mr. Harr
Sec. Flemming

Mr. Siciliano

Mr. Patterson
Amb. Lodge

Mr. Minnich
Gov. Hoegh

Asst. Dir. Elmer Staats, BoB for Mr. Stans
Dr. Saulnier, CEA
Gen. E. R. Quesada, FAA
Mr. Gordon Gray
Mr. McCone, AEC
Asst. Sec. George H. Roderick
Mr. George V. Allen, USIA
Mr. Abbott Washburn
Mr. Chad McClellan
Mr. Franklin Floete, GSA
Mr. Edward K. Mills, Jr.
Mr. Norman Mason, HHFA
Dr. Glennan, NASA
Mr. Merrill Whitman, Canal Zone
Government
[Here follows a discussion of the Federal Emergency Plan D-Minus
that provided for certain actions in case the United States was confronted
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Cabinet Series. Confidential. L. A.
Minnich, Jr., the President’s Assistant Staff Secretary, prepared and signed this memoran-

Panama  907
with the threat of an imminent attack as well as a final review of the
plans for United States participation at the Moscow Fair.]
Panama Canal2—Mr. Roderick first noted that since 1951 the Canal
had been a self-­supporting operation and has made payments to the
United States Treasury in recompense for past funding.
Mr. Roderick outlined the anticipated great increase of traffic
through the Canal and the ensuing requirements for modernization
and expansion of facilities. He stated that this can be accomplished out
of current earnings up until about 1975 but for the period beyond that
consideration would need to be given to the possibility of constructing
a third set of locks which would handle the largest existing ships, or the
possibility of a sea level canal, at a cost of $700 million–$1 billion, and
with the possibility of utilizing nuclear energy for cutting the canal. He
noted that the Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee of the House
has appointed a good study group headed by General Leslie Groves to
go into this. Mr. McCone cautioned that the nuclear aspect would need
much more study before it would be anything other than an academic
question.
Regarding the sea level canal concept, Mr. Gates pointed out that
any canal would be vulnerable to attack with or without locks. Mr.
Roderick said that he would want to rely on a military decision as to
that question, but that a sea level canal could be reopened much faster
than one where the locks had been destroyed.
The President ascertained that the immediate question at issue
was one of authorizing a $28 million modernization program and fur-
ther planning towards the 1975 requirements. The President thought
this much certainly to be in order. He believed also that eventually it
would be necessary to dig a new canal because the trend is more and
2 In a memorandum dated May 21, the Secretary to the Cabinet, informed the
President that the agenda for the Cabinet meeting of May 22 included a consideration of
problems concerning the Panama Canal. According to Gray’s memorandum,
“There will shortly be issued from the House Merchant Marine and Fisheries
Committee a report about the Panama Canal—­its traffic problems, the improvements
which are being made there, and the desirability of a second canal which might be con-
structed, possibly with the aid of nuclear explosives.”
“Chairman Roderick has asked to make a report so that these new ideas and devel-
opments will not catch the Administration unawares. Although the report will be highly
informative, no specific recommendations for action will be presented.”
(Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Cabinet Series)

more towards huge ships which cannot be accommodated in the exist-
ing locks.3
[Here follows a consideration of the problem of providing addi-
tional federal office space.]
3 In memorandum dated June 4 to Roy Rubottom, the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs, and to Philip J. Farley, the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant
for Disarmament and Atomic Energy, Harry F. Stimpson, Jr., the Under Secretary of
State’s Special Assistant, forwarded the following excerpt from the Record of Action of
the Cabinet Meeting of May 22:
“3.The Panama Canal—Problems and Alternatives
ACTION: a) The President gave general approval to the Company’s short-­range
plans for improving the present Canal during FY 1960–2.
b) With respect to long-­range plans, and taking into consideration the President’s
thought with respect to an additional canal, the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal
Company, working with the Atomic Energy Commission and consulting an appropriate
with the Department of State, will prepare and within a year will present to the Cabinet
and the President recommendations us to the choice among the five alternatives set forth.
c) There are to be no public references at this time to the methods suggested with
respect to the two alternative canals.”
(Presidential Cabinet Meetings, Lot 69 D 350, CP–B)
PM–18.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, July 11, 1959.
SUBJECT
United States Aide Memoire to Panama
On July 6 the Panamanian Foreign Minister informed our Chargé
d’Affaires2 and made a public announcement that he found unaccept-
able an Aide Memoire which had been presented to him by our Chargé.3
The Foreign Minister maintained that the Aide Memoire did not con-
stitute a direct reply from you in response to a letter of March 7, 1959
on July 10 and transmitted to the President under cover of a memorandum dated July
11 from John A. Calhoun, Director of the Executive Secretariat, to Brig. Gen. Andrew J.
Goodpaster, the President’s Staff Secretary.
2 John C. Shillock.
3 On June 24, the Department of State had transmitted the text of this Aide Memoire

Panama  909
from President de la Guardia4 objecting to certain features of the new
merit system and wage scale procedure put into effect by Canal Zone
authorities in February. Our Chargé reports that the Foreign Minister
privately stated that the contents of the Aide Memoire appeared to offer
little or no satisfaction to the Panamanian Government and the Chargé
believes that objections were raised on procedural grounds solely in
order to forestall criticism of the Government when the contents of the
Aide Memoire are eventually made public.
I believe that the transmittal of your reply, dated April, 1959,
to President de la Guardia5 and the subsequent delivery of the Aide
Memoire were entirely correct and appropriate. However, rather than
permit this incident to be further distorted out of proportion, I believe it
advisable and would suggest that you approve the enclosed letter stat-
ing that the United States Government’s study of the points raised by
the Panamanian Government’s memorandum has been completed and
is being delivered in the form of an aide memoire through the usual
diplomatic channels. If you approve this suggestion, I will instruct our
Chargé, on presentation of the letter, orally to inform the Panamanian
Foreign Minister that, although the Department regards the delivery of
the Aide Memoire on July [illegible in the original] to have been cor-
rect diplomatic procedure, you are pleased to send another letter to
President de la Guardia on this subject.
It is recommended that this letter, if approved, be released only on
the initiative of the Panamanian Government.
Douglas Dillon
Acting Secretary
[Enclosure]
Suggested Letter to the President of Panama6
Dear Mr. President:
I stated in my letter of April sixth, 1959 that I would direct a study
to be made by competent experts in my Government of the points raised
in the Memorandum accompanying your letter of March seventh, 1959.
The results of this study are contained in an Aide Memoire which
is being delivered through the usual diplomatic channels.
4 For further information concerning the contents of President de la Guardia’s let-
ter of March 7, see Rubottom’s memorandum of April 1 to the Acting Secretary of State,
Document PA-11.
5 See Document PM–12.
6 Drafted by Leggett on July 10.

May I take this opportunity to reiterate the hope expressed in my
letter of July twenty-­fifth, 1958,7 that adoption of these new employ-
ment and wage practices will make a significant contribution to the
mutual respect and friendship existing between our Governments and
peoples. I firmly believe that any differences existing with regard to the
implementation of the new system can be resolved by patient discus-
sion and negotiation between your Government and the officials of the
United States charged with the responsibility of administering it.
Please accept, Mr. President, my personal good wishes to you and
to the people of Panama.8
Sincerely,
7 See Document PM–4.
Harrington that he was to deliver the text of this letter from President Eisenhower to Panamanian
Foreign Minister Moreno as soon as possible, and that he was to inform the Foreign Minister
that the Embassy also had received instructions to resubmit the text of the Aide Mémoire of
Department that he had delivered the text of the President’s letter to Moreno and had notified
the Embassy to make certain textual changes in the Aide Mémoire before its presentation to
the Government of Panama. Harrington endorsed Moreno’s suggestions as a way to end the
City, July 17, the Department accepted Harrington’s recommendations concerning the Aide
Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of the Aide Mémoire to the Department for its
PM–19.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the
Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Krebs)1
Washington, September 23, 1959.
MEMORANDUM OF TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH
THE PRESIDENT
The President telephoned to say that as soon as Khrushchev
leaves2 he wants to set up a meeting with the Secretary on two sub-
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D
2 Nikita Khrushchev, the Premier of the Soviet Union, made a state visit to the United
is printed in the compilation on the Soviet Union.

Panama  911
jects: (a) Mexico (in preparation to President Lopez Mateos visit;3 and
The President said that when the problem of Panama had come
up a few months ago he had told the Department of Defense he did
not agree with the way they were operating in that area. Since then,
the President had talked to Milton Eisenhower, who had expressed
his alarm over what he believed to be a worsening of the situation.
This morning, the President said, Milton Eisenhower had a two-­
hour meeting with Secretary of the Army Brucker, who had agreed
that some action should be taken on the Panamanian situation.
The President went on to say that, after he and the Secretary have
had their discussion, he would want to set up a meeting of himself, the
Secretary, Secretary Brucker, Export-Import Bank President Sam Waugh,
and the Chairman of the Development Loan Fund Corporation.4 At this
further meeting the President hoped they could come up with a coor-
dinated plan of action.
The President commented that he is concerned that we con-
tinue to rely on a strict interpretation of the Treaty of 1903.5 He said
there have been many changes since that time and that we must
bear in mind that we have a large stake in the Panama Canal and
that, in protecting it, we are up against a people who are unedu-
cated, ill-­informed, and easy prey to Communist propaganda. The
President mentioned particularly his understanding that Panama
still owes the United States Treasury a tremendous amount and that
the Panamanian Government has barely been able to keep up the
interest payments.
The Secretary commented that he had understood that Panama
had been doing quite well on repayments but that, in any event, he
would look into the situation thoroughly and carefully and would
be ready to talk with the President in greater detail at the President’s
convenience.
3 Mexican President Adolfo López Mateos made a state visit to the United States
in the compilation on United States relations with Mexico, Document 336.
4 Vance Brand.

PM–20.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, October 12, 1959.
SUBJECT
U.S. Relations with Panama
PARTICIPANTS
The President

        President of Eximbank Waugh
The Secretary

        General Manager, DLF, Mr. Brand
The Secretary of the Army
        Assistant to the President Rocco Siciliano
The Under Secretary

        General Goodpaster
Assistant Secretary of the Army Roderick        Assistant Secretary Rubottom
The meeting started with a presentation by Secretary Brucker of
the problems which the Panama Canal Company, of which he is the
President, has encountered in its relations with the Government and
the people of Panama. He was assisted by Assistant Secretary of the
Army Roderick who used charts to describe the problems principally
related to: (1) Equal pay for equal work (single-wage scale) and (2) Area
of procurement of goods sold in the Canal Zone. Details of this presen-
tation are available in the attached memorandum.2
Following the presentation of the Secretary of the Army the
President said that he had heard from Panamanians on several occa-
sions three principal complaints: (1) Unfair wages paid to Panamanians
due to failure of the United States to live up to its 1955 Treaty obliga-
tions; (2) Purchases by the Canal Zone authorities of goods outside the
United States and Panama, especially New Zealand beef and Ecuadoran
rice; and (3) Sale of luxury goods in the Canal Zone commissaries and
PX’s. (Secretary Brucker said that orders had already been issued to the
PN’s to stop the sale of goods costing more than $50.) The President
told the group that the United States had come a long way since the
days of laissez-­faire and he referred as an example to our own agricul-
tural subsidy program. He felt that it was time for the United States to
decide what is in the best interest of all the United States and not just
to look at the “mathematics” of our jobs or our treaty obligations. He
opined that the Governor of the Canal Zone3 was perhaps the best that
we have ever had but that he could scarcely be expected to judge the
Panamanian situation “objectively.”
Distribution.
2 Not printed.
3 Maj. Gen. William E. Potter.

Panama  913
With respect to sovereignty it is clear that residual sovereignty still
rests with Panama, but actually the Panamanians had not mentioned
this problem to him, their principal complaints being the points listed
above. Secretary Brucker stated that the sovereignty problem did not
seem to be too serious to him.
Secretary Herter raised the question of the “security” jobs which
are held exclusively by Americans and which is a serious point at issue
there. Secretary Brucker replied that they were reviewing these assign-
ments now, that all teachers had now been removed from the security
list, and that 300 other security jobs had been removed from the lists.
Mr. Rubottom recalled the clipping given to him by the Panamanian
Foreign Minister in Santiago,4 following the latter’s open attack on the
U.S. policies in the Canal Zone at the Foreign Ministers meeting, which
consisted of two job descriptions, in English, which were word for word
the same and which offered slightly over a dollar to a Panamanian
and approximately $2.30 for an American doing road machine work.
Assistant Secretary Roderick said that the Canal Zone authorities were
“caught in this middle” between the U.S. objectives on the one hand
and the requirement to cut costs on the other. He acknowledged that
they might actually pay a U.S. wage under the terms of some of the
contracts awarded there, while the contractor himself would ultimately
pay the going Panamanian wage for the work prescribed.
The President referred to his philosophical approach to all these
problems. He said that times had changed since the 1903 Treaty was
signed and that the United States could not operate the Canal Zone as
though it were “an island.” The Secretary said that we should place
a more favorable interpretation on our treaty commitments, in accor-
dance with their spirit, wherever possible.
Mr. Siciliano reverted to the discussion on labor problems, and
said that, unless more incentive could be given to Panamanian workers,
fewer and fewer Panamanians would be hired in the future rather than
more of them. Assistant Secretary Roderick said that it would probably
be necessary to guarantee Panamanian apprentices certain jobs at the
end of their training period.
There ensued a discussion of third-­country purchases which was
acknowledged by Secretary Brucker to be one of the principal problems
with Panama. He pointed out the high-­quality New Zealand beef could
be purchased more cheaply than the same quality from the United States.
He said that Panamanian beef was not of the same quality. He seemed
to acknowledge that, if instructed to do so, the Canal Zone could pur-
chase all of its beef from the United States or Panama. He also pointed
4 For documentation on the fifth meeting of consultation on Ministers of Foreign

out the problem of the U.S.-operated dairy. Mr. Roderick recalled that
Ambassador Arias had acknowledged last week that Panamanians,
with few exceptions, were not yet in condition to sell milk that met U.S.
standards. They seemed to think that, with technical assistance, and
with the passing of time, this problem could be overcome.
Mr. Dillon raised the question of housing for the Panamanian
employees of the Canal Zone and how to finance such projects. The
Development Loan Fund might find that such financing would con-
flict with its lending policies. He inquired why the Panama Canal
Company could not finance the housing out of its own profits and have
the employees reimburse the cost of the housing to the company itself.
Mr. Waugh agreed that this was a wise proposal for middle-­class hous-
ing but doubted that the Canal Zone should undertake to finance very
low-­cost housing for the lowest paid workers. Mr. Dillon thought that
the financing of 1000 houses at an approximate cost of $5 thousand
each or a total project of $5 million (as earlier mentioned by Secretary
Brucker) would not set a precedent that would create difficulties for us
elsewhere in the world, if the Canal Company itself were to finance the
project. The President asked about those who would still be living in
sub-­standard housing. It was generally agreed that 1000 houses would
not solve the problem but that it would be a big step forward.
The President declared that these problems with Panamanians
vitally affect our foreign relations. They are not just a master of “good
business”. He said that the Department of the Army and the State
Department would have to coordinate more closely in dealing with the
Panamanians, since our differences with that country kept coming to
his attention.
Mr. Rubottom referred to the recent discussions with the Panamanian
Ambassador, who had stated quite frankly that Panama considered the
Canal to be its greatest asset. He recalled Ambassador Arias’s farewell
speech of three years ago when he had remarked that it was “easier to get
the United States to sign an agreement than to live up to its terms.” He
had publicly criticised Assistant Secretary Roderick by name on the same
occasion. It was clear that the Panamanians intended to do one of two
things, or possibly both: (1) carry their case to the International Court
of Justice, and (2) keep up the pressure on the United States in public
forums such as the Santiago meeting and the United Nations, or press for
renegotiation of existing treaties.
Mr. Rubottom said that the United States should go as far as possi-
ble to live up to the spirit of the Treaty in order to be able to respond to
Panamanian accusations and that it also should do as much as possi-
ble to help the Panamanians develop their economy outside the Canal
Zone. He referred to the fact that Ambassador Arias would be paying
a farewell call on the President in a few minutes and suggested that the

Panama  915
President make clear that we intended to treat Panama fairly but that
continued public attacks on the United States would have the effect
of tying our hands and reduce our capacity to cooperate with them in
the future.5
The President at the close of the meeting said that his orders were
to have the Panama Canal Company desist in its purchases from third
countries and to reduce to the greatest extent possible the handling of
luxury goods in commissaries and PX’s.
5 The President conveyed this message to Ambassador Arias in the course of their
conversation. A memorandum of the conversation, dated October 12, is in Presidential
Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 66 D 149.
PM–21.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, undated.
SUBJECT
Implementation of Decisions Taken on October 12 at White House Meeting on
U.S.–Panama Relations.
In accordance with the President’s wishes expressed at his meet-
ing on October 12, and responsive to Brigadier General Goodpaster’s
memorandum of October 14 to you (Tab B)2, a meeting was held at
the Pentagon on October 14 during which plans were discussed
for implementation of the President’s desires for improvement of
U.S.–Panamanian relations. Attached at Tab B3 is a Memorandum of
Understanding as agreed to by State, Canal Zone Government, and
Army representatives present at that meeting. You will have already
by Frederick D. Sharp III, the Officer in Charge of Panamanian Affairs, on October 21.
The source text is an uninitialled carbon copy that was attached to a Memorandum of
Understanding dated October 19, the contents of which had been agreed to by represen-
tatives of the Department of State, the Canal Zone Government, and the Department of
the Army at a meeting at the Pentagon on October 14.
2 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of Goodpaster’s memorandum is
in the Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Panama.”
3 Not printed. See footnote 1 above.

seen Mr. Rubottom’s memorandum of conversation on the White
House meeting on October 12 (Tab C).4
A Memorandum for the President with a suggested letter for his
approval addressed to Panamanian President de la Guardia is at Tab A.5
The text of this proposed letter has been concurred in by the depart-
ments of the Army. The message refers to previous correspondence
between the two Presidents and informs the President of Panama of the
action taken by President Eisenhower to achieve increased understand-
ing between the two countries by approving revised operating policies
in the Zone.
Discussion:
General Goodpaster’s memorandum mentioned the President’s
desire for the establishment of close, continuous liaison between des-
ignated working-­level representatives of the State Department and the
Department of the Army on problems pertaining to the Republic of
Panama and United States operations in the Canal Zone. This has not
been necessary in view of the fact that such liaison has existed for some
time. (Your October 19 reply to General Goodpaster is at Tab A).6 A
meeting of representatives of the appropriate agencies had been sched-
uled at the Pentagon for October 14 and, in the light of the decisions
taken at the October 12 meeting at the White House, it was possible to
re-­orient the discussion toward the implementation of the President’s
instructions to eliminate certain of the frictions affecting relations
between the two countries. Attending the meeting were Assistant
Secretary of the Army Roderick, Assistant Secretary Rubottom, United
States Ambassador to Panama Harrington, Governor Potter of the
Canal Zone, and Lieutenant General Gaither, CHICARIB, in addition to
members of their respective staffs. While Mr. Roderick was clear in his
understanding of the President’s instruction, and this coincided with
Mr. Rubottom’s understanding, the Canal Zone and military represen-
tatives present displayed an antipathetic attitude toward the changes
in procedures which will effect the way of life of residents in the Zone.
It is believed, however, that once the initial emotional impact of the
impending changes has been absorbed, distastes for these changes will
diminish and it would appear that while the Zone authorities and res-
idents will not like the new system they will realize that they must
live with it. In fact, the Department of the Army already appears to be
reconciled thereto.
4 Rubottom’s memorandum of this conversation is printed as Document PM–10.
5 The text of the memorandum for the President and the draft letter for transmittal
to President de la Guardia are printed as Document PM–22 and Enclosure.
6 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of Herter’s reply to Goodpaster is
in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series.

Panama  917
At the Pentagon meeting agreement was reached on the following
points, which had been discussed previously at the White House:
1. Housing Project
With regard to the proposal for the construction of “middle class”
housing located in Panama for Panamanian employees of the Canal
Zone, the Department of the Army representatives discussed the pos-
sibility of financing this project along the lines set forth by Mr. Dillon
at the White House, i.e., one thousand dwellings costing approxi-
mately $5 million to be financed directly from Panama Canal Company
funds. Governor Potter stated that the Canal Zone Government did
not have sufficient funds available for this purpose and that a direct
Congressional appropriation for housing would be required unless
another source of funds was found. The Department of the Army
agreed to seek means for financing such construction.
2. Third Country Purchases
The Department of the Army representatives agreed to change
existing procurement procedures to eliminate insofar as possible fur-
ther purchases from other than United States or Panamanian suppliers
of imports for resale in this Canal Zone. (This would raise questions
of compliance with United States obligations under Article XVII of
the GATT.7 In the past, we have taken the position that limitations on
third country purchases by the Canal Zone authorities do not contra-
vene Article XVII.) General Gaither pointed out that those principally
affected by this change would be his troops and United States employ-
ees of the Canal Zone.
3. Sales of Luxury Items
The Department of the Army representatives agreed to establish a
uniform definition of “luxury items” and the price limits of these items
which may be sold in commissaries, post exchanges and other sales
outlets in the Canal Zone. There was considerable discussion as to what
should be considered as a “luxury item” and a list of such articles is
being prepared for guidance. General Gaither was not convinced that
the maximum value of PX items should be less than that prevailing at
other overseas bases.
4. Single Wage Plan
The Department of the Army representatives (1) agreed to institute
an incentive program to attract Panamanian participation in an apprentice
7 Article XVII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, concluded at Geneva
on October 30, 1947, dealt with non-discriminatory treatment on the part of state-trading
enterprises. For the text of Article XVII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,
see 4 Bevans 664.

and related training program which would qualify Panamanians to work
in higher grades in Canal Zone establishments; (2) agreed to re-­examine
“security” classification positions with a view to reducing them further;
and (3) agreed to examine means of adjusting wages for manual-type
labor paid to unskilled and semi-­skilled employees, such adjustment
probably to date from February 1960, the first anniversary of the new
wage plan. According to Governor Potter, changes in existing regulations
may be required in order to implement these decisions.
ARA agrees with Ambassador Harrington’s suggestion that, as a
result of the strong personal interest taken by the President in the cur-
rent state of United States-Panamanian relations and in view of the
President’s instructions to the responsible United States officials to
undertake to interpret the 1955 Treaty in a broader sense then hereto-
fore, a letter should be sent to President de la Guardia of Panama by
President Eisenhower stating that he has approved a number of revi-
sions in Canal Zone operating policies which he believes will redound
to the benefit of Panama. This letter would have effect of taking the
immediate pressure off the United States, particularly during the forth-
coming presidential campaign in Panama, and would place us in a more
favorable light before the bar of world public opinion. At the outset, the
Department of the Army and Governor Potter did not favor sending the
letter, but desired that the same points be made orally to the Panamanian
President by our Ambassador. They have now receded from that posi-
tion and have concurred in the letter as drafted. ARA feels strongly that
the suggested letter should be signed by the President, for, in addition
to the reason set forth above, it would be a clear indication of the pres-
ident’s desire to cooperate with Panama in minimizing certain fric-
tions in our foreign relations. Moreover, if at some future time Panama
should take the 1955 Treaty compliance issue to the IOJ, we would have
a written record of our attempts to be cooperative and that we had, in
fact, leaned over backward to assuage Panamanian desires. It is ARA’s
view that the message should be released to the press upon its delivery
by Ambassador Harrington. ARA is, however, not laboring under any
delusion that these steps will halt further Panamanian attempts to seek
additional benefits from our presence in the Canal Zone.
ARA anticipated that these decisions affecting our operations in
the Canal Zone will come to the notice of the Congress, of the Board of
Directors of the Panama Canal Company, and of the public in general,
and that considerable comment will result therefrom. ARA in conjunc-
tion with H plans to undertake immediately to brief the members and
staffs of the appropriate committees in Congress on the background
of the decisions taken at the White House to point out that the foreign
relations aspects of this matter outweigh the possible inconveniences
which they may cause to Canal Zone residents or members of the
Armed Forces on duty there.

Panama  919
ARA will maintain continuing liaison with the Department of the
Army’s representatives to assure that the President’s wishes are car-
ried out.
Recommendation:
That you sign the attached Memorandum for the President (Tab
A), submitting for his consideration a letter addressed to Panamanian
President de la Guardia, starting that he has approved certain changes
in operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities and recommend-
ing that the message be released to the press upon delivery by our
Ambassador in Panama.
PM–22.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, October 28, 1959.
SUBJECT
Recommendation That You Sign A Letter To President de la Guardia of Panama.
In view of the decisions taken at your October 12 meeting on
United States-Panamanian relations, which has resulted in revisions in
certain operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities, I recommend
that you approve the enclosed letter addressed to President Ernesto de
la Guardia of Panama.
The proposed message refers to a meeting on September 1, 1959
of United States and Panamanian representatives2 in which President
de la Guardia actively participated. At that time steps were discussed
which would help minimize certain sources of friction between our
two countries. As a result of your October 12 meeting, the Canal Zone
authorities have begun to take the necessary action to implement the
steps discussed at the September 1 meeting, i.e. that the Zone revise the
third country purchasing practices, and that luxury item sales through
Zone outlets be limited insofar as possible. This information would be
conveyed orally to the Panamanian President at the time of delivery
by Sharp.
Assistant Secretary of State William P. Snow of the details of the meeting on September
September 1959”)

of your letter by our Ambassador. Information on other contemplated
actions would be communicated to the Panamanian Government at the
appropriate time.
Moreover, I feel it important for us to have a communication setting
forth your personal interests in our relations with Panama, for should
Panama [illegible in the original] its allegations of our non-­compliance
with the 1955 Treaty before the International Court of Justice continue
in the future, the United States would have a written record of our good
faith in cooperating with Panama in the efforts to increase its participa-
tion in the [illegible in the original] and [illegible in the original] of the
Canal Zone.
In order to derive appropriate [illegible in the original] from our
[illegible in the original] the bar of world public opinion, [illegible in
the original] what this message, if approved, be released as soon as it
has been delivered to President de la Guardia. If this is agreeable, the
Department will instruct Embassy Panama to report delivery so that
immediate public release may be made by the White House.3
Christian A. Herter
[Enclosure]
SUGGESTED LETTER TO PRESIDENT DE LA GUARDIA4
Dear Mr. President:
Since receiving your letter of March seventh, I have given careful
consideration to the course of relations between our two countries. I
have been particularly encouraged to receive recent information that
our representatives have been making progress toward reducing points
of divergence in the application of the Treaty of Mutual Understanding
and Cooperation of 1955.
The pending issues between our two countries arising in the
course of implementation of that Treaty have been and are under con-
tinuing study by the responsible officers of this Government, including
myself. It is clear to me by now that further discussion of the intent
and meaning of certain aspects of our Treaty undertaking is unlikely
to bring about full agreement. However, I do not think that this should
3 According to a typewritten note on the source text, Goodpaster informed offi-
cials of the Executive Secretariat on October 29 that the President had approved without
change the suggested letter to President de la Guardia. An additional handwritten nota-
tion on the source text indicated that the signed original of this letter had been received
from the White House on November 2 and had been transmitted.
4 Drafted by Sharp on October 21, approved in draft by Assistant Secretary of State
Rubottom and Assistant Secretary of the Army Roderick, and approved in substance by
Ambassador Harrington.

Panama  921
deter our efforts to achieve over-­increasing understanding between one
and two countries. For my part, accordingly, I have approved a number
of revisions in operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities which
result from a meeting of representatives of our two Governments in
which you actively participated. I trust that these actions, the substance
of which will be communicated to you by Ambassador Harrington, will
redound to the benefit of the people of Panama.
I am confident that it is your desire, as it is mine, that our two
countries should continue their traditionally close cooperation to insure
the efficient operation of the Panama Canal for the benefit of the entire
world.5
Sincerely,
Harrington, in the course of a telephone conversation on November 4 with C. Allen
Stewart, the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, recom-
mended against delivery on November 5 of President Eisenhower’s letter to President de
la Guardia. Stewart accepted Harrington’s recommendation and advised the Ambassador
that the Department would furnish the Embassy with instructions as to further action
concerning delivery of the President’s letter. (Memorandum of Telephone Conversation,
instructed Harrington to return the President’s letter to the Department via air pouch.
riots in Panama City on November 3, see the editorial note in Document PM–23..
PM–23.
Editorial Note
Responding on November 3, 1959, to demands from leaders of the
Third National Party that United States authorities honor Panama’s
Independence Day celebrations by flying the Panamanian flag along-
side the American flag in the Panama Canal Zone as a symbol of
Panamanian sovereignty, demonstrators in Panama City attempted to
enter the Canal Zone and to raise the Panamanian flag there. Prevented
by United States police from entering this area, the demonstrators pro-
ceeded to the United States Embassy in Panama City, tore down and
destroyed the American flag flying outside the building, and raised the
Panamanian flag in its place. Demonstrators also shattered windows
in the United States Information Office in Panama City and initiated
disorders in the city of Colón, at the Atlantic end of the Canal Zone.
Further incidents occurred on November 4, but the situation improved
sufficiently on November 5 to enable the authorities in the Canal Zone
to withdraw United States troops from guard duty. As a result of these
riots, over 80 American police and Panamanian nationals received
treatment for injuries.

On November 3, the United States Embassy transmitted a Note
to Panama’s Ministry of Foreign Relations protesting the desecration
of the American flag, the damage done to the United States Embassy
and Information Office, and the alleged failure of the Panamanian
police to maintain order. In its reply on November 4, the Republic
of Panama rejected the United States protest and accused American
authorities of provoking the riots and of having ordered American
soldiers to open fire on unarmed Panamanians. Documentation on
OAP Files, Lot 64 D 67.
PM–24.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, December 1, 1959.
SUBJECT
Note from Panamanian Embassy Seeking United States, Agreement to Fly
­Panamanian Flag in Canal Zone on Regular Basis.
Discussion:
Panamanian Ambassador Arias, on November 26, handed as a note
dated November 252 expressing his Government’s purpose to have the
Panamanian national flag flown on a regular basis in the Canal Zone
and stating that it would be desirable that the local authorities on both
sides agree as to detailed procedures.
The note continues by saying that Panamanians have long desired
this action, and that this is based in the fact that Panama has never
transferred nor ceded its sovereignty over the Canal Zone, but merely
has granted to the United States, according to existing treaties, the
rights, power and authority which the United States requires for the
maintenance, operation, sanitation and protection of the Canal.
The note continues that, notwithstanding the opposing positions
held by the two governments on flying the flag, the United States has not
denied the title of sovereignty which Panama has over the territory of
December, 1959.” Official Use Only. Drafted by Sharp on November 30. The source text is
a carbon copy.

Panama  923
the Canal Zone. The then Secretary of War William Howard Taft’s 1906
statement on titular sovereignty3 is cited and quoted, as is the reference
in Mr. Merchant’s departure statement of November 24.4 The note states
that since the United States recognizes Panama’s titular sovereignty over
the zone it is natural and logical to fly the Panamanian flag on a regular
basis in the zone. The note further states that such action would have
a favorable impact in Panama and throughout the world especially in
Latin America. The note closes with the reiteration that it is desirable that
the local authorities of both governments in Panama reach agreement as
to places and procedure for flying the Panamanian flag in the Zone.
Ambassador Arias told me when he handed me the note that while
he realized what our reply would be, he had to present his govern-
ment’s position on flying the flag in the Canal Zone.5
3 For William Howard Taft’s statement on the theory of titular sovereignty that
he made to the Senate Committee on Interoceanic Canals, see U.S. Congress Senate,
Committee on Interoceanic Canals, “Hearings Related to Panama Canal,” S. Doc. 401,
5 In a Note delivered to the Panamanian Embassy on December 10, the Department of
State informed the Government of Panama that the appropriate agencies of the United States
Government had taken the matter of flying the Panamanian flag on a regular basis in the terri-
tory of the Canal Zone under consideration and that the Department of State would communi-
PM–25.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary
of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1
Washington, November 27, 1959.
SUBJECT
Recent Developments in United States-Panama Relations.
During the past several months our relations with Panama have
been noticeably deteriorating and as a result of incidents arising
from uncontrolled mob action in Panama on November 3 and 4, they
have been subjected to severe strain. If demonstrations scheduled for
by Sharp.

November 28 are not directed against the Canal Zone and no further
violence occurs, our relations may be improved.
The main point at issue between the two governments revolved
around differing interpretations of the 1955 Treaty, but a new element
has now been added—the flying of the Panamanian flag in the Canal
Zone. Panama alleges that we are not complying with certain of our com-
mitments; i.e., (1) continuing discrimination against Panamanian labor
employed by Canal Zone agencies, (2) continuing imports of merchan-
dise from “third country” sources, (3) sales of so-­called “luxury items”
in Canal Zone sales outlets, and (4) unfair competition to Panamanian
enterprise by Canal Zone agencies. Panama has never been satisfied with
the 1955 Treaty and has sought to obtain by diplomatic action what it
failed successfully to negotiate. The Panamanian Foreign Minister both
at Santiago in August and at the UNGA in September2 aggravated the
situation by public attacks against us alleging non-­compliance with our
Treaty undertakings. We had been aware of some inequities but were
deterred from acceding to Panamanian demands by intransigence on the
part of the Panama Canal Company—Canal Zone Government and its
principal, the Department of the Army. On October 12, the President, at
a White House meeting, directed that certain changes be made in the
operating policies of Canal Zone agencies and implementation was
commenced. President Eisenhower called in Panamanian Ambassador
Arias just after the meeting and told him of his personal interest in our
Panamanian relations, alluding in a general way to certain changes
which could be anticipated. We assume that Arias, who was departing
for Panama where he is a candidate for the presidency in national elec-
tions to be held in May 1960, informed his President of the interview with
President Eisenhower.
The Panamanian campaign, although in its early stages, is popu-
lated by politicians of widely varied views. Among them are Aquilino
Boyd and Ernesto Castillero who although former Foreign Minister
and Vice Minister, respectively, have by demagoguery called for ever
greater benefits to Panama from the United States presence in the Canal
Zone. About four months ago, Boyd and Castillero started promot-
ing a “peaceful invasion of the Canal Zone coincident with Panama’s
Independence Day, November 3, to reaffirm Panama’s sovereignty
over the Zone. All available information indicated no wide accep-
tance of this proposal, recognized as a political maneuver by these
two extremists. The Embassy and the Canal Zone viewed the march
with misgiving and so told the Government, but the Panamanian
authorities minimized its importance. The Embassy by Aide Memoire,
United Nations General Assembly, see U.N. doc. A/PV. 804.

Panama  925
October 21,3 called Panama’s attention to the march once more, and asked
the Government to take all action to avoid untoward incidents which
might occur. Notwithstanding assurances, the Zone authorities made
plans to protect the security of the Zone and Canal. On November 3, after
a peaceful demonstration by Boyd, Castillero and a small group of sym-
pathizers, an unruly mob attempted to force entry of the Zone to plant the
Panamanian flag and apparently spontaneous violence took place at the
Canal Zone border. Rebuffed at the Zone, about 150 people went to the
Embassy and desecrated the United States flag, causing damage to other
United States installations, public and private. When Zone police and
firemen were overrun by the mob, Governor Potter called on CINCARIB
to protect the Zone. No further incidents occurred, but approximately 80
people were injured on both sides. Our Embassy protested the flag inci-
dent4 and Panama counter-­protested5 that a prior analogous incident to its
flag caused the mob to get out of control. Analysis of the events disclosed
that Panama’s Guardia National, its sole law enforcement agency, was
conspicuously absent from the scene of violence until late on November 3,
but from then on controlled Panamanian crowds well. Radio intercepts
made on November 3 reveal that the Guardia was instructed to avoid the
areas where the crowds were rioting. The Government apparently was
unwilling or unable, or both, to control the situation. From November
4 on the Panamanian press and radio undertook a massive vilification
campaign against us, which the Government felt would be turned against
it, if attempts were made to tone it down. The highly emotional populace
was apparently in command of the situation and reports were received
of further riots against the Zone scheduled for November 18 and 28.
(None materialized on the 18th.) In spite of demarches to President de la
Guardia and to Ambassador Aries (who had returned to Washington), it
was still apparent that the Panamanian government feared for its future
if it were to act forcefully to prevent further anti-United States demon-
strations, fanned by press, radio, and demagogues. In order to strengthen
President de la Guardia’s resolve and for other reasons, Mr. Merchant
went to Panama November 20–21,6 and discussed outstanding issues
with Panama. A device for the Government to attempt a pacification of
the people was afforded by the statement reaffirming titular sovereignty,7
3 For the text of the United States’ Aide-Memoire, see the Department of State
4 For the text of the United States’ Note protesting the flag incident, see the
5 For the text of the Republic of Panama’s Note, see the Department of State Bulletin,
6 Documentation concerning the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political
7 For the text of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs’ departure state-

and press and radio have been calling for calm and non-violence on
November 28. De la Guardia made a statesman-­like radio address last
night and we anticipate that violent demonstrations are now less likely
to occur than at any time since November 3. The Zone Government
and CINCARIB are prepared for any eventuality. If violence does occur,
there would be casualties, and we could anticipate strong charges in
public forums, particularly in view of UNGA’s vote to consider the
Hungarian case.8
With regard to flying the Panamanian national flag in the Canal
Zone, we are not willing to accede to such a request from Panama at
the present time.
We can look forward to continued Panamanian pressure for ever
greater benefits from our presence in the Canal Zone.
United Nations’ Special Representative on the Question of Hungary, to consider “The
Question of Hungary” during the plenary meetings of the fourteenth regular session
of the General Assembly. For documentation concerning the United States’ response to
the Special Representatives’ request, see the Eastern European regional compilation in
Chapter 1.
PM–26.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1
Washington, November 27, 1959.
SUBJECT
Situation in Panama
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Mr. Livingston Merchant, Deputy Under Secretary
At the request of the President I reported briefly on my trip to
Panama November 20–24. I said at the outset that the risk of serious
trouble tomorrow exists and I felt that the Ambassador, Governor
Potter and General Gaither were prepared to deal with it firmly and
wisely. To send an emissary from Washington I said I thought had been
well worth while. It had provided a cooling off period of a few days
conversation with the President occurred at 10 a.m.

Panama  927
and had left them, I believed, with a clear impression of three points:
first, that the Panamanian government had a responsibility and a duty
to protect American lives and property; second, that the United States
government would not negotiate under the threat of disorder and vio-
lence; and, third, that with the restoration of calm there were certain
measures which could come into effect which would be beneficial to
the Panamanians and which had been already decided upon prior to
November 3. This together with the statement on titular sovereignty
provided the Panamanian government with something which they
could use if they were disposed to take a firm line on the maintenance
of order. The government, however, is weak and there is some doubt
as to the reliability of the National Guard. Under the circumstances
President de la Guardia’s radio address last night,2 I thought, had been
quite good and it seemed clear that an effort was being made through
the press, radio, the faculty at Panama University and in the provinces
to hold demonstrations on Saturday3 to a peaceful purpose and char-
acter. If we got by Saturday without real trouble when I said I thought
we should be looking ahead with a view to correcting any justifiable
sources of complaint and grievance.
The President said that three years ago after the trouble at Suez4
he and Secretary Dulles had talked about the situation of the Panama
Canal many times and had sought to ensure that steps would be taken
which would head off any developments in the Canal Zone comparable
to what had occurred in Egypt. He spoke of the discrepancy in wage
rates and said that he had not felt that we had done all that we should
have in this regard under the agreements of 1955. The question of third
country purchases also had needed fixing and he had been anxious to
see a training and apprentice program put into effect. Considerable
progress had been made on these last month but then the inability to
get his letter to the Panamanian government before trouble clearly
threatened had resulted in the Panamanians not being aware of these
corrective actions already decided upon.
The President asked me to follow the situation closely with the
Department of Defense and make sure that with a return to more nor-
mal relations and a better atmosphere that there was no foot-dragging
anywhere and that we consider constructively and sympathetically
Panamanian requests. The President then volunteered that he thought
we should have the Panamanian flag flying not all over the Zone, as
2 The Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of President de la Guardia’s
radio address to the Department of State under cover of despatch 337, November 27, not
3 November 28.
4 For documentation on United States policy with respect to the Arab-Israeli Dispute
December 31, 1956.

some letter he had received had suggested, but at least in some cere-
monial spot along with the American flag. He thought that particularly
since we recognized Panama had residual sovereignty this would be a
natural gesture and he remarked on the fact that at our bases in Spain
only the Spanish flag is flown; the American flag is not flown at all. He
then said that if it was not illegal (and he asked that the Departments
of State and Defense study the matter) and if there were no mob action
or violence on Saturday, he would even like to see a statement made
on Sunday5 that henceforward the Panamanian flag would fly at some
appropriate place in the Zone.6
In leaving I said that we all had our fingers crossed on what would
happen tomorrow and that if there was no serious trouble we should
certainly be thinking of measures which could be taken to improve our
position in Panama since there was no doubt that it was a serious and
long-­term problem.
In conclusion I suggested and the President agreed that at his regu-
lar news conference this morning Jim Hagerty should say some­thing to
the effect that in reflection of the President’s interest and close follow-
ing of the situation in Panama he had asked me to give him a personal
report on my recent trip.
5 November 29.
6 On November 28, Major John S. D. Eisenhower, the President’s Assistant Staff
Secretary, telephoned Deputy Under Secretary of State Merchant and inquired about
the question of flying the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone on Sunday, November 29.
Merchant reported that he had asked the Legal Adviser to study the legality of such an act;
that he had raised this question with Secretary of the Army Brucker and with Governor
Potter while he had been in Panama; and that Brucker and Potter had objected to this mea-
sure. In view of Brucker’s and Potter’s opposition and the fact that there would undoubt-
edly be a demonstration in Panama on November 28, Merchant informed Eisenhower that,
in his opinion, immediate action on the flag was out of the question. Eisenhower agreed
with Merchant’s assessment and said he would report Merchant’s recommendation to the
President and also inform the President that he also supported Merchant’s conclusions.
PM–27.
Editorial Note
On November 28, 1959, mobs of demonstrators again attempted to
enter the Panama Canal Zone. Prevented from entering this area by the
Panamanian National Guard, the rioters proceeded to the business dis-
trict in Panama City where they smashed windows and looted American
commercial establishments. Twelve American soldiers and eighteen
Panamanians—National Guardsmen and civilians—­received treatment

Panama  929
for injuries caused by stone-­throwing and tear-­gas burns; at least 150 per-
sons were arrested. Documentation on these incidents is found in deci-
PM–28.
Letter from the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Mallory) to the Secretary of the
Army (Brucker)1
Washington, December 17, 1959.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
A meeting of representatives of the Department of State, Defense,
and Army was held at Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom’s office on
December 8 to discuss the display of the Panamanian flag in the Canal
Zone. Among these present were Assistant Security of the Army (FM)
Roderick, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (IEA) Knight, and Mr.
Rubottom, as well as members of their respective staffs.
The implicit decision of the President which he stated at his December
2 press conference2 as “. . . the one question of the flag has never been spe-
cifically placed before me; no decision has ever been made about it, but
I do in some form or other believe we should have visual evidence that
Panama does have titular sovereignty over the region”, would appear to
invite the submission to him of a recommendation on this matter, and,
in view of an official request already received from the Government of
Panama for the display of its flag on a regular basis in the Canal Zone,
I have been authorized by the Secretary of State to undertake with the
Department of Defense to prepare a joint recommendation on the flag
issue for submission to the President for his decision.
I have attached hereto a draft recommendation for consideration by
the Departments of Defense and Army, with a view to holding an early
meeting to approve such a paper for joint submission to the President.3
on December 15.
2 For the text of the President’s press conference on December 2, see Public Papers of
the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1959, p. 785.
3 The suggestions advanced in the draft recommendation to the President were that
the United States and Panamanian flags should be displayed on a daily basis at specific
localities opposite Panama City and Colón and that arrangements should be made for
special ceremonies to mark the initial raising of the flags as well as to commemorate
annually the two national holidays of July 4 and November 3.

Mr. Rubottom and members of his staff are prepared to meet with
you at your convenience to discuss this proposed recommendation as
well as procedures to be followed for our display of the Panamanian
flag in the Canal Zone.
A copy of this letter is being sent to Assistant Secretary of Defense
(ISA) John N. Irwin II.
Sincerely yours,
Lester D. Mallory
PM–29.
Letter from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for International Security Affairs (Knight) to the Deputy
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1
Washington, January 14, 1960.
Dear Livie:
Confirming our conversation, the Department of Defense believes
that it is unwise to accede to the Panamanian request to fly the
Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone. A memorandum setting forth our
reasoning is attached.2 Basically, we feel strongly on the basis of all of
the information available to us that acceding to the Panamanian request
will be interpreted as a sign of weakness on our part, and more impor-
tantly, as a symbol of the rightness of the position of those Panamanians
who urge that the Canal and the Zone territory should be controlled by
the Republic of Panama.
We are aware that there are both other and competing consider-
ations which you and your Colleagues are most competent to weigh,
and therefore, we confidently leave the ultimate decision to the
Department of State. If you find it necessary or desirable to state our
views, however, we would appreciate your doing so essentially as set
forth in this letter and the attached.
In the event that it is ultimately decided that the Panamanian
flag should be displayed in the Canal Zone, we are also of the opinion
that this should be done a suitable period of time after the forthcom-
ing Panamanian elections. Perhaps the next November Panamanian
Independence Day would be most appropriate.
2 Not printed.

Panama  931
It is the considered opinion of the Defense officials most familiar
with this problem that after carefully weighing the pros and cons of
flying the flag prior to the elections, there is too great a risk that the
results, if any, to be achieved by acceding to the Panamanian request
can well be dissipated or lost by permitting our yielding on this ques-
tion to become a subject of campaign oratory, and possibly stimulating
demands for additional concessions.
Additionally, I am attaching a memorandum setting forth our
position on the remaining differences between our Departments with
respect to third country imports3 for such use as you care to make of it.
As you are aware, our principal concern is the effect which a ban on
third country imports into the Canal Zone would have upon our post
exchange and commissary relations in other countries of the world.
Local competing commercial entities always have a selfish interest in
curbing these facilities at the expense of United States personnel serv-
ing overseas. While I am informed that the amount of commerce about
which our representatives differ amounts to less than one percent of
total third country purchases for resale, a total ban in the Zone might
well form a basis, somewhat justifiable, for increased agitation for sim-
ilar bans elsewhere.
Sincerely yours,
3 Not printed.
PM–30.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, January 22, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recommendation on Third Country Imports and Luxury Item sales by Canal Zone
Agencies.
You will recall that at your meeting on October 12, seeking
means for eliminating frictions in United States-Panama relations,
you instructed the Panama Canal Company to desist in its importa-
tion from third countries of merchandise for resale in Canal Zone sales

stores and to reduce to the greatest extent possible the handling of lux-
ury goods in commissaries and PX’s. Since the third country purchase
issue revolves around the interpretation of Item B of the Memorandum
or Understandings Reached in connection with the 1955 Treaty, your
instruction was construed to include the military sales stores in the
Zone as well.
In October the Panama Canal Company revised its procurement
procedures on third country imports and substantially limited lux-
ury items sales, in accordance with your instruction. However, the
Department of Defense, because it believes that to limit procurement
for resale in its Canal Zone outlets to United States and Panamanian
sources would have a precedential impact on worldwide military PX/
commissary policy, appealed to you in early December for a reconsid-
eration of your instructions on third country imports. Both State and
Defense Departments were requested to seek a solution which would
minimize the potential impact at other Defense installations overseas.
Both the State and Defense departments are agreed that a uniform
policy for both the Panama Canal Company and Caribbean Command
is required, and a satisfactory policy on luxury item sales has been
found. On the third country imports issue, we cannot reach a satisfac-
tory solution. This Department holds that all third country imports for
resale in Zone outlets should be halted, with the single exception of
gasoline. Our Defense colleagues cannot agree because of their fear
of setting a worldwide precedent. Since the Canal Zone is a unique
establishment with both civilian and military outlets within that lim-
ited area, it is our view that defensible arguments can be devised to
preclude demands for like treatment by other governments on whose
territory Defense installations exist.
In actual fact, the value of the commerce over which the Defense
and State Departments disagree is insignificant, but it is my view that a
question of principle is involved—that of living up to the spirit as well
as the letter of our 1955 Treaty undertaking.
I therefore recommend, on foreign policy grounds, that you reiter-
ate your earlier instruction on this matter and that Caribbean Command
be directed to revise its procurement policies on third country imports
for resale to conform with those policies already in effect by the Panama
Canal Company.
CHRISTIAN A. HERTER

Panama  933
PM–31.
Letter from the Deputy Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
(Knight)1
Washington, January 22, 1960.
Dear Bob:
Department of Defense positions on the issues of (1) the display of the
Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone, and (2) resale of luxury items, and
third country imports into the Canal Zone, were transmitted to this
Department.
My colleagues and I have carefully reviewed the Defense posi-
tions as well as the two memoranda supporting them. As I stated at the
January 7 meeting at my office, during which the issue of third coun-
try purchases was last discussed by representatives of State, Defense
and the Panama Canal Company, I find that our differing positions are
apparently irreconcilable and I have approved a recommendation that
the Secretary of State forward a Memorandum for the President recom-
mending that Caribbean Command be directed to revise its policies on
third country imports for resale to conform with those already put into
effect by the Panama Canal Company.
On the Panamanian flag issue, I have recommended that further
action be suspended for the time being in view of certain developments
which are now taking place. We will not fail to take the views of the
Department of Defense into consideration when a recommendation is
being formulated. As of the present time, however, no final position has
been taken at the higher levels of this Department.
I am enclosing a copy of the Department’s Memorandum for the
President on the unresolved third country import issues.3 It has been
approved by the Secretary and will be transmitted to the White House
shortly.
Sincerely yours,
Livingston T. Merchant
Livingston T. Merchant
Under Secretary for Political Affairs
by Sharp on January 20.
2 See Document PM–29.
3 For the Secretary of State’s Memorandum to the President, see Document PM–30.

PM–32.
Letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of
Defense (Gates)1
Washington, February 17, 1960.
Dear Tom:
On the subject of third country imports and luxury items for resale
by Canal Zone agencies, I recently recommended to the President, on
foreign policy grounds, that he instruct your Department to direct
the Caribbean Command to revise its procurement policies on third
country imports for resale in its sales stores to conform with those
polices already in effect by the Panama Canal Company. I informed the
President that our two Departments had found a satisfactory solution
with regard to luxury items sales.
I am sure you will have seen Brigadier General Goodpaster’s mem-
orandum of February 9 to you and me,2 in which he reports that the
President had noted the willingness of your Department to have this
Department resolve the remaining differences on the matter of third
country imports for resale by Canal Zone agencies, and had requested
me to do so, giving the maximum consideration I deem feasible to the
views of the Department of Defense as expressed in Secretary Douglas’
letter to the President of February 5.3
Therefore, in accordance with the President’s request to me, please
direct the Caribbean Command to revise its procurement policies on
third country imports for resale to conform with those now in effect by
the Panama Canal Company, which are that all third country imports for
resale in Canal Zone sales outlets shall be banned, except for gasoline.
On luxury items for resale in Canal Zone sales outlets, my under-
standing is that certain luxury items shall be banned if their acquisition
cost exceeds $50. Household appliances usually regarded as necessities
will be excepted.
on February 15.
3 The recommendations of the Department of Defense, as summarized in under
Secretary Douglas’ letter of February 5 to President Eisenhower, was to ban the resale of
only those products that were of special interest to the Panamanians-rice, beef, beer, and
milk derivatives-while continuing the resale of other third country imports and luxury
items. (Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, International Series)

Panama  935
I shall be grateful if you would inform me when the necessary
steps have been taken to implement this request, in order that I may
inform the President of the resolution of this problem.4
I am sending a copy of the letter to the Secretary of the Army for
his information.
With warmest personal regards,
Most sincerely,
Christian A. Herter
4 Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Knight informed Under Secretary for
Political Affairs Merchant on February 24 that the Department of Defense was ready to
implement the new policies governing third country purchases and asked the Department
of State if the new instructions could go into effect on March 15. Merchant concurred
in the Defense Department’s request. (Memorandum of Conversation, by Merchant,
Secretary of State Herter of this decision. (Telegram Tosec 9 to Rio de Janiero; Eisenhower
Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Panama”)
PM–33.
Editorial Note
Security Council, Allen Dulles, the Director of Central Intelligence,
discussed the situation in Panama. According to the memorandum of
discussion, Dulles
“said we must be prepared for a new eruption of violence over
the flag issue. Student, labor and other groups were planning a
new “sovereignty march” into the Canal Zone. Such a march might
take place on March 1, which is Constitution Day and a good day
for demonstrations. A new demonstration would probably receive
broader public support than previous demonstrations. Moreover,
it had been indicated that the National Guard of Panama would
not intervene. Secretary Herter said he was worried by this March
date, particularly as the President would be in South America at
that time.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

PM–34.
Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Mallory) to the Secretary
of State1
Washington, March 3, 1960.
SUBJECT
Panamanian Situation.
The anti-United States demonstrations reportedly planned for
March 1 in the Canal Zone area never materialized largely because
of the flexible attitude displayed by Governor Potter. On February
29 Governor Potter had crossed United States and Panamanian flags
placed on the light poles along that part of the route which would be
used by Carnival parade through the Zone. This move elicited favorable
comments from many Panamanians, even from such super-­nationalists
as Aquilino Boyd and Ernesto Castillero, who played a large role in
previous anti-United States demonstrations.
Although three USIS library windows were broken and one
Panamanian marched into the Zone to plant a flag, these were isolated
incidents. We have authorized the presentation of a pro forma note of
protest concerning the window breaking.
It appears that the Governor’s gesture bucked up the Panamanian
Government. The Guardia National performed well on March 1 and
was particularly helpful in that it rounded up known agitators and kept
them from participating in the Carnival parade. Moreover, the Foreign
Office issued a statement on February 29 which urged the public to
foreswear violence. This statement said that, contrary to rumors, the
United States is still seriously considering the formal Panamanian
request for a showing of its flag in the Zone.
On March 2 the Acting Secretary sent a telegram to Ambassador
Harrington commending him for his part in forestalling a demon-
stration, and asking that he express to Governor Potter and General
Gaither the Department’s appreciation for helping create a situation
which minimized the chances of a march on the Zone.2
Now that March 1 has passed without a major incident, it is possi-
ble we will have time to work out a new policy with respect to Panama
without being subjected to further pressure tactics by the Panamanians.
by C. Allan Stewart, Director of the office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs.
2 The Acting Secretary of State conveyed this message to Ambassador Harrington in

Panama  937
PM–35.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, March 18, 1960.
SUBJECT
White House Meeting on March 21 to Discuss Panama Policy
On February 16 the President addressed a memorandum to you
with an attachment containing a summation of complaints by Panama,
together with some suggestions as to ways to ameliorate the situation.
The President stated that he was sending the same document to the
Secretary of the Army and that following his return from South America
he hoped to have a conference with a view to finding better solutions
to outstanding problems than those thus far developed (White House
Memorandum, February 16, with its attachment is at Tab A)2
Secretary of the Army Brucker and Assistant Secretary of the Army
(FA) Roderick are scheduled to be present for the meeting with the
President on March 21. You will be accompanied by Mr. Merchant, and
me if you so desire.
Discussion:
We understand that Secretary Brucker will present to the President
a ten point program, largely based on the February 16 memorandum.
We have been unable, however, to find out precisely what this program
calls for and therefore list below the points of the February 16 memo-
randum and our comments thereon.
1. Discrimination in Wages Paid Panamanians
Since signing of the 1955 Treaty the Panamanian Government has
complained that the United States has violated “in spirit” the “equal
pay for equal work” commitment. Government officials refer to the fact
that the United States pays workers at United States and local rates,
with most of the Panamanians receiving the lower local scale of wages.
This is not a violation of the Treaty but the practice lends itself to unjus-
tified charges.
To narrow the gap between the two rates, the Department has sug-
gested to the Department of Defense that an increase of around 10 cents
in hourly pay to local rate employees might be beneficial at this time.
Confidential. Drafted Stewart. The source text is an uninitialled carbon copy.
2 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of the President’s memorandum

The Panama Canal Company directors have authorized an increase of
five cents an hour but no action can be taken until the three armed
services and the Canal Zone Government authorize a corresponding
increase, which must come from appropriated funds, for their workers.
In the discussion before the President it is recommended that you sug-
gest an immediate wage increase for local rate employees.
2. Job Reclassification
The memorandum suggests that an immediate study be made
to see how the pay rates of more Panamanians can be hitched to the
United States wage scale.
Mr. Brucker and Mr. Roderick will discuss ways and means of
doing this and it is recommended that the Department [illegible in the
original].
3. Security Positions
The memorandum suggests that an immediate study be made
to ascertain which of the more than 2,000 security jobs may safely be
opened to qualified Panamanians.
A move by the Canal Zone agencies to reduce the number of secu-
rity positions open only to United States citizens would be beneficial
to relations with Panama and is recommended you support any plan
submitted by Mr. Brucker or Mr. Roderick to achieve the reduction.
4. Apprenticeship Program
The memorandum suggests a sizeable increase in the apprentice
program and the reservation exclusively to Panamanians of a portion
of the positions in the skilled trades in order that they may separate for
these jobs among themselves.
The President mentioned improvement of the apprentice progress
in his discussion of the Panamanian problem with Ambassador Arias
on October 12. The Department has expressed itself in favor of opening
more United States-rate jobs to Panamanians on numerous occasions
in discussions with Defense officials and it is recommended that this
viewpoint again be mentioned.
If the Defense representatives present a good plan it is recom-
mended that you support it.
5. Discrimination in Promotion Opportunities
The memorandum suggests that a training program should be
undertaken for qualified Panamanians leading to appointments to at
least minor supervisory positions.
Recalling that United States industry follows the policy of replac-
ing its American personnel with nationals as soon as the latter are suf-
ficiently well-trained it is recommended that you support any move
which will reverse the present practice of freezing Americans in choice

Panama  939
jobs. Many of these jobs are passed from father to son, thus perpetuat-
ing a practice that was abandoned years ago by United States private
industry in Latin America.
6. Widespread Poverty and Unemployment Among Panamanians
The memorandum that this is partially due to the fact that the
Company and the Armed Services here discharged about 10,000
employees during the last ten to twelve years. It suggests that a study
be made to work out the basis for treaty provisions which might bring
about an approximation of the tariff advantages which have enabled
Puerto Rico to establish so many small industries exporting to the
United States and therefore increase employment.
[illegible in the original] An early start on an “Operation Boststrap“
might make negotiation of a new treaty with Panama much easier. As
you are aware, the United States will require the consent of Panama to
abandon its present Canal operation. A study of feasibility of making
tarris concessions to Panama is at Tab A.3
7. Increased USIA Propaganda Activities
The Department has instructed the Embassy to take steps leading
to establishment of a daily radio commentary program to present the
United States viewpoint in Panama. USIA is favorably disposed and is
awaiting a recommendation from its Public Affairs Officer. The Panama
Canal Company directors discussed this matter at their last board meet-
ing and decided there was a need for some medium to get the United
States point of view to the Panamanians. While Mr. Roderick is aware
of the Department of State’s efforts, you may wish to mention the above
details at the meeting if the subject arises.
8. Better Rates for Water Charges to Panama
This is a technical problem which the Defense representatives may
discuss. It is recommended that States defer to their judgement.
9. United States Loans for a Reasonable Housing Program in Panama
The Panama Canal company has drafted a bill which will pro-
vide congressional authority to proceed with a housing program. It is
believed the proposed bill will be discussed by Defense representatives
at the meeting and the President’s approval sought to introduce the skill.
Senator Murray (D-Mont) has introduced a bill calling upon the
Development Loan Fund to guarantee loans for housing in Panama.
The Department has drafted a letter to the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee indicating that the housing plan under the direction of the
Panama Canal Company is preferable to the Murray proposal (Tab C).4
3 Not found.
4 Not found.

10. The Panama Canal Company Program to Build More Houses for
Panamanian Employees in the Zone
The memorandum states the belief that a program of this nature
fosters loyalty to the United States by such inhabitants. This is undoubt-
edly true but the Defense representatives will be in a better position
than the Department to judge the feasibility of this project.
11. Modest Pension Increase and Provision of Medical Aid for Elderly
Retired Former Employees
These are laudable suggestions but again the Defense representa-
tives must provide the answer. It is understood that some pensions are
in the neighborhood of $40 a month.
12. Next Appointment to the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal
Company should be a State Department Representative
The memorandum recommends that until there is a vacancy a rep-
resentative of the Department of State should attend the meetings as
an observer. Mr. Marshant is suggested as State’s representative on the
Board.
It is believed advisable to have the Department represented on the
Board where its director would be in a position to influence decisions
which affect United States relations with Panama. The State member
would, in effect, be a voting political adviser to the Board. Rather than
burden the Under Secretary for Political Affairs or the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affaire with this responsibility it is suggested
that the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
might be named. In view of a larger role envisioned for the Ambassador,
it is not considered appropriate that he serve on the Board.
It is recommended that you support this point of the memorandum.
13. Civilian Governor of the Canal Zone
The memorandum suggests that the next Governor of the Canal
Zone, to be appointed in May of this year, “be a different man from the
President of the Panama Canal Company and a civilian selected partly
for qualities of tact and diplomacy.” He should sit with the Board of
Directors of the Panama Canal Company, the memorandum [illegible
in the original].
It is recommended that the Department support this point of the
­Memorandum. The United States military plays a triple role in the Zone
and vis-a-vis Panama: it supplies the governor of the Zone, manages
the Panama Canal Company, and protects the Canal. The Corps of
Engineers, which has a brilliant record in operating the Canal, has tra-
ditionally furnished the governor, who by statute serves also as ex offi-
cio president of the Company. There seems to be no compelling reason
Zone should be under a military governor. The presence of foreign

Panama  941
military government is offensive to peoples who consider the governed
territory to be their own. A military organisation operates on the basis
of command rather than persuasion. Military officers grow accustomed
to obedience, and are concerned primarily with matters of their inter-
nal command rather than with those of external interests. Accordingly,
a military command is seldom an instrument for civil administration
under which civilians and foreigners can comfortably live or work. An
individual commander may avoid arbitrariness but his military status
projects to foreign people more of an aura of colonialism than would
adhere to a civilian. The Panamanian press campaign against the “mili-
tary mentality” of the present governor suggests that the Panamanians
would welcome civilian governance of the Zone. It is believed that the
Zone’s government should be civilianized by the appointment of a
capable civilian governor. He should in his dual role as governor of the
Zone and president of the Company be responsible to the Ambassador
on all matters affecting the Republic. A civilian governor should not
report to the Department of the Army but to the Department of State
and to the White House through the Department. It is our understand-
ing that the appointment of a civilian governor could be effected by
the President, subject to confirmation by the Senate, without further
legislation.
It is our Legal Advisor’s opinion that there is no legal impediment
to naming a civilian Governor but the statutes call for the Governor
and the President of the Panama Canal Company to be the same person
(Tab B).5 Mr. Brucker, in a [illegible in the original] with Mr. [illegible in
the original], indicated his view that by statute the Governor and the
President of the Company must be an (Army) engineer.
In the event a civilian Governor, reporting to the President through
the State Department or directly to the Department, is named, it would
be desirable to have the stock of the Panama Canal Company trans-
ferred to the Secretary of State. At present the President has delegated
the Secretary of the Army as sole stockholder.
5 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of the Legal Adviser’s opinion, as
conveyed in a memorandum on March 18 to Merchant, is in ARA/PAN Files, Lot 65 D
176, “Policy - Panama 1960.”

14. The Flag
In addition to the items of discussion described above, it is believed
that mention should be made of the Panamanian request that the
United States fly its flag in the Zone. A decision on the request has been
delayed as a result of congressional opposition. Because of the negative
attitude of the House of Representatives and the reported strong pos-
sibility of the Gross Amendment being included in the Department of
Commerce appropriations bill,6 it is not recommended that steps be taken to
fly the Panamanian flag in the Zone before more educational work can be done
with Congress. Governor Potter’s precedent of March 1 in displaying
ceremonial Panamanian flags received no unfavorable comment from
Congress which leads to the belief some of the “sting“ of this issue may
have been drawn. The House Foreign Affairs Committee as yet has not
made public its attitude toward flying the Panamanian flag.
15. Gorgas Hospital Plan
The President wrote to Under Secretary Dillion on March 107 pass-
ing on an idea he had received from Mr. Ralph Cake, a director of the
Panama Canal Company, that the facilities of Gorgas Hospital in the
Canal Zone be used for a large scale training program (1000 trainees per
annum) for the benefit and advancement of medical science in Latin
America. The President asked for Mr. Dillon’s comments in time for
the March 21 meeting on Panama.8 We found that some preliminary
work had been done several months ago and U/MSC has prepared
a reply which states that the concept of such a program has struck a
receptive note in the Department and would have a beneficial impact
on our overall Latin American relations. ARA believes that the concept
is much broader in scope and therefore should not be considered solely
in the context of United States-Panama relations.
6 For the text of the Department of Commerce and Related Agencies Appropriation
Gross Amendment read as follows: “Provided further”, That no part of any appropriation
contained in title II of this Act shall be used to construct a flagpole, platform, or any other
device for the purpose of displaying the flag of Panama in the Canal Zone, the sovereign
control of which is vested in the United States Government by virtue of long standing
treaty.”
7 Not printed; the record copy of the President’s letter to the Under Secretary of
State is in the Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Panama.”
8 In a memorandum dated March 20, Under Secretary of State Dillon informed the
President that he had requested a prompt study of the feasibility of the training program
but recommended that since the survey’s conclusions would be unavailable for review at
the time of the meeting on March 21, the President should postpone making a final deter-
mination on the proposal until after the completion of the feasibility study. (Eisenhower
Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series)

Panama  943
ICA has been requested by Mr. Dillon to examine the feasibility of
such a hospital-medical training program at Canal Zone and also look
into the form the program might take.
It is recommended that no decision be taken on this matter until ICA
completes its study.
16. Other Policy Matters
Secretary Brucker’s anticipated proposal is good from our stand-
point but still doesn’t go far enough in meeting other perhaps more
important short and medium range problems requiring either a change
of policy or at least a change in emphasis. These problems are described
in Stage I of the S/P study (Tab E)9 on Panama and include the following:
1. Civilian Governor (if not discussed by Mr. Brucker)
2. Primay of United States Ambassador over [illegible in the
original]
3. Civilianization of the Panama Canal Company
4. The flag (which requires further study as mentioned in item 14)
5. Formalization of policy planning within NSC structure
6. Decision on Isthmian sea level canal.
Mr. Merchant and I agree in principle with this program as out-
lined by S/P but do not believe that it should be presented unilaterally
to the President, that we should discuss it first with Defense and Army.
We therefore recommend that you suggest to the President that we
have several other policy matters which we would like to discuss with
Defense and Army during the next week or ten days after which we
would hope the President could receive us again to discuss these longer
range aspects of the problem.
9 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of the Policy Planning Staff’s
study on Panama, entitled “A Three-Stage Approach to the Panama Canal Problem”,
In a memorandum dated November 25, 1959, to Gerard C. Smith, the Director of
the Policy Planning Staff, Merchant had requested the preparation of such a study, On
February 1, 1960, Smith complied with Merchant’s request and submitted such a study.
Merchant, in turn, informed Smith in a memorandum dated February 3 that he had
hoped for a more detailed examination of a broad range of issues associated with the
Panama Canal problem. In response to Merchant’s request, Smith, under cover of a mem-
orandum on March 16 to Merchant, transmitted a copy of the study on Panama to him.
The documents referred to are in PPS Files, Lot 67 D 548, “Pamama.”

PM–36.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, March 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
PANAMA
PARTICIPANTS
The President

Assistant Secretary Roderick
The Secretary

General Persons
The Secretary of the Army

General Goodpaster
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
Secretary Brucker referred to the President’s memorandum of one
month ago2 as providing the basis for the meeting and then distrib-
uted copies of a paper “Proposed Action by Panama Canal Company
and Canal Zone Government,”3 listing a ten-­point summary of a more
detailed paper which he handed to the President4 which the latter
began to read. Secretary Brucker retained a copy of the detailed pro-
posal for his own reading but did not have other copies of the basic
paper to distribute.
The President, after a few minutes, inquired about the apprentice
plan, recalling that he had heard from an American source regard-
ing their poor treatment in the Canal Zone training school. General
Goodpaster said that Robert Burroughs had been the source of this
report.
Mr. Roderick said that Panamanian apprentices received the same
wages as Americans (except the regular 25 per cent foreign residence
differential), starting at approximately $1.00 per hour and increasing
gradually over the four-­year apprenticeship to almost the maximum
wage paid to skilled Panamanian workers. He averred that the real
Distribution.
3 The Panama Canal Company and the Canal Zone Government proposed, in this
paper, to authorize a 10% increase in the wages of Panamanian employees; to expand
the apprentice program to admit 25 Panamanians annually; to replace 500 substandard
housing units in the Canal Zone; to construct 500 low cost housing units in Panama; to
withdraw the Panama Railroad terminal from Panama; to install a new water main
to increase the water supply to Panama; to reduce the rate charged for water furnished
to Panama; to support legislation to increase the pensions paid to disabled Panamanian
employees; to increase the pay of teachers in Latin American schools; and to continue
the review of security positions to keep the number at a minimum. (Eisenhower Library,
Staff Secretary Records, “Panama Canal”)
4 Not found.

Panama  945
problem was that Panamanian apprentices could not compete with
the American beginners. To meet this, the new plan proposes that the
Panamanian apprentices compete among themselves. The President
thought that the wage structure was certainly sufficient to disavow any
complaint on that basis.
Secretary Brucker pointed out the link between points 1 and 9
of the proposed action, i.e. increasing wages of Panamanian employ-
ees 10 per cent and increasing the pay of teachers in Latin American
schools; he referred to the link between items 6 and 7 having to do
with the installation of a new water main to supply Panama and a
reduced charge for water furnished to Panama; also, items 3 and 4 were
related, having to do with the replacement of 500 substandard houses
in the Zone and the construction of 500 low-­cost houses in Panama
for Zone employees. The proposed wage increase of 10 per cent had
been recommended deliberately, rather than the 5 per cent increase
originally suggested, and the company was thinking of making this
an annual increment which would, therefore, eliminate a wage differ-
ential between Panamanians and Americans in 10 years. Mr. Brucker
said that the company had also deliberately increased the number of
apprentices from 20 ­to 25 per year in its proposal; since the training
period is 4 years, there would be 100 Panamanians in the school at all
times, a rather impressive figure, he thought.
The President inquired about the U.S. treaty obligations to the
world regarding rates charged ships transiting the Canal. Wasn’t there
some way we could increase the rates so as to amortize the original
building costs for the Canal? Mr. Roderick explained that there was
in effect a formula with the Congress which works in the following
way: if the Canal Company books show that the rates are too low or
too high, the Executive Branch could, after a six-­month waiting period,
recommend a reduction or an increase in the rates in order to balance
the books. The Administration tried in the 83rd and 84th Congresses
to include original building costs in the financial base structure of the
Canal Company accounts, but the pressures on the Congress were suf-
ficient to nullify the government’s recommendations.
The President noticed that there was no mention of third coun-
try purchases or the sale of luxury items in the PX’s. Mr. Brucker
declared that the measures affecting these points had already been
placed into effect.
Mr. Merchant commented that this action had had favorable
repercussions.
Secretary Brucker said that his Department was prepared to move
ahead on all points in the company proposal although enabling legis-
lation would be required for point 4, covering construction of housing
units in Panama, and point 8, an increase of pensions paid disabled

Panamanian employees, even though ultimately the funds for both of
these items would be provided by the company. The Secretary said that
Panama obviously would have to cooperate in providing land for the
housing and that some kind of negotiation would have to be carried out.
Secretary Herter said that, while the Department was not aware
of the detailed terms of the company proposal, it sounded satisfactory.
He said that the Department had made a careful long-­range analysis
of the problems attendant to U.S.-Panama relations and that, after con-
sultation with Mr. Brucker, he would like to come back to the President
with recommendations. He believed that the long range U.S. picture
regarding the Canal hinged considerably on whether a sea level Canal
is to be built and, if so, where it is built.
Secretary Brucker referred to a proposal made to the President to
train annually 1000 Latin American doctors, nurses and medical tech-
nicians at Gorgas Hospital in Panama. The total cost was estimated
at $600,000 per year but since the governments of the trainees would
probably be willing to pay their travel costs, roughly half of the total,
the United States and the recipient countries.
Secretary Herter expressed awareness of the proposal and said that
the Department was studying it. He said that it was an appealing plan.5
The President opined that the gesture of the crossed flags on March
1 had worked out well. Why hadn’t we done this five years earlier? As
though to answer the question himself, he recalled a telegram of com-
plaint received from one of his brothers urging that the United States
make no conciliatory gesture on the flag. Secretary Brucker stressed that
the main point is that we are now prepared to do something regard-
ing this problem. He said we should certainly not allow any important
anniversary dates in Panama to go by without taking similar steps.
Secretary Herter said that the Department would include rec-
ommendations regarding the flag issue in its next meeting with the
President on Panama.
The President said that the measures included in the company pro-
posal seemed to him to be satisfactory and that the company should
move ahead with them.
5 In a memorandum dated April 15, Under Secretary of State Dillon informed the
President that the State Department had completed its feasibility study of the hospital
and medical training program at Gorgas Hospital and had concluded that the program
was feasible; that Gov. Potter had agreed to its implementation; that the International
Cooperation Administration was prepared to proceed; and that Ambassador Harrington
would bring the matter before the Foreign Ministry of Panama in order to obtain Panama’s
cooperation. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman Files, Dulles-Herter Series)

Panama  947
General Persons asked the President whether the various items
should be given to the Budget Bureau for consideration. General
Goodpaster asked whether steps should be taken with the Congress
to permit the company to amortize the original construction costs. The
President gave an affirmative answer to General Persons but recog-
nized that there were problems with the Congress and with the ship-
ping interests on the second point. The President pointed out that, with
respect to any long range decision on a sea level canal, it should not be
built in Panama if that country is uncooperative.
Secretary Brucker alluded to the subject of rates charged transiting
ships and said that a very careful review would have to be made before
attempting to obtain approval of an increase.
Assistant Secretary Roderick said that a study was now being made,
looking toward legislative action, to enable the company to pay the
government of Panama out of its own funds the $1.5 million increased
annuity, resulting from the 1955 Treaty, since the authorizing legisla-
tion flowing from that treaty had required that the State Department
seek an annual appropriation to make this increased annuity, although
the original $430,000 annuity is still paid out of company earnings. The
company is also considering steps enabling it to add $20 million to the
financial base of the company, this being the cost of the bridge now
under construction, in order that this might be chargeable against earn-
ings, at least insofar as interest, which is now being charged on the base
annually, is concerned.
PM–37.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, March 29, 1960.
SUBJECT
PANAMA - Policy Recommendations for Discussion with Secretary of the Army
Brucker.
You attended a meeting at the White House on March 21, together
with Mr. Merchant and me, on the subject of short-range policy
Drafted by Sharp between March 25 and March 28. The source text is an uninitialled carbon
copy.

changes to be implemented by the Canal Zone Government/Panama
Canal Company in the Canal Zone. Secretary Brucker and Assistant
Secretary Roderick presented a 10-point program of proposed action
(Tab A)2 which seemed to be satisfactory to the President and he
suggested that the Company should move ahead with the proposals
You mentioned to the President that the Department had made
a careful long-range analysis of the problems attendant on United
States-Panama relations and that, after consultation with Mr. Brucker
you would like to come back to the President with further recommen-
dations. I recommend that in a meeting, to be scheduled for the near
future with Secretary Brucker, attended by you, or Mr. Merchant if you
should find it more convenient, you support wholeheartedly the 10-point
program of the Army and that you urge its implementation be commenced as
soon as it is practicable to do so, with a further recommendation that the bene-
fits be spaced so as to achieve maximum effect.3
ARA believes that while the Department of the Army proposals are
excellent measures and will, no doubt, help to improve further our rela-
tions with Panama, which presently appear to be on the mend, there are
additional short-range changes which should be raised in the projected
meeting with Secretary Brucker for discussion and decision to be pre-
sented as joint recommendations to the President.
These measures, as described in Stage I of the S/P Study on Panama
1. Next Appointment to the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal
Company should be a State Department Representative
The memorandum from the White House dated February 16, 1960
(Tab C)5 recommends that until there is a vacancy, a representative of
the Department of State should attend the meetings as an observer.
Mr. Merchant is suggested as State’s representative on the Board.
It is believed advisable to have the Department represented on the
Board, where its director would be in a position to influence decisions
which affect United States relations with Panama. The State member
would, in effect, be a voting political advisor to the Board. Rather
than burden the Under Secretary for Political Affairs or the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs with this responsibility,
it is suggested that the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs might be named. In view of a larger role envisioned,
3 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Secretary of State Herter
approved this course of action on April 1.
4 Not attached to the source text.
5 Not attached to the source text.

Panama  949
for the Ambassador, it is not considered appropriate that he serve on
the board.6
It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that a
joint State/Army recommendation be made along these lines to the President.7
2. Civilian Governor of the Canal Zone
The February 16 memorandum suggests that the next Governor of
the Canal Zone, to be appointed in May of this year, “be a different man
from the President of the Panama Canal Company and a civilian selected
partly for qualities of tact and diplomacy”. He should sit with the Board
of Directors of the Panama Canal Company, the memorandum adds.
The United States military plays a triple role in the Zone and vis-a-
vis Panama: it supplies the governor of the Zone, manages the Panama
Canal Company, and protects the Canal. The Corps of Engineers, which
has a brilliant record in operating the Canal, has traditionally furnished
the governor, who by statute serves also as ex officio president of the
Company. There seems to be no compelling reason today, as opposed
under a military governor.
The presence of foreign military government is offensive to peo-
ples who consider the governed territory to be their own. A military
organization operates on the basis of command rather than persuasion.
Military officers grow accustomed to obedience, and are concerned pri-
marily with matters of their internal command rather than with those
of external interests. Accordingly, a military command is seldom an
instrument for civil administration under which civilians and foreign-
ers can comfortably live or work.
An individual commander may avoid arbitrariness but his military
status projects to foreign peoples more of an aura of colonialism than would
adhere to a civilian. The Panamanian press campaign against the “mili-
tary mentality” of the present governor suggests that the Panamanians
would welcome civilian governance of the Zone.
It is believed that the Zone’s government should be civilianized by
the appointment of a capable civilian governor. He should in his dual
6 At this point, the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: “(see
Mr. Merchant’s comment, Tab F, para. 1).” Apparently Tab F, which is not attached to
the source text, was a memorandum dated March 30 from Merchant to Herter, in which
Merchant took exception to Rubottom’s recommendation relating to the rank of the State
Department’s representative serving on the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal
Company. Merchant believed the Under Secretary of State or the Under Secretary for
Political Affairs should represent the Department. He maintained that high rank was
7 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, on April 1 Herter con-
curred with Merchant’s recommendation regarding the rank of the State Department’s
representative.

role as governor of the Zone and president of the Company be respon-
sible to the Ambassador on all matters affecting the Republic.
A civilian governor should not report to the Department of the
Army but to the Department of State or to the White House through the
Department. It is our understanding that the appointment of a civilian
governor could be effected by the President, subject to confirmation by
the Senate, without further legislation.
It is our Legal Advisor’s opinion that there is no legal impediment
to naming a civilian governor but the statutes call for the governor and
the president of the Panama Canal Company to be the same person
(Tab D).8 Mr. Brucker, in a discussion with Mr. Merchant, indicated his
view that by statute the governor and the president of the Company
must be an (Army) engineer.
In the event a civilian governor, reporting to the president through
the State Department or directly to the Department, is named, it would
be desirable to have the stock of the Panama Canal Company trans-
ferred to the Secretary of State. At present, the President has delegated
the Secretary of the Army on sole stockholder.9
It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that
such a joint recommendation be made to the President.10
3. Primacy of United States Ambassador over the Canal Zone.
The termination of military administration of the Zone is directly
related to the question of United States representation in the Republic
of Panama. Part of the Canal problem is that the governor of the Zone
(president of the Company) is responsible to the Secretary of the Army,
and that CINCARIB is responsible to the JOS, notwithstanding that a
wide variety of decisions made by each affect Panama and Panamanians
in some way.
The coordination of the actions of the governor (president) and
CINCARIB with those of the Ambassador now depends solely on the
working relationship and goodwill existing between the three men. It
would be prudent to assure a greater degree of formalized coordination
by establishing the primacy of the Ambassador.
It is not recommended that CINCARIB’s Panama responsibili-
ties be affected except in regard to the primacy of the Ambassador on
9 At this point, the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: “(see
Mr. Merchant comment, Tab F, para. 4).” Merchant, according to his memorandum of
March 30, was uncertain of the soundness of recommending to the President that he
10 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, on April 1 Herter disap-
proved this recommendation and suggested that the Secretary of the Treasury should

Panama  951
all matters affecting11 United States relations with Panama. This, in
addition to the appointment of a civilian governor responsible to the
Ambassador, would simplify the problem of coordination and reduce
the military and “colonial” coloration of the Zone.12
It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that
Executive Order 10575 be recognized as applicable to the Canal Zone vis-a-
vis the Republic of Panama as it is elsewhere in the conduct of United States
foreign relations.13
The appointment of a State Department representative to the Canal
Company Board, the appointment of a civilian governor and the estab-
lishment of the primacy of the Ambassador would have two immedi-
ate effects: It would (a) “civilianize“ the Panama Canal Company and
(b) ­supplant the present primacy of the Department of the Army by elevat-
ing the Department of State to new responsibilities vis-a-vis the Zone and
the Canal.
Civilianization of the Company would still permit the special com-
petence of the Corps of Engineers vis-a-vis the Canal to be available to
the civilian management.
The result of appointing a civilian governor would be to reduce
the role of the Department of the Army in the Zone to that of furnishing
technical acceptance in the operation of the Canal and of maintaining
a security force.
4. [illegible in the original]
It is believed that the forthcoming meeting with Secretary Brucker
would be the appropriate time to raise once again the Panamanian
request that the United States fly its flag in the Zone.
As you will remember, a decision on the request of November 25
has been delayed on a result of Congressional opposition. However,
Governor Potter’s precedent of March 1 in displaying ceremonial
Panamanian flags received no unfavorable comment from Congress,
which leads to the belief some of the “sting” of this issue may have
been drawn.
The House Foreign Affairs Committee as yet has not made public
its attitude toward flying the Panamanian flag. Moreover, it is under-
stood that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee does not intend to
take action on the flag issue.
11 At this point, an unknown hand inserted the following in the source text: “the
Govt. of.”
12 At this point the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: ”(see
Mr. Merchant’s comment, Tab F, para. 2).” Merchant, according to his memorandum or
March 30, suggested that, in the interest of clarity, the reference to the Ambassador’s respon-
sibility “on all matters affecting United States relations with Panama.” Should be amended
13 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Herter approved this
recommendation on April 1.

It would appear that a sounding might be taken of Congressional
attitudes toward our unilateral display of the Panamanian flag toward
the end of the present session, in order to determine the feasibility of
action by the Executive Branch following the adjournment. ARA feels
that Representative [illegible in the original] may be having second
thoughts on his action to halt our flying of the Panamanian flag in the
Zone, and I believe the action of Governor Potter on March 1 clearly
shows a significant recession from the Pentagon’s earlier position.14
It is recommended that you explore with Secretary Brucker the possibility
of the Pentagon joining with State in recommending to the President that he
approve in principle our regular display of the Panamanian flag in the Zone
under conditions that are mutually acceptable to the Departments.15
5. Policy Decision on Isthmian Sea Level Canal
The Panama Canal Company study (now on the process), which
is due to be presented to a Cabinet meeting in May of this year, calls
for a successor sea level Canal to replace the Panama Canal to be com-
pleted by 1980. Since construction is estimated at approximately ten
years, the United States Government must during the 1960s build the
politico-psychological atmosphere requisite for successfully negotiat-
ing a sea level Canal across Panamanian territory—the present pre-
ferred site.
The creation of this atmosphere will require that we adopt a new
Isthmian canal policy in the near future. S/P has prepared a long-range
study (Tab A) which calls for medium and long-range ­policy changes
additional to those mentioned above. At Mr. Merchant’s instigation, the
JCB has undertaken to prepare a study of the strategic importance of
the present, and future sea level canals, to be ready in about sixty days.
Following presentation of the Canal Company study to the
Cabinet, it seems to ARA that the President could be asked to (a) decide
in principle to proceed with construction of an Isthmian sea level canal
and (b) approve a new long-range Isthmian canal policy which could
be discussed with the new Congress.
It would also appear desirable that the Departments of Defense,
Army, and State initiate discussions among themselves immediately to
resolve such differences as now separate us in a frank and open-minded
14 At this point the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: “(see
Mr. Merchant’s comment, Tab F, para. 3).“ Merchant, according to his memorandum of
March 30, suggested that the flag issue should, for the moment, remain unresolved, but
that the precedent of the crossed ceremonial flags should be repeated on every significant
Panamanian and United States holiday. [illegible in the original]
15 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Herter approved
Merchant’s suggestion on April 1.

Panama  953
manner, all parties to recognize that the socio-economic evolution of
the Isthmus is upon us for the period being considered.
It is recommended that you explore with Secretary Brucker the possi-
bility of setting up a task group to commence formulation of a joint State/
Army policy. [illegible in the original] This group would draft recom-
mendations for ultimate submission to the President for decision. The
President would indicate at what time study of a revised policy on the
Isthmian Canal and related matters mentioned in this S/F paper would
be referred to the National Security Council.16
16 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Herter accepted this
­recommendation on April 1.
PM–38.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State1
Washington, April 5, 1960.
SUBJECT
Press Release on Program for Improvement of Relations with Panama
Secretary of the Army Brucker has presented to the Department
for concurrence a press release (Tab A)2 outlining a nine-point program
for improvement of relations with Panama (the original release had
ten points but relocation of the Panama Railroad terminal, presently
in Panama City, has been held up at the request of the Panamanian
Government as a result of opposition from Harmodio Arias, who inter-
posed objection to any arrangement which might assist the railroad
when a Foreign Office Note was presented to the Foreign Relations
Council for approval (Tab B).3
Official Use Only. Drafted by Stewart on April 4. The source text is an uninitialled carbon
copy.
2 Not printed.
3 Not attached to the source text. Tab B, which is not printed, was Airgram G-197

Secretary Brucker is scheduled to meet early this week with his
personnel to ascertain whether all plans for implementation of the pro-
gram have been completed. Assistant Secretary of the Army Roderick
informed Mr. Stewart on April 4 that he still has not heard from the
Department of Defense as to its capacity to award the ten per cent
increase to non-United States rate employees of the military estab-
lishments in the Zone and the Canal Zone Government. Mr. Roderick
expressed the view, concurred in by ARA, that the Panama Canal
Company wage increase, already authorized by the Board of Directors,
should not be granted unilaterally. He thought it would be preferable
to hold up the press announcement, if necessary, until Defense and the
Canal Zone Government could secure funds to enable them to grant
the increase. ARA concurs, believing a much greater impact would be
achieved by an all-inclusive wage increase for non-United States rate
workers. Mr. Roderick said he was expecting momentarily to hear from
Defense whether it had arranged for the necessary funds.
When all arrangements have been made to implement the nine
points the press release will be sent to the President for his approval. It
will be suggested that the announcement be made by the White House.
Recommendations.
1. That you approve the press release.
2. That you concur with the Department of the Army view that the
announcement be withheld until all employing agencies in the Zone
arrange to grant the ten per cent wage increases simultaneously, assum-
ing this will be possible in the near future.4
4 On April 5, Secretary of State Herter approved the press release, and concurred
with the view of the Department of the Army that the President withhold the announce-
ment of this program until all employing agencies in the Canal Zone arranged to grant
the 10% wage increase simultaneously.

Panama  955
PM–39.
Memorandum of Conversation, by Edward T. Long1
Washington, April 6, 1960.
SUBJECT
Long-Range Program for Panama
PARTICIPANTS
State:
The Secretary
Under Secretary for Political Affairs Livingston T. Merchant
ARA - Assistant Secretary Rubottom
S/P - Assistant Secretary Smith
OAP - C. Allan Stewart
M - Mr. Long
Defense:
Secretary of the Army Wilber M. Brucker
Assistant Secretary of the Army George H. Roderick
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) Robert Knight
Colonel-George M. Seignious II - Aide
Nine Point Program
The Secretary opened the meeting by expressing his delight at the
nine point program for Panama which the Department of the Army had
prepared and which was to be announced by means of a White House
press release. He expressed the hope that the Department of Defense
would be able to find the money for pay increases for Panamanian
employees of the U.S. armed services. Mr. Roderick said that there was
now no problem on this issue and that he was hopeful it would be
resolved by the end of the week with the press announcement com-
ing out some time before April 15. He said the pay increases would
go into effect on May 1. He also proposed a new sentence in the draft
press release which would highlight the fact that this program was not
an afterthought and reflective of submission to Panamanian pressure
but was something which was in train before the November riots and
would have been implemented before if the riots had not taken place.
The Secretary agreed with this change with the addition of the thought
that the delay was also caused by our own legislative procedures.2
Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.
2 For the text of the White House press release of April 18 announcing the nine point

Significance of Panama
Turning to the reason for the meeting, the Secretary pointed out that
we had been looking at the Panama problem from a long-­range viewpoint
and that we were considering Panama in the overall mosaic of Western
hemisphere problems. Malcontents in the hemisphere today were not
rallying around Lenin or Stalin or Khrushchev or Mao but rather had
adopted Fidel Castro as their symbol. He observed that it was our wish to
avoid particularly the increase of sentiment favorable to Castro in Panama
where there was much social pressure on the part of unhappy elements.
With this in mind he wanted to propose several changes which he thought
would contribute to a more effective U.S. operation in that country.
Panama Canal Company Board
First of all, he stated we would like to have a State Department rep-
resentative at a senior level on the Panama Canal Company Board of
Directors which he understood now had thirteen members. We did not
want to displace any current member but thought that, until an opening
occurred, the State Department representative could be an observer with a
political voice. Secretary Brucker replied that he had no objection to a State
Department observer but that his concept of the Company was that the
Company was strictly a business operation with a Board consisting of high
level businessmen. He alluded to the appointment of Commerce Under
Secretary John Allen to the Board which he had approved on the under-
standing that Mr.  Allen, an experienced businessman, would conduct
himself as a businessman rather than as an official of the Department of
Commerce. Secretary Brucker questioned whether it would be a good thing
from the Department of State standpoint to have an official on the Board.
The Secretary asserted that our concept differed completely from Secretary
Brucker’s. We had no desire to interfere with the business operation of the
Board but we thought it important that one voice of the thirteen be a politi-
cal voice, that there should be a member of the Board alert to political impli-
cations of the Board’s actions. The Secretary stated that, if requested to name
the State Department Board member, he would nominate Mr. Merchant.
Secretary Brucker then stated that if this was what the Secretary wanted it
would be acceptable to him. (Note: Secretary Brucker seemed even happier
when the Secretary pointed out that Mr. Merchant had considerable busi-
ness experience before joining the Department of State.)
Panama Canal Company Stock
The Secretary then raised the question of the stock of the Panama
Canal Company, the operation of which the President has delegated to the
Secretary of the Army. The Secretary thought it would be a good thing, in
order to avoid the military implications of ownership, to have this stock
transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury. Secretary Brucker stated he
was not prepared to discuss this subject and the matter was dropped.

Panama  957
Governor of the Canal Zone
The Secretary said that we had given careful thought to the problem
of the Governor of the Canal Zone and it was our firm opinion he should
be a civilian. Secretary Brucker observed that there was nothing in the
statutes which would prohibit this but stated the Governor of the Canal
Zone, who was also the President of the Panama Canal Company, had
traditionally been a Corps of Engineers officer. He thought this precedent
was a good one, that it should be continued and that it was very proper.
The Secretary said he knew that the leading candidate for nomination as
the new Governor next month was an engineering officer of great stat-
ure and that he would have no quarrel with his designation. However,
the problem was one of principle and he thought that, in principle, the
Governor should definitely be a civilian. Secretary Brucker said that it
was such an important thing to have a Corps of Engineers officer head-
ing up the Zone and Company, that the Corps of Engineers’ tradition
was a great one in Panama. He said that certainly we would not want
to have a run-­of-­the-­mill politician as Governor and that we would not
want to have two civilians, the Ambassador and the Governor, involved
in Panama and Canal Zone problems. It was most important to have a
professional engineer giving professional advice on the Canal Zone. The
Secretary responded that he did not quarrel, of course, with the efficient
operation of the Canal itself but that he might argue on the issue of a mil-
itary officer as Governor and involved in relations with the Government
of Panama. He said that, while he took absolutely no exception to the pro-
spective nomination from the Corps of Engineers for the new Governor,
he thought we would have to reserve our positions on this issue. He said
that, assuming a civilian candidate and a military candidate were of equal
stature, we would prefer the civilian. It was a question of judgment.
Secretary Brucker responded that the nominee for Governor
would have to be confirmed by Congress where of course the Corps of
Engineers was very powerful.
The Secretary then said “we agree to disagree”, that he thought it
important that we settle this matter in principle for the future.
Mr. Merchant said the problem essentially was that the U.S. exer-
cises sovereignty over a narrow strip of land bisecting the Republic of
Panama. In these modern times it was essential from the standpoint of
our political relations with Panama to avoid the image of military occu-
pation, which the concept of a military man as Governor of the Zone rep-
resented psychologically. He said that certainly the Corps of Engineers
would continue in its respected technical capacity. The Secretary agreed
that the problem was essentially a psychological one. Secretary Brucker
replied that he just did not agree with the Department of State’s position
on this and he strongly recommended reconsideration of it. He stated

that, in his opinion, the Latin Americans had a tremendous respect for
U.S. Army officers and that this was an important aspect.
Primacy of the Ambassador
The Secretary said another problem which he would like to address
himself to was that of the difficult position inherent in the presence of three
top-­level American officials in the area, the Ambassador, the Governor
and the General commanding the Unified Command. He said he felt it
important to affirm the primacy of the U.S. Ambassador in Canal Zone
matters relating to the government and the people of Panama. Secretary
Brucker observed that the military had no disposition to look at things in
Panama other than eye to eye with the Ambassador. The closer the relations
the better, and this has been the traditional situation there. The Secretary
said this must be the understanding between the two Departments and
Secretary Brucker replied that “we will work with you on this”.
New Canal
The Secretary then turned to the problem of the new Canal and
said it was the Department’s feeling that a governmental decision on
this should be made as soon as possible. He said he understood that
the Panama Canal Company had just completed a study recommending
the construction of a sea level canal. Mr. Roderick interjected that the
Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee of the House was publishing
a report on this subject done by a group of highly respected engineers
and that the recommendation of this report would be the construction
of a third set of locks to the present canal. He understood that the report
recommended this because of the diplomatic problem of negotiating a
different route for a possible sea level canal. He said he had heard that the
Cabinet was to consider the Panama Canal Company report on April 29
and that perhaps this consideration should be undertaken beforehand,
i.e., before the Merchant Marine and Fisheries report was made public.
Gorgas Hospital Project
Secretary Brucker asked how the Gorgas Hospital project was pro-
gressing. The Secretary said he understood ICA was actively and favor-
ably studying it. He hoped that the necessary funds could be found.
Flag
The Secretary then mentioned the flag problem and observed that
the Department felt, that given the present attitude of Congress, noth-
ing formal could be done in this regard at this time. He hoped, however,
that the Governor would continue, on suitable occasions, his ceremo-
nial crossed flag project which was so successful last month. Secretary
Brucker agreed.

Panama  959
PM–40.
Letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the
Army (Brucker)1
Washington, April 8, 1960.
Dear Wilber:
It was good of you to come over on Wednesday2 to discuss Panama
with us and I found the meeting most helpful. I have been pondering
the various problems since our meeting and would like to set down my
view as to where we stand and where we should go.
We weren’t able to come to a meeting of the minds on the civilian
versus military Governor issue. Although the President has now nomi-
nated a military officer for a new term as Governor of the Zone, I think
we should still establish the principle that the Governor of the Canal
Zone should be a civilian.
I was delighted that you accepted my informal suggestion of Livie
Merchant as the Department of State representative on the Board, when
a vacancy appears, but I am not quite clear whether you accepted Livie
as an individual or as a position. I think it important that the principle
be established that the Department of State will be permanently repre-
sented on the Board of Directors at the Under Secretary level.
You said that you anticipated no difficulty in affirming the primacy
of the Ambassador in matters relating to the government and people
of Panama. I hope that this can be regularized by an executive order
something along the lines of Executive Order 105753, and I plan to send
you in the near future some draft language on this for the President’s
subsequent consideration.
I think we neglected to pin down the procedure for securing a pol-
icy decision on the sea level canal. It is most important that we agree to
put this problem into the NSC machinery as soon as possible.
On the matter of the flag, I understand that we were agreed that
no decision be taken at this time with respect to its daily display in the
Zone but that on all suitable holidays the Governor should exhibit the
small ceremonial crossed flags as he did on March 1.
1960.” Confidential. The source text was attached to a memorandum from Merchant to
Herter dated April 8, in which Merchant suggested that, since the Secretary had failed at
this meeting with Brucker on April 6 to obtain final agreement on most of his Panama
proposals, the Secretary should send Brucker a letter in which he reiterated his sugges-
tions. Merchant also recommended that the Secretary and Brucker have an early discus-
2 April 6.
text, see 19 Federal Register 7249.

I believe we should take our various proposals to the President for
decision on a fairly urgent basis. If you would let me know in the next
few days, after you have had the opportunity to consider this letter,
we could then arrange a mutually convenient appointment with the
President for this purpose.
With warmest personal regards,
Most sincerely,
Christian A. Herter
PM–41.
Editorial Note
On April 12, 1960, Robert K. Gray, the Secretary to the Cabinet,
transmitted the text of Cabinet Paper 60–108, entitled “Isthmian Canal
Plans—1960” to the Members of the Cabinet. In his covering memoran-
dum, Gray indicated that this document was scheduled for Cabinet con-
sideration at the Cabinet meeting planned for April 29, 1960, and that
the Secretary of the Army, acting in his capacity as “the stockholder”
and, as such, the senior official of the Federal Government supervising
the Panama Canal Company, was complying with the Cabinet decision
of May 22, 1959, to present, on behalf of the Board of Directors of the
Panama Canal Company, a report to the President and the Cabinet on
the feasibility of constructing an alternative Isthmian sea-level canal.
CP–60–108, prepared with the assistance of the Atomic Energy
Commission and the Department of State, concluded that: 1) a new
sea-­level canal was the most advantageous, least vulnerable, and most
practical solution of the problem of the over-­used Panama Canal; and
2) that conventional construction of a sea-­level canal would cost three
times as much as nuclear excavation at a location remote from the pres-
ent Canal Zone. The report also recommended that the Panama Canal
Company and the Atomic Energy Commission promptly initiate con-
struction plans for a sea-­level canal at a remote location using nuclear
excavation; however, if the nuclear construction of a sea-­level canal
could not be completed before the early 1970s, the report recommended
that the Panama Canal Company use conventional methods to build a
new sea-­level canal in the Canal Zone.
Documentation in the Department of State concerning the ques-
tion of the construction of a new sea-­level canal is in ARA/PAN Files,
Lot 65 D 176, and at the Eisenhower Library, it is in the Whitman File,
Cabinet Series.

Panama  961
PM–42.
Editorial Note
The National Security Council, at its 441st meeting held on April 14,
1960, concurred with a proposal submitted by the NSC Planning Board that:
“A U.S. policy should be developed during this Administration on
the long-­range national security interest in inter-­oceanic canals across
Central America, including consideration of the future of the Panama
Canal, a possible new sea-­level canal, the question of internationaliza-
tion of such canals, and the appropriate assignment of responsibility
within the U.S. Government regarding such canals.”
On April 23, 1960, President Eisenhower approved this paragraph
as NSC Action 2219–­b–(3).
(S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, NSC Records of Action)
PM–43.
Minutes of Cabinet Meeting, White House1
Washington, April 29, 1960.
The following were present:
President Eisenhower
Vice President Nixon
Mr. Loy Henderson

Sen. Morton, RNC
for Sec. Herter

Sec. Brucker, Army (in part)
Sec. Anderson

    Mr. George Roderick (in part)
Sec. Gates

Amb. Julian Harrington, Panama (in part)
Mr. Lawrence Walsh

Dr. Edward Teller, AEC (in part)
for AG Rogers

Dr. Gerald Johnson, AEC (in part)
Mr. John McKibbin

Mr. Merrill Whitman, Panama Canal
for PMG Summerfield
    Company (in part)
Mr. Royce Hardy
for Sec. Seaton

Mr. Morgan
Sec. Benson

Mr. Kendall
Sec. Mitchell

Mr. Merriam
Mr. John Allen (in part)
Dr. Paarlberg
for Sec. Mueller

Mr. Harlow
Sec. Flemming

Mr. McCabe

Gen. Goodpaster
Amb. Lodge

Mr. Robert Gray
Gov. Hoegh

Maj. Eisenhower
Mr. Stans, BoB

General Bragdon (in part)
Mr. Staats

Mr. Harr (in part)
Mr. John McCone, AEC
Mrs. Wheaton
Dr. Saulnier, CEA

Mr. Patterson

Mr. Minnich
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Cabinet Series. Confidential. Minnich
prepared and signed this memorandum. The meeting began at 9:04 a.m. and concluded at

[Here follows a discussion of the draft of the special message to the
Congress that the President delivered on May 3; a consideration of bud-
get and personnel questions; and a description of Project Ploughshare,
the use of underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes.]
Isthmian Canal—Mr. Brucker picked up the subject of a sea level
canal, which Dr. Teller had discussed in part.2 He said that the plan for
cleaning up the existing canal, approved in 1959, will continue through
1968, but the need remains for settling on a long range solution.
Mr. Roderick said that the 1947 study of requirements and of routes
remains pertinent in all respects except for the possibility of using
nuclear explosions. He then went over the various possible routes and
their costs. He concluded that a sea level canal is best since it can han-
dle the heaviest traffic, at the most economical rate, and would be less
vulnerable to attack.
Mr. Roderick commented that the Panama Canal Company is now
very experienced and could carry on with the new canal.
Mr. Roderick wanted to propose, subject to the President’s approval
of the project, some public announcement of it, even though further
nuclear development was required prior to actual initiation of the work.
The President said that the biggest problem now is the determina-
tion that will have to be made as to our foreign policy interests – ­that is,
whether to stay with Panama or to consider switching to Colombia. He
thought that the additional cost of routes other than those in Panama
was a very secondary factor given the long term usage of any canal.
Mr. Roderick thought that the financing could be similar to that of the
St. Lawrence Seaway, and that even the more expensive canals could
be paid off by using higher tolls than now charged. He noted that there
had been no increase in tolls since 1916.
The President repeated that State should get to work now on its
part of the problem. Sec. Anderson thought that State should also
consider the fringe economic benefits that would accrue to whatever
country that became the site of the new canal – ­for instance, Colombian
economic development would be greatly advanced if the switch were
made to it. Mr. McCone did not want the Mexican possibility dismissed
lightly, even though much more costly, since it would save much time
for ships traveling between the East and West coasts of the United
States. Mr. Roderick said that a study showed various savings for vari-
ous routes, but that Panama currently is on the direct line of the heavi-
est traffic–from Venezuela to the East Coast.
2 In the course of his presentation regarding Project Plowshare, Dr. Edward Teller of
the Atomic Energy Commission stated that the excavation of a sea level canal through the
Central American Isthmus provided the best example of how nuclear explosives could
best be used for peaceful purposes.

Panama  963
The President stated that anything that binds Mexico closer to the
United States is in itself worth a billion. The Vice President added that
the matter of stability of local government is a question with which
State would have to be concerned and is of very great importance.
Sec. Benson asked if it was planned to discontinue the present
canal. Mr. Roderick replied that this also is a question for determination
through State Department.
Mr. Brucker inquired about informing Congressional Committees
of this proposal and of publicizing it. Mr. Henderson asked that the
question of publicity be deferred until Mr. Herter’s return on May 6th.3
Mr. Brucker felt some urgency with regard to Congressional hear-
ings. The President thought that no great problem was involved in the
basic report submitted by the Panama Canal Company, rather it was
in the things the State Department needed to consider. He directed Mr.
Henderson to take it under study and discuss it with Mr. Dillon in the
absence of Mr. Herter.
took him to London, to Tehran for the CENTO Council meeting, to Istanbul for the NATO
Council meeting, and to Athens. He returned to Washington on May 6, 1960. For the texts
of the Department of State press releases concerning his trip, see Department of State
PM–44.
Memorandum from John H. Stutesman, Jr., to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Washington, May 2, 1960.
Isthmian Canal Plans—1960, A Report of the Panama Canal Company
Board of Directors
Attached for your information and appropriate action is an excerpt
from a draft record of action of the cabinet meeting of April 29, 1960.
This record of action has not yet been approved by the President.2
Cabinet Paper-Privileged. Stutesman was the Special Assistant to the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Administration. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2. According to a memorandum dated May 6 from John A. Calhoun, the Director of
the Executive Secretariat, to Secretary of State Herter, the President on May 5 approved

ACTION: a) Subject to the further consideration mentioned in sub-­
paragraph b(i), and taking into account, in addition to the points raised
in the Cabinet paper,
i) the relatively diminished importance, in the long run, of the esti-
mated differences in costs, when judged against other considerations, and
ii) the possibility of higher tolls because of full-speed transit,
the President indicated his favorable inclination to the
Recommendations of CP - 60 - 108, with the proviso that the nuclear
excavation of a trans-Mexican route be included as one of the most
likely alternatives—­this in view of:
—­the friendliness of the Mexican Government;
—­the savings to shippers in the lessened coast-­to-coast distance.
b) The President requested the staff of the Department of State to
prepare for use upon the return of Acting Secretary Dillon materials on
the basis of which he may advise the President as to
i) the diplomatic considerations involved in negotiating respec-
tively a Mexican, Colombian or Panamanian route, this matter being
scheduled for a subsequent meeting of the National Security Council;
ii) the recommendation of Secretary Brucker, i.e. that favorable
consideration should be given to releasing the text of CF – 60 – 105
and/or a related interim statement in the very near future, and thus
ensuring that the Administration receives the credit for the new pro-
posals which its initiative deserves.
With respect to paragraph (b) (ii) above, the subject report was trans-
mitted to the Department by the Secretary to the Cabinet, Mr. Robert Gray,
requested that the Acting Secretary of State advise him whether a recom-
mendation by Secretary of the Army Brucker, that “the text of Cabinet
Paper 60–108 and/or a related interim statement be released in the very
near future”, was agreeable to the Department of State.
ARA, in consultation with S/AR and S/P, is requested to determine
whether, in the Department’s view, this document might now be released.
A memorandum for the President should be prepared for the signature
of the Acting Secretary outlining the Department’s views on this matter.3
This memorandum should he received, under cover of an appropriate
John H. Stutesman
Cabinet Assistant
3. For the Acting Secretary of State’s memorandum of May 4 to the President, see
Document PM–45.
4 Rubottom’s memorandum of May 2 to the Acting Secretary of State is in the

Panama  965
PM–45.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, May 4, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recommendation Against Release of Text of CP–60–108, “Isthmian Canal
Plans—1960”
With reference to Secretary Brucker’s recommendation at the
cabinet meeting of April 29 that favorable consideration be given to
releasing the text of “Isthmian Canal Plans—1960’ and/or a related
interim statement in the very near future, I recommend that, on for-
eign policy grounds, an embargo be placed on release of the con-
tents of this report until a long-­range Isthmian Canal policy has been
formulated in the National Security Council for your review and
approval. I understand that current plans call for this matter to come
up in the NSC this summer.
Premature release of information contained in “Isthmian Canal
Plans—1960” would greatly complicate our problems in establishing
favorable preconditions to satisfactory negotiations for a new Canal at
whatever location may be decided upon as a result of NSC consider-
ation. Release of the document at this particular time would also be
likely to adversely affect our posture in the nuclear test ban negotia-
tions. Therefore, I recommend that the question of how and when this
report might be released should be considered at the same time the
Panama Canal paper comes before the NSC.
If you should wish, Secretary Herter or I would be happy to dis-
cuss with you in more detail the foreign policy considerations involved
in this matter.2
Acting Secretary
Cabinet Paper-Privileged.
2 According to Calhoun’s memorandum of May 6 to Secretary of State Herter, the
President, in addition to approving the draft record of action of the Cabinet meeting on
April 29, also accepted Acting Secretary of State Dillon’s recommendation against releas-
ing the text of the Panama Canal Company’s report. (Presidential Cabinet Meetings, Lot

PM–46.
Letter from the Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary
of the Army (Brucker)1
Washington, May 4, 1960.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
I refer to your letter of April 29 to the Secretary of State2 asking
for the draft language of a proposed Executive Order concerning the
status of our Ambassador to the Republic of Panama and the agenda
of the other Panamanian topics for discussion. This was in connec-
tion with the meetings on Panama scheduled for May 10 and May 11.
As your office has already been informed by telephone, the Secretary
has requested that these meetings be postponed until after the Summit3
in view of the fact that he will have only three working days here between
his return from Tehran and Istanbul and his departure for the Summit.
With respect to the Executive Order we have not completed our
study but will of course send you a copy when this is done. It is my
understanding that the suggested agenda will be along the lines of the
Secretary’s letter to you of April 8,4 but we shall be in touch with you
again after the meetings have been re-­scheduled.
Sincerely yours,
DOUGLAS DILLON
Acting Secretary
3 The Acting Secretary of State was referring to the Heads of Government and Chiefs
meetings is printed in Foreign Relations, vol. VII, part 1, Western European Integration
and Security; Canada.
4 See Document PM–40.
PM–47.
Editorial Note
On May 8, 1960, presidential elections were held in Panama to
select a successor to President Ernesto de la Guardia, Jr., whose four-­
year term expired in the autumn. Dr. Roberto F. Chiari was elected the
new President of Panama, and he assumed office on October 1, 1960.
Documentation concerning the election campaign is in Department of
State file 719.00.

Panama  967
PM–48.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, May 20, 1960.
SUBJECT
Diplomatic Considerations in Negotiating An Isthmian Sea Level Canal Route (CP-60-108)
With reference to your request at the Cabinet meeting of April 29
that you be advised of diplomatic considerations involved in negotiat-
ing a route for an Isthmian sea level canal to be constructed by nuclear
excavation techniques outside the Canal Zone, I present some conclu-
sions for your consideration.
Mexico: While it is difficult to predict accurately what the state
of our relations with any of those countries will be a decade hence,
Mexico has made it clear that it would require complete control over
a Tehuantepec canal free from any foreign influence, including the
United States. Mexico’s well-­known sensitivity on sovereignty matters
and its extreme reluctance to cooperate in common defense problems
are other factors which must be considered. Its present policy of friend-
ship toward us is relatively recent and not necessarily permanent.
Colombia would almost certainly want sovereignty over a new
canal, a substantial share of the profits, and a strong voice in its opera-
tion, with the defense responsibility primarily ours.
Nicaragua: We have treaty rights in Nicaragua but negotiations for a
canal route would be required not only with that country but also with one
or more of the neighboring states of Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Honduras
concerning any rights they may have in the area of the selected route. This
was specified in the United States Senate’s consent to the ratification of
the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty in 1916.2 It is therefore clear that acquiring the
right of way for a Nicaraguan Canal would involve very complex negoti-
ations affecting four countries—a ­most difficult undertaking.
Panama: Based on our half-­century experience with Panama, it is clear
that we will never be granted the same broad rights we now have in the
Canal Zone. Additionally some mutually satisfactory arrangement would
be required to permit abrogation of our present treaty structure with that
country. This should preferably be an economic assistance program to
assist Panama toward political and economic stability and to reduce its
dependence on canal revenues. Such is clearly within our capabilities, if
undertaken and pursued with resolution and adequate resources.
Privileged. Drafted by Sharp.
2. For the text of the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty signed at Washington on August 5,

Further diplomatic consideration common to all potential sites is
the reaction to the employment of nuclear explosives for construction.
The problem of creating the proper psycho-­political atmosphere will
require an exhaustive testing and development program in the continen-
tal United States to prove that no harmful effects would be suffered by
local populations. Moreover, our commitments under any future inter-
national agreements on nuclear controls would have to be considered.
In the light of these considerations, I believe it is premature to attempt
within the near future to select a location for a sea level canal replace-
ment of the Panama Canal. The Report of the Panama Canal Company
which the Cabinet has considered estimates that if its recommendations
are accepted we have approximately ten years to prepare the way for
negotiations on a location of our own selection. While I believe there are
strong advantages in your making a decision in principle in favor of a
sea level canal—­should the National Security Council so recommend—I
believe the location should be deferred until we have had an opportunity
to formulate and implement policies which might considerably improve
the prospects of long-­range stability within both Panama and Colombia.
DOUGLAS DILLON
Acting Secretary
PM–49.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Prepared in
the Office of the Secretary of State1
Washington, August 9, 1960.
MEMORANDUM OF TELEPHONE CONVERSATION
WITH THE PRESIDENT
The President telephoned and said normally he never sends any
message to the Secretary by one of his Ambassadors, but the President
said he had just been talking to our new Ambassador to Panama2
about the problems still there and that Ambassador Farland brought
up something the President never knew, i.e. he said that Harrington
started the custom of flying our flag only 37 days a year over our
Embassy. The President said he told Farland that with Harrington
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, Telephone Conversations. The conver-
sation began at 12:10 p.m.
was appointed Ambassador on June 24 and presented his credentials in Panama City on
August 29.

Panama  969
gone, a new President, the Governor gone and Gaither gone, maybe
this would be a good time to make a little arrangement, beginning on
such and such a date, to start the custom of flying the flag all the time
over our Embassy and to fly both the American and the Panamanian
flags from poles of equal height at the Headquarters of the Panama Canal
Zone to demonstrate our recognition that residual sovereignty rests
with Panama. The President said he told Farland to ask the Secretary
to look this idea over to see if the Secretary thinks it is a good thing,
and if the Secretary does think it is good, he could check with the Army
and then the Secretary could put out a directive or the President could,
he didn’t care which. The President said perhaps we could just make it
the day after Congress which would keep Flood from going crazy. The
Secretary said Flood is threatening all sorts of things; The President said
Farland might, although we don’t have the authority, make the proposal
to the new President and see if it couldn’t be worked out so this could
be accomplished—­not announce it, but just see if we can just do it. The
Secretary said he would give this the most careful consideration.
The Secretary then said he hoped the President had liked
Ambassador Farland, and the President said he did; that he had met
him before. The Secretary said he has done so well that we hope he will
permanently join the ranks of the Foreign Service.
PM–50.
Letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the
Army (Brucker)1
Washington, August 12, 1960.
Dear Wilber:
Following the discussion on Panama at our meeting of April 6, I wrote
to you on April 82 outlining my understanding of the conclusions we
reached in the hope that we could get together soon thereafter on the four
points we had under review, prior to seeing the President. Unfortunately,
due to my very busy schedule in the ensuing weeks, it was impossible
to give attention to the matter, and Acting Secretary Dillon wrote you on
May 43 to inform you of the delay which had been encountered.
by Sharp on July 19.
2. See Document PM–39.
3. See Document PM–40.

In the Interim, we have completed the study on the precedence of
the Ambassador in making decisions on Canal Zone activities which have
implications for our relations with the Republic of Panama. After careful
consideration, we believe that the precedence of the Ambassador should
relate not only to decisions affecting our relations with Panama, but also to
decisions affecting our relations with other countries. I am enclosing a copy
which is in line with the above and which I should like to discuss with you
at our next meeting before presenting it for the President’s consideration.
With respect to my suggestion that a representative of this
Department be named to the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal
Company when a vacancy occurs, I am not quite clear whether you
accepted Livie Merchant as an individual or as a position. As I wrote
you in my April 8 letter, I think it important that the principle be estab-
lished that the Department of State will be permanently represented on
the Board of Directors at the Under Secretary level. It seems to me that,
until a vacancy occurs on the Board, our representative might serve as an
observer, thus giving the same foreign policy guidance to the Company
that will be available when he becomes a member of the Board.
On the issue of a civilian versus a military Governor of the Canal
Zone, you will recall that we were not able to come to a meeting of the
minds. Although Major General Carter has recently begun his four year
term as Governor, has made an excellent start and has shown with-
out a doubt that he has a profound sense of public relations, I think
we should still establish the principle that the Governor be a civilian.
I want to make it clear that a man of extremely high caliber would be
required in order not to defeat the purpose of appointment.
With reference to the issue of the display of the Panamanian Flag in
the Canal Zone, we were agreed on April 6 that no decision be taken at
that time. Since that date, however, we have become increasingly con-
cerned over the possibility of a recurrence of the events of last November
on the anniversary date this fall. In conversations in June with senior
officers of the Department, both the present administration in Panama
and President-­elect Chiari voiced the fear that disturbances would occur
if a favorable decision had not been made by November 3. In our view,
Congressional resistance, which still persists, has been the overriding
factor in the unwillingness thus far to set a recommendation before the
President. We feel, however, that the new Congress will not react as
strongly as the present one has when presented with a decision which
is the President’s to make, in any event. Therefore, I should like to dis-
cuss with you at our next meeting, and prior to our meeting with the
4. Not found.
1946, see II Federal Register 7329.

Panama  971
President, the possibility of a joint Army-State-Defense recommendation
to the President that, as of November 3, 1960, the flags of the United
States and Panama be flown on a daily basis in the Canal Zone in a spe-
cial location, readily visible from the Republic of Panama, in recogni-
tion of Panama’s titular sovereignty over the territory of the Canal Zone.
Our idea is that the notification to the Government of Panama would be
explicit in setting forth our understanding of the significance of this act,
that our treaty rights in the Zone would remain unaffected by the joint
flag display. We would certainly indicate that in its reply the Government
of Panama should acknowledge that the proposed action would only be
in recognition of Panamanian titular sovereignty over the Zone.
I hope that we can arrange to meet soon with the President on the mat-
ters outlined above and, when an appointment has been made, I will be in
touch with you so we can discuss them together a day or so beforehand.
With warmest personal regards.
Most sincerely,
Christian A. Herter
PM–51.
Memorandum from the Director of the Executive
Secretariat (Calhoun) to the President’s Staff Secretary
(Goodpaster)1
Washington, August 22, 1960.
SUBJECT
Senator Green’s Letter on Implementation of Nine Point program for Panama.2
In accordance with your request of August 15, I am enclosing a
suggested reply to Senator Green for Mr. McCabe’s signature. Senator
Green’s letter is returned for your files.
Walter J. Stoessel. Jr.
John A. Calhoun3
August 18.
2 A copy of Senator Green’s letter of August 12 to the President is attached to the
source text, but not printed here.
3. Walter J. Stoessel, Jr., the Deputy Director of the Executive Secretariat, signed for
Calhoun.

[Enclosure]
SUGGESTED REPLY
Dear Senator Green:
Further to my letter of August fifteenth4 in reply to yours of August
twelfth to the President, concerning the program for the improvement
of relations between the United States and Panama which the President
approved on April nineteenth, I am pleased to be able to inform you of
the following actions which have been taken on each of the nine points
contained in the program.
of 10 percent in the wages of persons in the appropriate categories.
Point 2. The apprentice training program was expanded by the
appointment of 27 Panamanian apprentices in July 1960, two more than
the number originally specified.
Point 3. The construction of 500 housing units in the Canal Zone is
scheduled in the Capital Budget program of the Panama Canal Company
beginning in FY 1960. The program now developed provides for the con-
Twelve units were begun in FY 1960 and completion of the program is
scheduled in FY 1965 with the construction of 88 apartments.
Point 4. Meetings have been and are being held here to consider
the various plans and proposals that have been developed for con-
struction and financing of 500 housing units in Panama for Canal Zone
employees. It is understood that the Development Loan Fund is pres-
ently entertaining a proposal for a guarantee to private capital inter-
ested in financing this project.
Point 5. The Panama Canal Company has advertised for bids for
the construction of a new water main and contracts will be let in the
near future, following the opening of the bids.
Point 6. Effective July 1 the rate at which water is sold to the
Government of Panama for distribution in the cities of Panama and Colon
was reduced from approximately [illegible] cents to 7.5 cents for the first
100,000 cubic feet and to 7 cents for additional units of this amount.
Point 7. Legislation enacted by the United States Congress was
increase in cash relief payments effective as of July 1, 1960.
Point 8. Salaries of teachers in the Canal Zone Latin American
4. A copy of McCabe’s letter of August 15 to Senator Green is attached to the source
text, but not printed.

Panama  973
Point 9. A continuing review at the highest levels of the list of jobs
reserved for citizens of the United States has been undertaken by the
U.S. agencies in the Canal Zone.
I hope that the foregoing information will satisfy your request as to
the progress which has been made on the President’s program.5
Kind regards,
Sincerely,
Edward A. McCabe
Administrative Assistant to the President
5 No evidence has been found to indicate whether McCabe signed this draft reply
and sent it to Senator Green.
PM–52.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1
Washington, September 1, 1960
SUBJECT
Various Problems Relating to Panama Including the Flag Issue
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Secretary of State Herter
Major General Wilton B. Persons, Assistant to the President
Livingston T. Merchant, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
Wilbur Brucker, Secretary of the Army
George H. Roderick, Assistant Secretary of the Army
Lt. Col. John S. Eisenhower, Assistant Staff Secretary
(The attached memorandum for the President2 which had been
intended to be jointly signed and jointly presented to the President
by the Secretary and Governor Brucker as being reflective of the talk
yesterday between Messrs. Herter and Brucker, was not given to the
President in light of Governor Brucker’s unwillingness, expressed just
prior to going into the President’s office, to concur in item IV “Flying
began at 9 a.m.
2 The memorandum intended for the President is not printed.

of the Panama Flag in the Canal Zone.” Accordingly, it was used by
Secretary Herter in his presentation.)
The Secretary of State informed the President that agreement had
been reached with Secretary Brucker that the Department of State will be
represented on the Board of Governors of the Panama Canal Company
at the Under Secretary of State level, the first appointment to be made
when the next vacancy appears. He said that they had further agreed
that each nomination would be a matter for consultation between the
two Secretaries. Governor Brucker confirmed this agreement and, after
a brief discussion of the topic, the President gave his approval.
The Secretary of State then informed the President that he and
Governor Brucker had agreed it was neither necessary nor desirable
to attempt at this time to establish the principle that future Governors
of the Canal Zone should be civilians. The President remarked that 30
years ago the defense of the Canal Zone was the most important ele-
ment in our relations but that with the development of missiles this
factor was no longer controlling. Hence his general thought was that
whereas the management should be in the hands of engineers the
Governor should be a civilian. He agreed, however, that any such deci-
sion should be deferred at this time and left to the next President.
The Secretary of State then reported his agreement with the
Secretary of the Army for the establishment of the primacy of the
United States Ambassador over the Governor of the Canal Zone in mat-
ters affecting the relations between the United States and the Republic
of Panama or any other nation. He indicated, and the Secretary of the
Army concurred, that they had reached agreement on a draft letter to be
sent by the President to the Secretary of the Army confirming this rela-
tionship.3 He also mentioned that the relationship of the Ambassador
to CINCARIB would be worked out promptly in the future by himself
with the Secretary of Defense and their agreement thereafter referred to
the President. The President indicated his approval.
The Secretary of State then raised the question of the flying of
the Panama flag in the Canal Zone. The Secretary said that, whereas
Governor Brucker did not wholly agree with him, he believed that the
Panama flag should be flown daily with the American flag in the plaza
called Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal Zone opposite the Panamanian
Legislative Building, with both flags raised and lowered by U.S. person-
nel only. He said that this act should be announced with the statement
that the flag was being flown as an act of grace on the part of the United
States in recognition of our friendship for the Panamanian people and
our recognition that titular sovereignty resided in Panama. It should
likewise clearly be stated that this unilateral act did not modify in
3 A copy of the draft letter was attached to the memorandum intended for the
President.

Panama  975
any way our treaties in force with Panama. The Secretary added that
he believed Secretary Brucker, who would wish to speak to this point,
thought the flag should be flown, if such was the President’s decision,
only on national holidays. The Secretary went on to say that time was
important since agitation was beginning to build up on the issue in
Panama, looking toward their national holiday on November 3, and it
was important that the decision on our part should not be announced
under circumstances of any apparent pressure on us. The Secretary
indicated also that we should simultaneously start flying our flag daily
in front of our Embassy. He concluded by pointing out that the so-­called
Gross Amendment to the Department of Commerce appropriations bill
prohibited the use of such funds for the erection of flag poles for this
purpose and recommended that the necessary funds for construction be
provided from the President’s own special projects fund.
The President said that he thought only jingoistic criticism in this
country would be aroused by this act on our part, and he saw no rea-
son for being deterred. He admitted that there was some merit to the
argument that if we flew the flag the Panamanians would interpret this
as a concession on our part and demand further concessions from us.
He felt strongly, however, that it was the right thing to do and said he
would welcome the opportunity to defend the decision under political
attack. He mentioned, however, his strong belief that we should fly our
flag daily at our Embassy and that the Panamanians should understand
in this general connection that we would do so. On the question of fre-
quency of flying, he said he thought that if it were flown on holidays
the principle was thereby established, and that there was no reason
why it should not be flown on a daily basis.
Governor Brucker then launched a long argument against flying
the Panamanian flag under any circumstances. At the outset he noted
that in his view it would be undesirable to give them any implication
that we would be trading our right to fly our own flag at the Embassy
for the flying of the Panama flag in the Canal Zone since this would
look like a reciprocal agreement and not a voluntary act of grace on
our part. (The President agreed on this point.) The Governor stated
that newspaper editorials throughout the country were running 20 to l
against the flying of the flag. He referred to the Gross Amendment and
Selden Resolution4 in the House. He thought that the injection of this
issue in the campaign in this country this fall would be emotional and
duced a Concurrent Resolution in the House of Representatives expressing the sense of
the Congress that any variation in the traditional interpretation of the treaties between
the United States and the Republic of Panama should become treaty items requiring the
approval of Congress. After full debate in the House of Representatives on February 2,

divisive. He concluded by saying that if it were decided to fly the flag
he thought emotions would be minimized both in the United States and
in Panama by flying it only on holidays.
There followed a prolonged discussion pro and con in which
General Persons and Mr. Merchant also participated.
The President at the conclusion of the discussion decided as
follows:
(1) The Panamanian flag should be flown together with the
American flag in Shaler’s Triangle on Panama’s Independence Day,
November 3, and on other days of special significance to Panama and
to the United States. The United States flag would not fly in that place
except on days the Panamanian flag was flown. Two flag poles would
be erected (the source of funds was left undecided), but no elaborate
steps at this time would be taken to create a formal plaza.
(2) The decision should be announced as late in the fall as it was
deemed possible to do without risking the building up of public pres-
sures in Panama for agitation on the issue. September 20 was suggested
as the general time period in which this condition might be met.
(3) The announcement should be made by the Governor of the Canal
Zone in a public statement to the press to the effect that the President
had approved the flying of the Panama flag with the American flag
on holidays and other days of special significance to Panama and to
the United States. The Panamanian Government would be informed by
formal note of this forthcoming statement two hours or so before it was
given to the press. An announcement before October l was desirable in
order to avoid the implication that this was an action directly tied to
the inauguration of a new President in Panama. (Theodore Roosevelt’s
birthday on October 27 was incidentally mentioned as one day suitable
for flying of the flag.) Discretion was left to the Secretary of State as to
the determination of the date for the announcement but the President
requested that he be given adequate advance warning before such an
announcement was made.
(4) A statement elaborating on and justifying the announcement
should be prepared by the State Department and furnished the White
House for Mr. Nixon’s and Mr. Lodge’s use if questions arose after the
announcement during the course of the election campaign.
(5) The American Ambassador in Panama should promptly insti-
tute the practice of flying the U.S. flag in front of the U.S. Embassy
without reference to or other connection with the impending action on
the flying of the Panamanian flag.

Panama  977
PM–53.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy
in Panama1
120. No Distribution Outside Dept. Eyes Only for Ambassador.
Re DEPTEL 111.2
Following for your personal information only is summary of deci-
sions reached Sept 1 at White House meeting attended by President,
The Secretary, Secretary of Army and others:
1. President approved Dept State representation on Board of
Governors of Panama Canal Company at Under Secretary of State
level, the first appointment to be made when next vacancy occurs. Each
nomination is to be matter for consultation between Secretary of State
and Secretary of Army.
2. President decided that no decision would be made at this time
on establishment of principle that future governors should be civilians,
both Secretaries having indicated their agreement it neither necessary
nor desirable so to determine at this time.
3. President approved concept of establishment of primacy of
Ambassador over Governor in foreign affairs matters and agreed that
relationship of Ambassador to CINCARIB was a matter to be worked
out promptly between Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense in
consultation with him. FYI Draft letters on these two items are now in
preparation. End FYI
4. With respect to the Panamanian flag, the President determined
as follows:
(a) The Panamanian flag should be flown together with the U.S.
flag at Shaler’s Triangle on such days as November 3 and on other days
of public significance to Panama and to the U.S. U.S. flag would not fly
there except on days the Panamanian flag was flown. Two flag poles
would be erected (the source of funds was left undecided) but no elab-
orate steps at this time would be taken to create a formal plaza.
(b) This decision should be announced as late in the fall as it was
deemed possible to do without risking the building up of public pres-
sures in Panama for agitation on the issue. September 20 was suggested
as the general time period in which this condition might be met.
(c) The announcement should be made by the Governor in a state-
ment to the press to the effect that the President had approved the fly-
ing of the Panamanian flag with the American flag on holidays and
Drafted by Merchant and Long, approved by the Secretary, and initialled by Merchant.

other days of special significance to the two countries. Panamanian
Govt would be informed by formal note of this forthcoming state-
ment two hours or so before it was given to press. An announcement
before October 1 was desirable in order avoid implication that this was
an action directly tied to inauguration of new Panamanian president
(Theodore Roosevelt’s birthday on October 27 was incidentally men-
tioned as one day suitable for first flying the flag).
5. President also approved the practice of flying U.S. flag daily
in front of Chancery without reference to or other connection with
impending action on the Panama flag.
You are requested not to take any action on 1 through 4 above deci-
sions until further instructions. We shall soon be transmitting to you for
comment drafts of a press release and note on the flag.
You should not consult with Governor or CINCARIB on these mat-
ters until further notice.3
Herter
3 On September 8, Ambassador Farland expressed his concern that the Department
of State’s proposals contained in paragraph 4 (c) would, if carried out, enable the
Communists and ultra-nationalists to characterize the decision to restrict the flying of
the Panamanian flag with the American flag at one designated Canal Zone location as a
half measure adopted begrudgingly. Farland believed that the proposal failed to meet the
official Panamanian request for a regular display of the flag in the Canal Zone and would
only serve to aggravate the situation and to perpetuate the issue as a source of agitation.
On September 9, Maj. John Eisenhower telephoned Merchant to express his concern
with the contents of telegram 132 from Panama City. He stated his belief that Ambassador
Farland’s arguments were persuasive, and that he intended to show the telegram to the
President. (Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Merchant, September 10, 1960;
PM–54.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the
President1
Washington, September 8, 1960.
SUBJECT
Relationship Between the Chief of the United States Mission in Panama and the
­Governor of the Panama Canal Zone
At the meeting in your office on September 1st Secretary Brucker and
I indicated our agreement on the primacy of the Chief of the United States

Panama  979
Mission in Panama over the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone in mat-
ters affecting the relations between the United States and the Republic of
Panama or any other nation. We said further that we would submit for
your consideration draft letters to be sent by you to each of us confirming
this relationship. I enclose for your consideration these draft letters.2
Secretary Brucker concurs in this memorandum.
CHRISTIAN A. HERTER
Christian A. Herter
[Enclosure 1]
Draft of a Letter from the President to the Secretary of the Army
(Brucker)3
Dear Mr. Secretary:
It is my desire that there should be clarification of the relationship
between the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in Panama
and the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone in matters affecting the
relations between the United States and the Republic of Panama or any
other nation.
I therefore direct that in the exercise of his functions the Governor
of the Canal Zone shall consult with the Chief of the United States
Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama on all matters which
may have foreign affairs implications, and with respect to such mat-
ters shall be guided by the foreign policy considerations set forth by
the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of
Panama. In the event of their failure to agree with respect to any pro-
posed action to which the chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission
in the Republic of Panama shall object for reasons of foreign policy,
such action shall be deferred pending a mutual decision thereon by the
Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of State.
I would appreciate it if you would issue appropriate instructions to
the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone.
I am sending a copy of this letter to the Secretary of State for his
information.
Sincerely yours,
2 On September 12, the President signed and transmitted the texts of these letters
to Secretary of State Herter and to Secretary of the Amy Brucker. (Eisenhower Library,
Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series)
3 Drafted by Long.

[Enclosure 2]
Draft of a Letter from the President to the Secretary of State4
Dear Mr. Secretary:
I quote below a letter I have sent today to the Secretary of the Army
on the question of the relationship between the Chief of the United
States Diplomatic Mission in Panama and the Governor of the Panama
Canal Zone:
“It is my desire that there should be clarification of the relationship
between the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in Panama and
the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone in matters affecting the relations
between the United States and the Republic of Panama or any other nation.
“I therefore direct that in the exercise of his functions the Governor
of the Canal Zone shall consult with the Chief of the United States
Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama on all matters which
may have foreign affairs implications, and with respect to such mat-
ters shall be guided by the foreign policy considerations set forth by
the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of
Panama. In the event of their failure to agree with respect to any pro-
posed action to which the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission
in the Republic of Panama shall object for reasons of foreign policy,
such action shall be deferred pending a mutual decision thereon by the
Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of State.
“I would appreciate it if you would issue appropriate instructions
to the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone.”
Sincerely yours,
4 Drafted by Long.
PM–55.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the President’s Staff
Secretary (Goodpaster)1
Washington, September 14, 1960.
MEMORANDUM OF CONFERENCE WITH THE PRESIDENT
September 12, 1960
Others present: Secretary Herter, General Goodpaster
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret.

Panama  981
[Here follows a discussion of the President’s address which he was
Nations; a report about Under Secretary of State Dillon’s activities in
Bogotá at the third meeting of the Special Committee of the Council of
the Organization of American States to study the formulation of new
measures of economic development; a further consideration of other
matters pertaining to the arrival of certain chiefs of state and heads of
government in New York for the 15th General Assembly of the United
Nations; and a report on the situation in the Congo and measures that
the United States should undertake at the United Nations in connection
with the crisis.]
Mr. Herter next brought up the question of the Panamanian flag.
He referred to the message which Ambassador Farland had sent,2 and
also said he had received a letter from Chester Bowles3 regarding the
possibility of trouble on October 3rd. The President had read the mes-
sage from Ambassador Farland. He asked Mr. Herter to get in touch
with Secretary Brucker and tell him that although the President had
agreed on the solution of flying the Panamanian flag on selected holi-
days, he had not thought it was really the right one. He now felt that the
decision should be taken to fly the flag all the time. He said he thought
we should just do this and not announce it in advance or tell anybody
about it. Mr. Herter said he had planned to have the Panamanians told
two hours or so in advance, and would suggest having the flag put up
on about September 29th. The President asked for my reaction. I told
him that I thought flying the flag was appropriate evidence of “titular”
sovereignty; that if it is flown it should be flown constantly, and not as
an “act of grace” on ceremonial occasions; that the decision should be
taken to do this, that it should be done soon, preferably within a matter
of a few days and certainly in no more than a week since word of the
decision would inevitably leak out of the departments concerned, that
there should be no advance announcement. Mr. Herter said one of the
problems is the legislative bar against defense funds to put up a flag
pole. Mr. Herter suggested the cost could be met out of the President’s
Special Projects Fund. I told the President I was not sure this would be
an appropriate source of funds, but that there seemed to be no doubt
that funds could be found somewhere to pay these costs. After discus-
sion the President agreed that Governor Brucker should be told to put
up the poles (or modify existing poles) and then look for the funds.
3 Not found.

[Here follows a discussion of whether the President should attend
the meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Paris in December.]
A.J. Goodpaster4
Brigadier General, USA
4 Goodpaster initialled the source text.
PM–56.
Letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of
Defense (Gates)1
Washington, September 14, 1960.
Dear Tom:
I think you are aware of recent discussions Wilber Brucker and I
have had concerning clarification of the relationship between the Chief
of the United States Diplomatic Mission in Panama and the Governor
of the Canal Zone in matters affecting the relations between the United
States and Panama. On September 12th the President directed Wilber to
issue appropriate instructions in this regard.2
At a meeting at the White House on September 1st I mentioned
to the President that I wanted, in a similar vein, to discuss with you
the relationship of the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission
in Panama to the Commander-­in-Chief of the Caribbean Command
(CINCARIB). The President agreed that it would be useful for the two
of us to come to an agreement on the matter if possible.
I therefore suggest for your consideration the following draft
language which the President, as he did with Wilber and me on the
Governor-Ambassador relationship, might send the two of us on the
CINCARIB -Ambassador relationship:
“In the exercise of his functions the Commander-­in-Chief, Caribbean
Command, shall consult with the Chief of the United States Diplomatic
Mission in the Republic of Panama on all operations and activities of
his headquarters which may have foreign affairs implications affect-
ing relations between the United States and the Republic of Panama,
and with respect to such matters shall be guided by the foreign policy

Panama  983
considerations set forth by the Chief of the United States Diplomatic
Mission in the Republic of Panama. In the event of their failure to agree
with respect to any proposed action to which the Chief of the United
States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama shall object for rea-
sons of foreign policy, such action shall be deferred pending a mutual
decision thereon by the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State.”
If you agree with this draft, I would suggest that we two send a
memorandum to the President requesting his approval and suggesting
he issue us confirming instructions. If you have difficulty with this, I
would be delighted to discuss the matter with you.3
With warmest personal regards,
Most sincerely,
Christian A. Herter
the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, to Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs Merchant, the Department of State was still awaiting a reply to this letter
PM–57.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Panama1
133. Eyes Only Ambassador.
The President has determined that the Panamanian flag will be
flown together with the U.S. flag on a daily basis in Shaler’s Triangle,
this action to be initiated as soon as possible.
If you see no overriding objection to following schedule, Dept
suggests:
Foreign Office the note quoted in Part 1 of Deptel 1342 and the Dept will
at the same hour deliver to the Panamanian Embassy in Washington
the note quoted in Part 2 of Deptel 134.
by Long and Merchant on September 14, approved by Herter, and initialled by Long.
2 See Document PM–58.

quoted in Part 3 of Deptel 134.
3. FYI/ Concurrently, the White House will issue parallel state-
ment, text of which will be cabled for your info when available.
4. FYI / As soon thereafter as physically possible, i.e., as soon as flag
poles can be erected and Shaler’s Triangle suitably neatened, hopefully
following day but certainly before October 1st, the flags will be flown.
5. FYI. The flags will be raised and lowered by U.S. personnel only.
6. FYI. The modest costs incurred for flag poles, etc., will be met
through special funds. A clarifying message on this will follow shortly.
END FYI
separate message.3
In absence serious objection your part, in which case cable NIACT,
you are instructed immediately to inform the Governor of your instruc-
tions. You should also inform CINCARIB, stressing to both necessity
holding in confidence till public announcement. You may inform them
these instructions have White House concurrence.
Please comment urgently on the drafts sent in DEPTEL 134.
Dillon
3 Not found.
PM–58.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Panama1
“Excellency: I have the honor to refer to the desire heretofore
expressed by the Government of the Republic of Panama to have the
Panamanian flag flown in the Canal Zone.
I am pleased to state that, after the highest consideration by my
Government, I am instructed to inform you that as a further reflection of
by Long on September 14, approved by Herter, and initialled by Long.
2 See Document PM–57.

Panama  985
the genuine friendship existing between our two Governments and peo-
ples, my Government has determined that as a voluntary act on the part of
the United States, and in recognition of the titular sovereignty residing in
the Republic of Panama with respect to the Canal Zone, the Panamanian
flag will hereafter be flown together with the United States flag on a daily
basis in the area known as Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal Zone. This deter-
mination is in nowise to be considered as modifying in any way the trea-
ties and agreements in force between the United States and Panama.
“Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest
consideration.”
Excellency: I have the honor to refer to the Panamanian note
cessor. His Excellency, Ricardo M. Arias, stating it to be the aim of
the Government of Panama to have the Panamanian flag raised reg-
ularly in the territory of the Canal Zone and also stating the view
that Panama, under existing treaties, has “merely accorded” to the
Government of the United States “the rights, power, and authority
required by the United States for purposes of maintenance, operation,
sanitation, and protection of the Canal”.
After careful consideration, I must inform your Excellency that the
Government of the United States cannot agree with, and must reject,
the position of the Panamanian Government just quoted and contained
in the note under reference.
However, I am pleased to state that—­as you may be aware—­
the United States Ambassador to the Republic of Panama has today
informed His Excellency, Miguel J. Moreno, Jr., Minister of Foreign
Relations of Panama, that as a further reflection of the genuine friend-
ship existing between the Governments and peoples of our two coun-
tries, the Government of the United States has determined that as a
voluntary act on its part, and in recognition of the titular sovereignty
residing in the Republic of Panama with respect to the Canal Zone, the
Panamanian flag will hereafter be flown together with the United States
flag on a daily basis in the area known as Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal
Zone. This determination is in nowise to be considered as modifying in
any way the treaties and agreements in force between the United States
and the Republic of Panama.4
4 Commenting on the text of this note in telegram 152 from Panama City on
September 16, Ambassador Farland informed the Department of State that Foreign
Minister Moreno was in Mexico until September 18 or 19 and recommended that his name
be deleted from the note and be replaced with that of Rodrigo Miro, the Acting Foreign

Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest
consideration.”
“I am happy to announce that President Eisenhower has, as a vol-
untary and unilateral decision on the part of the Government of the
United States, approved the flying of the flag of the Republic of Panama
together with the United States flag on a daily basis in Shaler’s Triangle
in the Canal Zone. This decision is in reflection of the genuine friend-
ship that exists between our Governments and peoples, and symbolizes
the close ties that unite us.”
PM–59.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Panama (Farland) to
the Department of State1
156. President informed and note delivered simultaneously Acting
President De la Guardia expressed great satisfaction U.S. decision,
stating his faith in President Eisenhower and in latter’s understand-
ing Panama’s problems had always been basis his firm belief flag issue
would be favorably considered and resolved satisfactorily. President
added he felt U.S. decision would assist create climate for discus-
sions on subject construction sea-­level canal which he foresaw a cer-
tainty near future. He expressed some worry over-wording of note on
grounds extremist elements might seize upon try make further trouble
but did not specify that which created concern. Embassy believes he
had reference to statement that decision in nowwise be considered as
modifying treaties and agreements in force between U.S. and Panama.
President-­elect delighted news and promised with flag issue out of
way full cooperation re-­establish friendly and cooperative atmosphere
for moving ahead together. I took occasion point out primary obstacle to
close and fruitful cooperation was communist subversion spearheaded
now in Panama by Cubans. President-­elect said his government pre-
pared take action but information activities Cubans in Panama lacking
2 For the text of the White House press release, see the Department of State Bulletin,

Panama  987
and help from us this regard would be valuable. Initial reaction of dip-
lomatic corp highly favorable.
Discussions with Carter have been cooperative. Flags will be flown
on or before September 20. Carter desirous formal but simple flag rais-
ing ceremony with President De la Guardia in attendance. Instructions
in this regard desired at once.3
Ambassador Farland that it approved of a formal but simple flag raising ceremony with
President de la Guarlia in attendance, provided that Farland and Gov. Carter agreed on
the details and plans and provided that United States personnel carried out the flag raising
from Panama City, September 21, Ambassador Farland reported that the Panamanian and
American flags had been raised at 10 a.m. that morning in Shaler Triangle in a simple but
appropriate ceremony attended by Panamanian Foreign Minister Moreno and other offi-
cials of the Foreign Office, members of the Cabinet, and the Commander of the National
PM–60.
Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs (Mallory) to the Acting
Secretary of State1
Washington, September 23, 1960.
SUBJECT
Ceremony on Occasion of Initial Flying of Panamanian Flag in Canal Zone.
This paper is in response to your oral request of this morning for
the background on the decision to hold a ceremony on the occasion of
the initial flying of the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone.
The actual genesis of the concept of a ceremony is not clear but
Ambassador Farland reported on September 17 that Governor Carter
was desirous of a “formal but simple flag raising ceremony with
President de la Guardia in attendance” and he requested instructions
in this regard. (Tab A).2
July 1960.” Secret. Drafted by Sharp. The source text is an uninitialled carbon copy.
2 Not attached to the source text. The document at Tab A, telegram 156 from Panama
City, September 17, is printed as Document PM–59.

The Department approved such a ceremony subject to agreement
between the Governor and the Ambassador on the procedure and that
all physical duties involved be carried out by U.S. personnel. (Tab B).3
Ambassador Farland on September 20 recommended that President
de la Guardia be invited to raise the Panamanian flag at the ceremony,
(Tab C)4 but the Department turned down that recommendation on the
grounds that (a) it would be a precedent for the possible further exercise
of sovereign rights in the Zone by Panama thus prejudicing our treaty
position and (b) would expose us to even greater Congressional and pub-
lic criticism in this country than that to which we have already been sub-
jected. The Department did, however, authorize a ceremony, the extent of
which was left to Ambassador Farland’s discretion. (Tab D).5
Notwithstanding the genesis of the decision, it appeared that the
initial display of the Panamanian flag with ours in the Canal Zone as
a symbol of Panama’s titular sovereignty, would require some formal
ceremony were it to have the desired impact on Panamanians, for a
routine raising without any note being taken of the event, could well be
interpreted as an off-­hand and rather ungracious performance of an act,
which was intended to have emotional impact.
3 Not attached to the source text. For a summary of the document at Tab B, tele-
4 Not attached to the source text. The document at Tab C, not printed, was tele-
5 Not attached to the source text. The document at Tab D, not printed, was telegram
PM–61.
Editorial Note
On October 1, 1960, Dr. Roberto Chiari, the victor in Panama’s
presidential elections held on May 8, 1960, was sworn in as President of
Panama for a four-­year term. In his inaugural speech President Chiari
expressed gratification at the United States’ recognition of Panama’s tit-
ular sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone, but at the same time he
maintained that the United States had not complied fully with the terms
of the treaties covering Canal Zone operations. He was optimistic, how-
ever, that the United States’ recognition of Panama’s titular sovereignty
foreshadowed a new era of good relations that would enable the two
nations to find practical solutions to existing problems. Documentation
concerning President Chiari’s inauguration is in decimal file 719.11.

Panama  989
PM–62.
Editorial Note
In an exchange of notes on October 31, 1960, between Joseph S.
Farland, the American Ambassador in Panama, and Galileo Solís,
the Panamanian Minister of Foreign Relations, the United States
Government and the Republic of Panama concluded an agreement
that entered into force on October 31, 1960, whereby the Canal Zone
Government and the Republic of Panama established procedures for
the reciprocal recognition of motor vehicle operator’s licenses. For the
texts of the notes exchanged, see 12 UST 301. Documentation concern-
ing the negotiation of this agreement is in decimal file 611.1913.
PM–63.
Memorandum from the Director of the Executive
Secretariat (Stoessel) to the President’s Staff Secretary
(Goodpaster)1
Washington, November 2, 1960.
SUBJECT
Recent Developments in U.S. Economic Assistance to Panama
Under Secretary Dillon has suggested that the President might be
interested in recent developments concerning United States economic
assistance to Panama. At his request, the enclosed brief summary has
been prepared which, if convenient, you may wish to bring to the atten-
tion of the President.
Walter J. Stoessel, Jr.
[Enclosure]
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN U.S. ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
TO PANAMA
Upon the recommendation of all interested agencies, on October
31 Under Secretary Dillon approved an allocation from FY 1961
Contingency Funds of $6.0 million for emergency assistance to Panama,
of which $5.0 million is to be a fifteen year loan to help the recently

inaugurated government of President Chiari in facing a serious current
budget problem. The balance of $1 million is to be used to initiate sev-
eral small social development projects of rapid visual impact.
Other recent U.S. economic assistance to Panama includes a $5.3
million loan by DLF, part of a $14.5 million program for farm-­to-­market
roads, and a $2.5 million loan for low cost housing in Panama, thus
implementing the last of the Nine Points in the President’s Program,
announced on April 19, to improve our relations with Panama.
Several sources report that current accounts due and payable by
the Panamanian Treasury amount to about $16 million with no cash
position. Arrearages have been running at the rate of about $1 million
per month. These deficits can be attributed to fiscal irresponsibility on
the part of the previous regime.
The new administration came to power in orderly fashion on
October 1. President Chiari has come out for an austerity program, rec-
ognizes the urgent need for socio-­economic reforms and advocates the
diversification of the economy away from its present overdependence
on the Canal Zone. Chiari is against Communism, is anti-Castro, has
praised ICA and the President’s initiative for a Latin American social
and economic development program. Thus far, at least, he seems more
interested in promoting a peaceful socio-­economic evolution for his
country, rather than seeking further economic concessions from our
presence in the Canal Zone.
The ability of the Chiari Government to survive over the next six
months and carry out badly needed administrative and budgetary
reform depends upon an immediate infusion of financial assistance
to restore fiscal order in the budget and a greater measure of liquid-
ity in the nation’s banks. Should the present government fall, social
and political chaos would most likely follow. A successor government
might well be a Castro-oriented or -inspired regime with Communist
leanings; a government which in view of our long range strategic inter-
ests there, would undoubtedly constitute a serious threat to the mainte-
nance of our presence in Panama.
Our relations with Panama have improved steadily since the
unfortunate violence of a year ago as a result of the new Canal Zone
procurement policies, the President’s Nine Point Program, the flag
decision, and the efforts of the newly appointed principal United States
representatives in the area. The Chiari regime, if it can survive its cur-
rent financial crisis, offers hope for political stability, peaceful socio-­
economic evolution, and a friendly and reasonable relationship with
us, all necessary to the attainment of our Isthmus policy objectives.

Paraguay: U.S. Relations with Paraguay
PA–1.
Letter from the Ambassador in Paraguay (Ploeser) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom)1
Asuncion, March 21, 1958.
Dear Dick:
It is generally understood that Paraguay is certainly in a transi-
tional period. Paraguayan politics, as you know, are rarely dull.
At the moment, the Colorado Party has a factional fight, and the
Liberals and Fehreristas and elements of the Catholic Church are all
showing activity which tends to cause unrest and uncertainty. In each
of these segments of activity, we find active support of the Communist
groups, even in the case of the Priest Ramón Talavera. He has had
among his principal advisors a well-known Communist, Miguel Chasse
Sardi. These have all been reported to the Department, and there will
be more to come. All of this puts the political sagacity and astuteness of
President Stroessner to the supreme test.
It is our opinion here that any disorderly change in the Government
might, at least for a substantial period, be an open door for Communist
infiltration of the government, and that the Communists, by their infil-
tration technique, are in a position to act quickly. The Stroessner gov-
ernment believes, and so do we, that there are some Communists who
have already infiltrated. While we have some suspicions as to who they
may be, the Government of Paraguay is not always in a position to have
documentary proof or adequate evidence to make a dismissal in the
face of opposition to such dismissal. The pattern has been clear in cer-
tain instances. The action of the President in some of his very important
decisions shows a total unwillingness to yield to the influences of these
people.
inal]. Secret; Official-Informal. The source text is a carbon copy bearing [illegible in the
original] Ploeser’s typed signature, [illegible in the original]: “[illegible in the original]
sent [to] USA [?] for reply.”

President Stroessner [text not declassified] has supported our
Government in three important aspects:
First, he has refused to recognize the Soviet or any of the Iron
Curtain countries, and in this refusal has carried it to the extent that
any and all of their missions or individual visitors have been refused
visas. This has been true during my experience.
Second, he has given us consistent support in international organi-
zations, even when this has put him at certain times in sharp opposition
to some of his Latin American neighbors.
Third, he has supported the stabilization program instituted by
the International Monetary Fund and supported by the U.S. Treasury.
He has done this in critical moments against the opposition of influ-
ential members of his own cabinet and the military. Since the first of
November, the exchange rate of the guaraní to the dollar has not varied
more than one point.
In addition, he has assured my deputy, Ralph Hilton, and myself upon
the occasion of our last visit, that the program for his next term of office is
one of gradual democratization of Paraguay. This is good to hear, but we
are well aware of the lack of tradition of democracy in Paraguay and of
the questionable readiness of the people for full democratic government.
It seems to be our interest to do those things which will maintain
a stable government in Paraguay. [text not declassified] This is my pol-
icy, within the framework of our basic policy documents relating to this
hemisphere. When I use the first person, I do it only on the assumption
of my responsibility. This Embassy which is operating in complete agree-
ment, based upon its individual and collective opinions, works as a team.
There are several things we could do which could in no way put
the U.S. in an embarrassing position but which would certainly demon-
strate our friendship for the people of Paraguay and would be sound
and durable economically under whatever government the future may
bring. I think I state them in the order of their time importance and of
our ability to do them.
If all the recommendations here could be authorized to this
Embassy, we could bring about their announcement in their proper
timing as only we can judge it.
The recommendations are:
(1) Authorizing DLF private loan sector two and a half million
dollars credit to be extended through a local Development Loan Bank
which would carry a label to indicate that these are American funds.
This Development Loan Bank can be organized under the joint manage-
ment of the two privately owned banks in Paraguay, the First National
City of New York and the Bank of London & South America (British).
The announcement should be made and such Development Loan Bank
should be organized forthwith under private management for private

Paraguay  993
enterprise operation only. In my opinion, the government of Paraguay
would give this their blessing.
(2) A grant which would complete the Chaco Road connecting
Bolivia and Paraguay to be done as a U.S. gesture to the economic ben-
efit of the two nations – Bolivia and Paraguay. This should be tied into
the use of whatever funds are to be extended to Bolivia so that the road
(a portion of the Pan-American highway) properly ties into the capital
of Bolivia and the capital of Paraguay. Bolivia imports a substantial part
of her food. Paraguay has fertile soil and could well feed many times its
population. The economy of the two countries are in many ways com-
plementary. They are also the only two land-­locked nations in South
America and should pose no problem to those in the Department who
might be understandably concerned over the problem of precedence
insofar as grant aid to Paraguay is concerned. This is an international,
two-­nation plan. I want to make clear that there is no present request
on the part of Paraguay for grant aid or charity in any form. If we make
such a grant, it should be done in adequate amount, in a manner to
emphasize the international aspect, and with every precaution to avoid
the appearance of being a reluctant giver. I am not talking about an
exorbitant amount of money. I believe that with the start that has been
made on the Chaco Road, with the help of the ranchers in the area and
of the Mennonites, and with the use of the military, which is important,
on the construction, that the amount would not be excessive. I would
want to get these figures for you; perhaps $5 million could accomplish
what we want insofar as the Paraguayan end is concerned.
This gesture might well be timed with the Nixon visit,2 ­probably
just prior to his arrival so that he may take the bows when he gets
here. This is particularly beneficial to Bolivia because it means cheaper
food and a higher standard of living as a result. As it is now, I under-
stand that most of Bolivia’s food is imported from the Argentine, none
competitively. While this would not be detrimental to the economy of
Argentina, which has a worldwide market, it would be a new life line
for Bolivia and Paraguay. Storm and the other solid people within the
government of Paraguay are extraordinarly strong advocates of access
to the Bolivian market and the use of Bolivian minerals.
(3) The quick approval of the public works program which we
have presented to the DLF, (Additional supporting technical informa-
tion is being prepared.) (a) The Brazilian road, (b) the Ayala-Oviedo
road, (c) telecommunications. All three of these projects are of equal
economic growth benefit and constitute the unlocking of Paraguay to
other sections of the world – not Bolivia.
goodwill tour of South America. For documentation on the Nixon trip, see Documents

It is toward the accomplishment of our aims that we have politi-
cal and economic stability in Paraguay. I believe with this little added
effort, we can achieve great things for these two nations. I believe we
will strengthen our defense against the Soviet efforts in this area.
These matters are respectfully recommended as matters urgent to
our very important self interest.
With warmest personal regards, I am
Very sincerely yours,
Walter C. Ploeser
PA–2.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 3 pages not declassified.
PA–3.
Memorandum from Jackson W. Wilson of the Office of
South American Affairs to the Director of the Office of
South American Affairs (Bernbaum)1
Washington, May 26, 1958.
SUBJECT
Paraguay: Recommended Program
1.	 Political
Continue to maintain correct friendly relations with present regime but
a. avoid showing any special favor for leaders of Government
themselves
b. emphasize U.S. friendship for Paraguayan people rather than
for Government
through the Officer in Charge of River Plate Affairs, Livingston D. Watrous.

Paraguay  995
Maintain policy of strict non-­intervention in Paraguay’s internal
affairs, but
a. Encourage leaders of Government to move toward more demo-
cratic forms.
2. Economic
Continue to support Paraguay’s stabilization program with finan-
cial assistance for sound development projects but with emphasis on
finishing projects now under way.
Export-Import Bank Loans: Sympathetically consider applications
for specific documented development projects with Paraguay’s debt
carrying capacity. Specifically, support Paraguay’s request for addi-
tional $917,500 to complete waterworks project.
Development Loan Fund: Support Paraguayan requests for loans to
a. cover local currency costs of Export-Import Bank projects already
under way.
b. cover both dollar and local currency costs of a basic communica-
tions system and surfacing of road to Brazil.
c. cover dollar costs of expansion of electric power facilities at
Asunción, Encarnación and Villarrica.
d. provide small dollar credits of developmental nature to business
and industry through a development bank-­type institution.
P.L. 4802 Agreement: Support sale of surplus agricultural products
to Paraguay when this will not interfere with normal marketings of
other supplying countries.
2 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of
PA–4.
Editorial Note
On July 10, 1958, the Export-Import Bank of Washington announced
a $1 million credit to Paraguay to finance installation of Asunción’s first
water supply system. An original $7 million credit to Corporación de
Obras Sanitarias de Asunción (CORPOSANA) was authorized in 1954
to provide a 15 million gallon-per-day water supply and distribution
system for Asunción. The additional credit would enable CORPOSANA
to purchase the necessary construction materials and equipment in the
U.S. in order to increase the number of service connections, in the water
system. Documentation concerning the subject is contained in ARA/
EST Files, Lot 62 D 354, “Eximbank.”

The United States and Paraguay on October 29, 1958, signed a
loan agreement making $2.5 million in development loan funds avail-
able for completion of an all-­weather, rock-­surface road in Paraguay
known as the Route to Brazil, the funds to be used primarily for financ-
ing crushed-­rock surfacing of the section between Coronel Oviedo
and Puerto Presidente Stroessner. The agreement was signed by
Ambassador Juan Plate for the Government of Paraguay and Robert B.
Menapace, Acting Managing Director of the Development Loan Fund,
for the United States. Pertinent documentation is located in ARA/EST
Files: Lot 62 D 354, “DLF.”
PA–5.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Paraguay1
59. Reference Embassy’s despatch No. 111,2 Department desires no
effort be spared toward arresting further propagation views expressed
by Foreign Minister. Implication that aid on FM’s terms should be
granted as reward for willingness stabilize currency and other mea-
sures in Paraguay’s own self-­interest, or to ease FM’s political diffi-
culties, represents fundamental misunderstanding entire economic
development program. Playing east against west, and threat of policy
change, are singularly inappropriate as basis for productive and pro-
gressive Paraguayan foreign policy. U.S. efforts help Paraguay already
generous and FM’s present tactics more likely handicap than encourage
further help. Dept will make clear to FM, if opportunity occurs during
by Clarence A. Boonstra, Deputy Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs, and Charles
C. [illegible in the original], Officer in Charge of Paraguayan Affairs; initialed by Maurice
M. Bernbaum, Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs. Repeated for information as
telegram [illegible in the original] to New York for Assistant Secretary Rubottom, who
was attending the thirteenth regular session of the U.N. General Assembly.
randum of conversation between Ambassador Ploeser and Paraguayan Foreign Minister
[illegible in the original]. In the memorandum of conversation, Ambassador Ploeser
stated that [illegible in the original] indicated that Paraguay was dissatisfied with the
amount of aid it had thus far received from the United States, and expressed a desire for
prompt additional aid amounting to $25 or $30 million. The Ambassador also stated that
[illegible in the original] exhibited impatience with the notion that aid should be based on
the soundness of the country’s fiscal position, and implied that if the United States was
not favorably disposed [illegible in the original] aid, Soviet bloc countries were [illegible
in the original] in helping Paraguay. ([illegible in the original])

Paraguay  997
Washington visit,3 that unjustified insinuations and veiled threats are
not repeat not conducive to cooperation toward solution Paraguay’s
economic problems. Meanwhile will appreciate cable summarizing
your responses to FM on above aspects of his statements4.
ACTING
3 Rubottom met with [illegible in the original] in New York and later reported to
Ambassador Ploeser in Paraguay that [illegible in the original] had expressed views sim-
ilar to [illegible in the original] described in Embassy despatch 111, but that he has not
pressed them in any objectionable way. Rubottom also indicated that he made no com-
S. [illegible in the original] responded that the Ambassador had repeatedly pointed out
the generosity of the United States aid program in Paraguay and the importance of a
Document PA–6.
PA–6.
Telegram from the Chargé in Bolivia (Carter) to the
Department of State1
referred GOP desire massive aid and cited news reports additional
aid Bolivia and Bolivian Congress recommendation trade and diplo-
matic relations Russia. I took occasion emphasize all points reference
telegram leaving no doubt our attitude. Emphasized our aid based
GOP need, that aid Bolivia also aids Paraguay. Later in day confidant
President Stroessner approached me same subject and I replied similar
vein adding would be better if this new approach abandoned before
going any further. He said he would report this back to President. My
impression is conversations had sobering effect both individuals.
Carter
Priority.
2 [illegible in the original].
3 [illegible in the original].

PA–7.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Washington, September 25, 1958.
SUBJECT
United States-Paraguayan Relations; the Paraguayan Foreign Minister Visits the
Department.
PARTICIPANTS:
Dr. Raúl SAPENA Pastor, Paraguayan Foreign Minister
Dr. Juan PLATE, Paraguayan Ambassador to United States
ARA - Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
COPIES TO:
EST - Mr. Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director, EST, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs
EST/P - Mr. Charles C. Carson, Officer-­in-Charge, Paraguayan Affairs
Following the usual pleasantries, the Minister and Mr. Rubottom
alluded to their earlier friendship in the days when the latter was on
duty at our Embassy in Asunción during World War II. Mr. Rubottom
told the Minister that in the course of informal meeting of Latin
American Foreign Ministers just ended2 Secretary Dulles spoke to him
of the Paraguayan chancellor in highly complimentary terms. This
pleased the Minister immensely.
Getting down to business, the Minister said he wished “to lay all
the cards on the table.” Mr. Rubottom cordially invited him to make
himself at home.
The Minister said he was happy to note that general conditions
in Paraguay today are quite good—­both economically and politically.
The national budget for the first half of 1958 had showed a surplus of
some 150 million guaraníes, and although this did not represent a huge
amount of money, the surplus was a sign of improved economic health.
The Minister said that evidence of the nation’s economic advance-
ment also appeared in the current annual report of the International
Monetary Fund, a draft of which he had just read.
Politically, the Minister noted, the Stroessner Government is mov-
ing ahead in its determination to accommodate democratic processes
in Paraguay: the Liberal Party had been allowed to hold a convention
Official Use Only. Drafted by Carsen on October 9. The source text is an uninitialed car-
bon copy.
2  The Foreign Ministers of the American Republics conferred informally in Washington,
September 23–24, to consider and approve measures to strengthen Inter-American eco-
nomic cooperation. For documentation relating to the meeting, see Documents ETA–14, 48.

Paraguay  999
last July, and subsequently to reorganize itself throughout the country;
municipal elections, with opposition participation, would be held soon;
the electoral laws were to be liberalized; and constitutional reform
would be carried out.
Mr. Rubottom commented that Mr. Herbert L. Matthews, editorial
writer of The New York Times was planning to visit Paraguay for sev-
eral days in mid-October. Mr. Rubottom suggested that Mr. Matthews’
presence would afford an excellent opportunity for the GOP to demon-
strate its sincerity about liberalizing the regime. Mr. Rubottom pointed
out that the press of this country is wont to describe the GOP as one
of the three remaining dictatorships in the hemisphere. Mr. Rubottom
said that he knew the Paraguayans would accord Mr. Matthews their
renowned hospitableness; but he hoped the government would also
encourage Mr. Matthews to go beyond official circles and out among
the people of Paraguay, and even among the political opposition. The
Minister intimated that the GOP has nothing to hide, would warmly
welcome Mr. Matthews and would be glad to have him know, and to
publish the truth about, Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said he thought that
it would be extremely important to Paraguay at this juncture for it to
become widely known that the GOP is seriously working to eliminate
its authoritarian character.
The Minister noted that the August 15 inauguration of President
Stroessner for a five-­year term went off smoothly except for one dis-
cordant note which disappointed the President considerably. The
­opposition Liberal Party directorate had been invited to participate in
the ceremonies. Instead of graciously accepting like good Paraguayans,
or at least sending calling cards to the Presidential Palace, they had
transmitted a long, rude, manifesto denouncing the Stroessner govern-
ment. The Minister implied that while the government is ready to do its
part toward establishing political harmony in the country, it cannot go
far without the cooperation of the opposition.
Returning to economic matters, the Minister said that he wished
to express, in behalf of President Stroessner and himself, Paraguay’s
heartfelt gratitude for what the United States has done to assist the
country. However, Paraguay desperately needed, and had to have,
more help. While remarkable economic progress had been achieved
in recent years, Paraguay was still lacking adequate roads and river
transportation facilities to get her products on the markets of the world.
Besides acquiring better transport, the country also needs to increase
production, and in order to do this its people must have farm imple-
ments, machinery, fencing material, silos, warehouses. Paraguay had
every reason to be proud of its unfaltering effort, with U.S. aid and
guidance, to carry out a currency stabilization plan. However, stable
currency, desirable though it may be, is meaningless to the average

Paraguayan unless there is also visible and tangible economic progress.
The Minister pointed out that, by using due-­bills, or IOU’s, the rural
folk can and do manage somehow without any currency at all.
The Minister said that there should be no doubt in the mind of
anyone that Paraguay stands solidly on the side of the United States
and the West. He said that President Stroessner fully recognizes the
fact that the United States is a friend of Paraguay and has helped her
in many ways; but, in his anxiety to see his people enjoy better times,
the President constantly asks his advisors why the United States is
not willing to do more. The Minister said the President wanted him to
repeat in Washington what he had said many times before: Paraguay
would give the United States of anything she has, including air bases.
(At this point, Ambassador Plate remarked that when he is asked about
Paraguay’s position in world affairs today, he replies, “Paraguay is the
aircraft carrier of the Americas”.)
The Minister said that Paraguay’s anti-­communist policy works
against her. It is becoming increasingly difficult to explain to Paraguayan
business people why they are not allowed to trade with communist
countries. For example, an Asunción hardware merchant wishes to buy
farm machinery from the United States, but cannot pay cash in dol-
lars. A Polish manufacturer hears about this, and sends a letter offering
a hundred tractors at an extremely low price, and on easy, long-­term
credit terms. What a blessing it would be if the merchant could get such
attractive offers from the United States. Mr. Rubottom wondered about
the good faith of the Polish offer; and the Minister seemed to agree that
it might be questionable.
Mr. Rubottom indicated that it is not the practice of the United
States to tell her friends among other sovereign nations whether they
should or should not trade with the Sino-Soviet bloc. He suggested,
however, that to his mind two important considerations are involved:
(1) a nation’s principles and (2) the question of whether relations with
the communist world are in that nation’s best self-­interest. The Minister
nodded assent, and pursued the matter no further.
The Minister then said he was constrained to mention Bolivia.
Whereupon, he produced and read a telegram which President
Stroessner had sent him urgently. The President noted that he had just
learned with dismay that on the day after the Bolivian Government
announced the United States would provide aid of $26 million, a large
part of which would be an outright grant, the Bolivian parliament
approved a motion recommending that the government establish dip-
lomatic relations with Soviet Russia. Paraguay, said the Minister, found
it most difficult to understand this sort of thing.
Mr. Rubottom pointed out that there is no comparison between
the current situation in Paraguay and Bolivia. He said that present day
Bolivia has been likened to a cancer in the body of America; and that

Paraguay  1001
it was to the interest of the entire hemisphere that the malignancy be
speedily removed. Should Bolivia be permitted to fall into chaos and its
evil effects spread, as they most surely would, Paraguay would probably
be the first of Bolivia’s neighbors to suffer. Mr. Rubottom suggested that
Bolivia was to be pitied, rather than envied, by Paraguay. The Minister
was in agreement with both observations. He went on, nevertheless, to
note that following the Paraguayan-Bolivian war over the Chaco, the
various nations participating in the settlement had agreed to help toward
the economic recovery of both countries; but those which had actually
contributed anything had given much more to Bolivia. He said the
United States had been particularly generous to Bolivia, to the discom-
fiture of Paraguay. The Minister emphasized that Paraguayan-Bolivian
relations are good at present. There remained, however, the question of a
border settlement on the northwest boundary. The Paraguayans fear the
Bolivians will cause trouble if oil is discovered in the Chaco. Therefore,
the United States should try to understand Paraguayan alarm when the
United States grants large-­scale assistance to Bolivia—­including arms.
Mr. Rubottom said that he was under the impression that the
subject of arms to Bolivia was cleared up when Paraguayan officials
mentioned it to him and other U.S. officials who accompanied Vice
President Nixon on his South American tour last spring. Mr. Rubottom
recalled that earlier this year the United States had given Bolivia an
insignificant amount of military assistance, solely for internal security,
and consisting only of technical advice and a handful of weapons for
the Palace Guard. He said he would be glad to provide the Minister
with precise data in the matter if he wanted it. The Minister declared
that he himself believed what he had been told, and had only wanted
to point out that the Paraguayan masses, who are not acquainted with
the facts, are naturally disturbed when they hear of U.S. arms and large
sums of money going into Bolivia. The thought of U.S. arms and money
falling into the hands of irresponsible Bolivians such as Juan Lechin,
the leftist labor leader, was particularly disturbing to Paraguayans.
Mr. Rubottom returned to the idea that Paraguay is not, and would
not want to be, in the same position in which Bolivia finds herself. A for
Bolivia’s Lechin,3 he said he understood that his influence in Bolivian
affairs had been on the wane for some time [and amounted to practi-
cally nothing at present.] Mr. Rubottom stressed that U.S. activities in
behalf of Bolivia are solely for the purpose of helping a member of the
Latin American community that has fallen into dire distress, and that
to bring that country back to economic health and self-­respect would
mean strengthening the hemisphere, and indeed the free world, as a
whole. With regard to any Paraguayan fears of an armed attack by
3 [illegible in the original].

Bolivia, Mr. Rubottom pointed out that under today’s inter-American
system we simply do not resort to arms as a means of settling diver-
gencies. Mr. Rubottom found it incomprehensible that Latin American
countries should ever again wage war against one another.
Turning again to Paraguay’s urgent need for economic devel-
opment, the Minister observed that hitherto the United States had
adopted a strict banker’s attitude when considering loans to Paraguay.
Although the banker’s attitude was understandable, it meant that the
have-­not countries can borrow practically nothing, while the have
countries can go on unlimitedly borrowing and adding to their gran-
deur. The Minister thought that the United States lending institutions
were a bit heartless in their dealings with Paraguay. He said the GOP
is thinking in terms of a loan from the United States of some 25 to
30 ­million dollars . . . . .
Mr. Rubottom said that it was now his turn to speak frankly. He
began with a reference to the report Dr. Milton Eisenhower made to the
President following his recent fact-­finding tour of Central America.4
He said that foremost among Dr. Eisenhower’s findings in the area vis-
ited was the need for bankable loans-­not grants.
The Minister quickly replied that Paraguay is not at all interested
in grant–aid, the very thought of which is repugnant to her. He spoke of
the reputation Paraguay enjoys for paying her debts and of her intention
to maintain her good name. She does not ask for charity. The Minister
said he had not necessarily meant an immediate loan of $30 million,
but something approximating that sum to be spent over a period of
time—­perhaps on a five-­year economic development plan. He then
inquired about the possibility of the United States sending an economic
planning mission to Asunción to make a complete survey of Paraguay’s
economy; to study her necessities; to find out what Paraguay is doing
that is wrong; to suggest projects that might be undertaken, and gener-
ally to show the Paraguayans the pathway to some of the better things
of life. Paraguay, he said, sorely need a well-­ordered plan.
Mr. Rubottom indicated interest in the idea of such a mission and
agreed, without making any commitment, to look into the feasibility of
the United States sending one.
Mr. Rubottom told the Minister that Paraguay is not alone in her
problems. He referred at some length to the multifarious problems con-
fronting the United States, both at home and abroad, and suggested that
relatively speaking, Paraguay’s worries are no more severe than those
4 Apparent reference to the statement made by Milton Eisenhower and released
by the White House upon his return from Central America on August 1; for text, see

Paraguay  1003
of this country. He mentioned the tremendous cost to the U.S. public of
our foreign aid efforts since the last war and the fact that protests from
the overburdened taxpayers are making it increasingly difficult as the
years go by for the government to secure Congressional appropriations
to continue the assistance programs. Mr. Rubottom stressed that we are
together in the hemisphere and in the free world. He also stressed the
gratitude which the United States feels toward Paraguay, a valued and
respected partner, for her cooperation and support toward the realiza-
tion of common ideals. Mr. Rubottom praised the high moral standards
of the hard-­working Paraguayan people and their ability, in the face
of adversity, to uphold the good name of their country. Mr. Rubottom
thought the Minister would agree (and he said he did) that in the past
the United States had demonstrated its willingness to help Paraguay
solve her problems. Referring to the Minister’s earlier allusion to what
Paraguay regarded as slowness on the part of the Development Loan
Fund in attending to Paraguay’s requests, Mr. Rubottom pointed out
that the DLF is a new organization which has encountered a number
of delays in getting under way. Nevertheless, the DLF had already
definitely committed $6.1 million for use in Paraguay which placed
Paraguay in the forefront among the Latin American countries which
had obtained benefits from the DLF. Furthermore, the DLF was actively
considering additional loans for Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said that
there is no doubt in his mind that Paraguay will, in the coming years
and as she grows, continue to qualify for loans from the United States,
although we naturally could not commit outselves to any projects or
amounts in advance of dear justification by cases.
The Minister laughed and said, “There you go, speaking as a
banker!”
The Minister then described what Paraguay is doing with regard
to the problem of river transportation. He told of a $1.9 ­million
agreement signed recently with Spain for the purchase of three river
­steamers and five barges; and of current negotiations with Japan over
a proposed $3.8  million deal for the purchase of five cargo ships, a
refrigerated barge and a cattle boat. He stated that if an agreement
is consummated as expected, it will mean the entry into Paraguay of
he noted, had decided against the earlier proposals for a $12 million
agreement involving some 150,000 immigrants over a 30-­year period.
The Minister said that the foregoing items would give a tremendous
boost to Paraguay’s river fleet; but the craft would still be insufficient
for Paraguayan requirements. He referred to the memorandum which
the Paraguayan Foreign Ministry had presented to our Embassy at
Asunción under date of September 10, 1958, setting forth a request for
a $5 million loan from the United States for use in a second agreement
with Spain to purchase river boats. The Minister said he had talked
with President Waugh of the Export-Import Bank about the possibility

of that institution financing such a loan. The Minister indicated that he
found Mr. Waugh sympathetic to the idea.
Mr. Rubottom said that while he had not yet had an opportunity to
study the Paraguayan proposal at length, he had gained the impression
that it involved a triangular transaction with Spain which the United
States might find it difficult to agree to. The Minister explained that
what Paraguay has in mind does not actually have the three-­cornered
feature which the United States finds objectionable. The loan would
be made directly to Paraguay, which would purchase steel plate
and motors from the United States and send the material to Spain.
Construction costs would be paid out of a combination of Paraguay’s
favorable pesetas balance and P.L. 480 pesetas which the United States
holds in Spain. Mr. Rubottom said that this, and any other Paraguayan
loan proposal, would receive careful attention in Washington but that
naturally he could not commit the United States then and there.
The Minister said two items of business remained. The first was
the Minister’s information copy of a lengthy telegram which President
Stroessner had just sent directly to President Eisenhower. The Minister
rendered an eloquent reading of the telegram.5 Stroessner, saying that his
message was inspired by the traditional friendship between Paraguay
and the United States and was a reaffirmation of ­Pan-American ide-
als and principles, urged that the United States lend its whole-­hearted
cooperation in the current gathering of the Foreign Ministers of the
American Republics who had met to discuss the ­proposed “Operation
Pan-America” of Brazilian President Kubitschek. Stroessner noted that
a united America, closely bound by ties of friendship and understand-
ing, can serve as an example to the world.
The second item was the Minister’s request that Mr. Rubottom
arrange an appointment for him with Secretary Dulles. He wished to
make a courtesy call, and had no intention of discussing Paraguayan
problems with the Secretary. Mr. Rubottom said he was very sorry, but
the Secretary had left that afternoon for Boston and would not return
before the Minister’s scheduled departure for Paraguay.
The Minister said he would be remiss should he fail to call atten-
tion to the fine work of Ambassador Ploeser who had created so many
friends for himself and his country in Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said he
knew the Ambassador would be pleased to hear this.
The conversation ended in the same cordial atmosphere in which
it began.
5 [illegible in the original].

Paraguay  1005
PA–8.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Paraguay (Ploeser) to
the Department of State1
Asunción, September 9, 1959.
No. 100.
SUBJECT
Ambassador’s Report on the Objectives, Progress and Projections of the American
Mission in Paraguay2
1. Objectives in Paraguay
2. Economic
3. Political
4. United States Information Service
5. Army Attaché
6. United States Air Force Mission
7. United States Army Mission
1. Objectives in Paraguay
The objectives of the United States Embassy, as pursued during the
past two years in Paraguay, have been:
to stabilize the economy and to lay a sound base for development;
to establish a mutuality of understanding and confidence so that
economic assistance could be programmed with the common purpose
of supporting both U.S. policy and Paraguay’s national self-­interest;
to educate the political thinking of the Government to cooperate
with United States objectives in regional and world organizations;
to nurture in the people of Paraguay an attitude of friendship and
respect for the people of the United States and for our Government;
to avoid all appearances of condoning the dictatorship of General
Alfredo Stroessner and letting it be clearly known that similar cooper-
ation would be extended to any other non-Communist regime which
might come to power in Paraguay; and
to initiate and foster steps toward democracy in a way that would
give no honest pretext for charges of interference.
Measure of Achievement
We believe that:
the measures taken to bring about monetary and fiscal stability
have been uniquely successful;
2 A handwritten marginal notation reads: “Document read by Asst. Sec. Rubottom
and Amb designate Harry F. Stimpson.” Stimpson presented his credentials to the
President of Paraguay on October 23, 1959.

technical assistance and loan assistance have been applied in  a
manner that has supported U.S. policy objectives and has been in accord
with a reasoned appraisal of Paraguay’s national self-­interest;
the political thinking of the Government of Paraguay has been
educated to express itself in undeviating accord with that of the United
States in all regional and international assemblies;
the people of Paraguay do radiate and demonstrate a genuine
friendliness and respect for North Americans, and being genuine, it has
made our tasks here easier and more rewarding;
not only have we avoided the pretensions of condoning dictator-
ship, but on the contrary, we have openly and avowedly advocated the
immediate necessity to initiate democratic processes in Paraguay; but
the pressures applied to the present government to move it toward
greater political liberalism have not been measurably fruitful.
2. Economic
Program Appraisal—In an effort to evaluate the Country Program
for the past two years, we would say:
1. Country Team
All components have been brought together into a harmonious
and “hard-­hitting” unit. Early in the period, there were discernible sec-
tional weaknesses in the Air Force Mission and in the United States
Operations Mission. These debilities were promptly eliminated. For the
past year there has not only been the closest cooperation based upon a
mutuality of respect, but complete and effective support has been given
to all sections of the Embassy. Today, the Country Team is an opera-
tional fact rather than only a semantic concept.
2. The Stabilization Program
In December of 1957, the Economic Section of the U.S. Embassy
cast a statement of Paraguay’s external indebtedness and her annual
service requirements, and then carefully estimated Paraguay’s ability
to meet those requirements together with her further absorptive capac-
ity for modest and feasible development. (See Exhibit I—appended3.)
It is our belief that this was the first time any of the lending agen-
cies of the United States, or the International Bank, or the IMF, had a
factual photograph of Paraguay’s external debt obligations or of her
potential ability to service them. It is certain that it came as a surprise to
the Government of Paraguay.
Based on that study, the Team was able to recommend credits
for selected public works and for private enterprise. The former were
directed toward those that would be essential to provide a basis for
private investment. Every recommendation was predicated upon the
conviction that monetary and fiscal stability had to be reinforced, that
3 Not printed.

Paraguay  1007
inflationary pressures had to be resisted, and that a sound foundation
for development had to be laid down.
This Embassy has [text not declassified] supported the contract for
continuing monetary stability between the GOP and the IMF.4 Our
dealings with the Government have been a synthesis of respect and
firmness, and we believe that it is not egotistical to suggest that this
relationship has been one of the fundamental reasons for the unique
success of the stabilization program in Paraguay since its inception in
late 1957.
At the risk of interrupting the narrative here, we want to make a
point of the fact that the Resident Representative of the IMF in Paraguay,
Kemal Kurdas, has cooperated with the Embassy so effectively and
continuously [text not declassified]
What has been said of Kemal Kurdas can also be said of Ing.
Gustavo Storm, until a few days ago, President of the Central Bank.
Ing. Storm has been a strong rampart of support for the stabilization
program. His policies were formed in constant consultation with the
Embassy, with the USOM/P and with the IMF.
It can be added that there has been an atmosphere of complete
integrity maintained between the Ambassador and President Alfredo
Stroessner. It has been this pattern of honest and open dealing with
the President that has made it possible for the Ambassador to obtain
his cooperation with the stabilization program in the face of violent
attacks—and there have been many violent attacks—by certain mem-
bers of the Paraguayan cabinet.
The credits extended in the public sector, e. g., the $2,500,000 for
the Brasil Road in 1958 and the $1,000,000 for telecommunications in
1959,5 were timed so as to influence the renewal of the stabilization
agreements of those years.
[text not declassified]
This avoided a crisis at the time the stabilization agreement was
up for renewal and this action appears to have successfully forestalled
the devious efforts of the communist organization to unleash a gen-
eral strike. The Embassy received praise from the IMF representatives,
Fund entered into a $2.75 million stand-­by agreement to facilitate continuation of its fis-
cal stabilization program. Pertinent documentation is contained in ARA/EST Files, Lot
Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended April 30,
lion loan to the Government of Paraguay to help provide improved telephone, telegraph,
and teletypewriter service between Paraguay and other countries. Documentation on the
subject is located in ARA/EST Files, Lot 62 D 354, “DLF.”

praise to which the Embassy is probably not entitled because we did no
more than fulfill our clear responsibilities.
Summarizing, we would conclude that the Embassy policy has
not been one of unreasoned liberality with loans to the Paraguayan
Government. Every loan has been timed and sequenced to have the
optimum effect politically, on fiscal stability, and to prepare the way
for economic development. In this, our liaison has always been tight
with the International Bank and its special mission of 1956, and with all
other lending agencies.
[text not declassified]
3. The United States Operations Mission to Paraguay
In a manner that would avoid the possibility of creating an impres-
sion that the Embassy was trying to direct its affairs, the Embassy has
made an evaluation of the past and present programs of the USOM/P.
In the process of so doing, the Embassy has received the fullest cooper-
ation of USOM/P’s Director and Assistant Director.
[text not declassified]
Under the firm belief that the United States cannot forever pamper
so many nations of the world, or subsidize their legitimate budgetary
charges, we have established termination dates for USOM/P’s services
and projects. We are convinced that if we are to attain the objectives
of ICA, projects must have final date goals as well as goals of accom-
plishment. The built-­in habit of U.S. bureaucracy—as is true of all
bureaucracies—to perpetuate itself is an understandable, a human,
but a vicious tendency. We can understand why each servicio and each
­special project has a hundred excuses for its own expansion and per-
petuation. At the same time, I want to put it clearly on the record that
the Director of USOM/P and his Assistant Director are cognizant of this
tendency and are fully with me in putting this practice to the guillotine.
Appended as Exhibit II6 is a list of the projects that are in being, as
well as those which are contemplated in the Paraguayan technical aid
program, and we have indicated the projected dates of termination.
It is the firm recommendation of the Embassy, concurred in by
USOM/P’s Office of the Director, that these dates be strictly observed.
4. Private Enterprise
The Embassy has placed great emphasis on private enterprise, and
as a matter of policy and basic experience, we believe that representa-
tive freedom can never be enjoyed unless enterprise is free.
[text not declassified]
6 Not printed.

Paraguay  1009
5. American Business Group
The Ambassador believes that a U.S. Embassy represents not alone
the Government of the U.S., but also the people and that it is the respon-
sibility of the Embassy to have helpful contact with Americans abroad.
It has been his policy to receive visiting Americans and to emphasize
to those having business in Paraguay that it is the duty and pleasure of
the American Mission to serve them. It is suggested that we hope their
interest is to develop, not to exploit, and to make friends for the U.S.
business generally.
Twenty-­two months ago the Ambassador organized on an invita-
tion basis occasional group meetings of Americans doing business in
Paraguay. These meetings were held approximately once monthly in
the office of the Ambassador. The current economic conditions were
discussed as well as the current American program and policy. On
September 4, l959, the group gave the Ambassador a farewell asado and
a silver tray as a memento of appreciation. The group has an excel-
lent spirit. To qualify for attendance the guest must be a citizen of
the United States. It has been mutually beneficial. In September 1956,
while the State Department inspectors were working in Paraguay, the
Ambassador held a meeting so as to permit them to attend and observe
for themselves. This practice should be continued.
6. Private Development Bank7
Second only to monetary stability, it has been recognized that
the most important economic fact in Paraguay is the unavailability of
equity and loan capital for private enterprise. As is true of the Latin
American complex of nations, Paraguay has a few people of sizeable
wealth and many who live just above the subsistence margin. A history
of revolutions and inflations has always carried in its train a sequence
of uneconomic investment, hoarding and capital flight.
In May l956, the U.S. Ambassador proposed to a representative
group of businessmen that a privately-­owned development bank
be established. The idea was enthusiastically received. But being
Paraguayans, they conceived of a bank in which Paraguayans would
not have to invest any money—it would be totally financed by capital
pledged from the United States and/or international sources.
We have changed that idea!
Through several open meetings and through the establishment of a
voluntary businessmen’s committee, the Ambassador made it clear that
help would be given only provided Paraguayans put up a substantial
equity investment. It took more than one year to effect an organization,

to draw up a charter which was approved by the Central Bank, and to
obtain a pledge of equity capital.
The draft charter has been sent to the World Bank (IBRD) for gen-
eral comments, and recommendations for the selection of a foreign
manager. It is before the DLF for the same purpose and, additionally,
to obtain DLF funds to augment the equity capital pledged by the
Paraguayans.
The response of World Bank has been slow. In the case of the DLF,
the Embassy has had a written commitment for credits at the ratio of 2
to 1 of loans to paid-­in capital, with the added expression that this ratio
might be expanded once the bank has demonstrated a competent and
creditable use of the original loan.
It is the strong and immediate hope of the Embassy that the DLF
move quickly to assist Paraguay in the selection of a foreign manager
and that it will play a maximum and an effective part in the establish-
ment of this bank without waiting further upon the World Bank. While
the Embassy has been insistent upon a foreign manager for the bank,
it now makes one Paraguayan exception, which has been approved by
the DLF: Gustavo Storm, former president of the Central Bank.
It is the Embassy’s conviction that this private enterprise devel-
opment bank for Paraguay is of the highest priority; it is an essential
and basic step to activate the productive forces of the private sector of
this economy. Moreover, it is a basic step to support a continuance of
stabilization program.
7. Projection
Based on the assumption it is unlikely that there will be a large
inflow of private capital during the next two years, and that a steady
and progressive improvement in Paraguay’s economic position will
continue to be a difficult task, we believe that our assistance program
must have continuity. The fundamental reason for this is that we must
give Paraguayan entrepreneurs the assurance that they can count on
continued development loan assistance so that planning can take place
in a way that will make possible the optimum utilization of manpower
and financial resources.
When it comes to a projection for the next two years, we offer it
with a humility that rests upon an awareness that this forecast must
ride in the teeth of the hurricane of change that is sweeping over the
planet. Nevertheless, our recommendations for loans over the next two
years would follow roughly in this sequence and in these priorities:
a. To the Private Sector
(1) That every effort be made to assist in the establishment of a
local private enterprise development bank under the direction and con-
trol of competent and experienced foreign technicians. This bank could

Paraguay  1011
accommodate intermediate—and long-­term development loans of a
modest size, and it could serve as a vehicle through which future loans
could be channeled and most effectively applied in Paraguay;
(2) Premised upon the elimination of the existing restrictive controls
in cattle raising and meat processing, that a line of credit be extended to
the larger cattle raisers whose needs would outrun the near-­term loan
capabilities of a development bank;
(3) That an objective but generous attitude be applied to loan appli-
cations to assist in feasible industrialization of forest products, milk
processing, fruit packing, sugar-­mill renovation, cement plant and fiber
development and utilization, and electric power facilities;
(4) In the event the Government’s electric generation and distri-
bution facility (Administración Nacional de Electricidad) is sold to an
outside capable and experienced utility operator, that a loan for its ren-
ovation and expansion be seriously considered, if needed.
b. To the Public Sector
Géneral:
(1) A basic need of any economy is transportation and communica-
tions. In this we must, of course, deal directly with the government. Under
the present telecommunications program of Paraguay, ­completion will
give the adequate communications facilities for the foreseeable future,
but Paraguay needs roads and more roads to open up the country. This
need, which is natural, is made all the more acute with the breakdown
of the present antiquated railway system. In this regard we have been
negotiating an engineering unit arrangement between the Paraguayan
government, ICA and the United States Army, which will be most help-
ful but not enough. Paraguay will need loans for new roads and for the
improvement of old roads.
(2) The airport, because of its 9,000 ft. runway, is a suitable “Jet”
station and Asunción is coming in for more and more air travel. Within
two years a new hotel in down-­town Asunción should be completed.
Then Asunción will definitely become a tourist attraction as the original
“colonial city” (still colonial) and a most suitable location from which
to visit Falls Iguazú.
Apron and parking facilities at the airport should be given
attention.
(3) Loans to the public sector should be extended in harmony with
the general philosophy, conditions and cautions set out in the Report
of the Survey Team of the IBRD dated March 17, 1959,8 which lays
8 A summary of the report is contained in a memorandum from Carson to Rubottom,

­particular stress on the need for increased agricultural production and
­reorganization of the present agricultural credit facilities; and
(4) In harmony with that Report, that the loans be those needed
for ­transportation—especially feeder roads—and communications
­facilities; and
(5) If a foreign and experienced private utility enterprise cannot
be found to take over the Administración National de Electricidad
(ANDE) on reasonable terms, and a public loan becomes a necessary
final resort, then such a loan be considered, but it should be granted
only on the condition that foreign technical and administrative man-
agement be clearly stipulated in said loan. Within ANDE there has been
much waste and payroll padding through political patronage and the
Government can, by cleaning its own house here and in other places,
make room for needed improvements through its own revenues.
8. Conclusion
All loans that may be hereinafter extended should be constructed
with a knowledge of Paraguay’s annual debt load and service require-
ments. A reference to Exhibit I indicates that Paraguay has additional
debt servicing capabilities from, and including, 1962 and thereafter.
The current Central Bank reserve position and the improvement that
has occurred in the Bank’s liquidity during 1959 give some basis for
confidence that Paraguay can pay any loans which may be granted in
the categories listed above—as long as the service payments are exten-
sively limited to 1962 and thereafter.
Finally, it is the considered opinion of this Embassy that, as long
as the Government of Paraguay rigidly; adheres to the stabilization
­program, she should be generausly treated—in accordance with her
ability to pay—in the private sector, and that further loans in the public
sector should be in accord with the thinking expressed above.
Appended as Exhibit I is a schedule of Paraguay’s external debt
and annual service requirements as they exist at the time of this Report.
Appended as Exhibit II is a list of projects of USOM/P and their
scheduled termination dates.
Appended as Exhibit III is a schedule of loans made to Paraguay
during the past two years by the DLF, the Ex-Im Bank and the World
Bank.9
POLITICAL
Embassy’s Past Action
Paraguay has a long history of political instability and a “state of
siege” has existed almost continually since 1940. President Stroessner
9 Not printed.

Paraguay  1013
came to power in 1954 by a coup and was elected in a plebiscite and
was re-­elected without opposition in 1958, for a five-­year term to expire
on August 15, 1963.
The GOP’s political weaknesses and instability in the inter-­
American system are of vital concern. All U.S. economic assistance and
counseling has the basic objective of promoting its economic devel-
opment and thereby political stability which will provide a favorable
­climate for the establishment of a more democratic government so that
it may be a greater force for strength in the Western hemisphere.
Stroessner, a so-­called “strong man” governing under the 1940
constitution has indicated that he would like to move towards democ-
racy. The Ambassador in various speeches has encouraged Paraguay
to take steps towards democratic reforms particularly in his April 13,
1959 speech in which he forcefully stated the U.S. position concerning
democracy in the Western hemisphere and made clear that the U.S.
position towards Paraguay is not in support of dictatorship as against
democracy. In many private conversations the Ambassador has urged
Stroessner to move toward democracy and has even made sugges-
tions as to laws for free elections, free press, etc. In early 1958 President
Stroessner promised Municipal elections and allowed the two oppo-
sition parties, Liberal and Febrerista, to hold conventions. Due to a
political disturbance, these were nullified. Later, on May 29, 1959, the
uni-­cameral Congress was dissolved due to a serious open split in the
Colorado Party. The Colorado Party and the Army have been the base
of Stroessner’s political strength. However, Stroessner’s waxing and
waning of democratic moves now include the convocation of congres-
sional elections in February 1960 in which the two opposition parties
may participate.
[text not declassified] The Embassy has concentrated on “the people
of the U.S. to the people of Paraguay” theme in order not to appear that
the U.S. is supporting “dictatorship” in Paraguay as against democ-
racy and also to continue to lay a basis of friendship and cooperation
between the two peoples in case of future changes in governments
which may occur. In this regard, Embassy officials have kept contact
not only with the Colorado Party and government officials but also
with opposition party leaders whose members have been received and
welcomed in the Embassy.
The Embassy has continued to encourage free labor movement in
labor circles in its personal contacts [text not declassified]
The Communist Party (PCP) is small, disorganized, and illegal. Its
principal threat lies in its penetrations into the various political parties,
including the ruling Colorado Party, through which it contributes to
political instability. The PCP has been active in the student and labor
movements but has not gained a dominant position. Most of the PCP

leadership is presently in exile where they play an important role in the
subversive planning of the political exiles.
The Embassy’s plan of action for the present and future is to con-
tinue to encourage the GOP to take steps towards democratic reforms,
short of interference. [text not declassified] Possibly one might hope that
the dissident clique of the Colorado Party, which has made its break
based upon an insistence of democracy within the government, might
be the most liberal group. This is more a political promise than a hope,
based upon experience. [text not declassified] Then too, there is always
the private enterprise motive in South American governments, which
is certainly not absent in Paraguay. An overturn opens the door for two
possibilities which are harmful to U.S. purposes:
1. Communist infiltration;
2. A blow to economic stability.
Because of the fact that the pledged stockholders of the Paraguayan
Development Bank project are of all political shades, it is believed that
the establishment of this bank will lend a measure of political stability
guarding the economy.
Embassy’s Plan of Action for the Present and Future
1. Continue to encourage the GOP to take steps towards demo-
cratic reforms, short of interference.
2. Continue contacts with dissident political groups.
3. Continue to encourage the GOP’s support in the United Nations
Organization and the Organization of American States and elsewhere.
4. Continue to encourage free labor movement in its contacts.
5. On every possible occasion reiterate our anti-­communist posi-
tion and our support to the free world in public statement as well
as private. This should be the political theme of all personnel in the
American Embassy.
6. Continue to encourage the GOP to improve its control of
Communism.
7. Continue to expose international communist penetration into
Latin America.
4. United States Information Service
Accomplishments and Goals
The American School has been chartered as a bi-­national institution.
Kindergarden will open with 20 pupils (19 Paraguayans) September
40 Paraguayans. Goal: Funds for “model” American school building.
Two American students are in National University under the
Inter-American Cultural Convention. Paraguayan student will be in

Paraguay  1015
University of Texas in September. First time Paraguay has complied
with IACC obligation.
Two American professors are in National University, one lecturing
in Economics, one advising on complete administrative and curricula
revision to “Americanize” higher education in Paraguay. American
professor budgeted for 1960 FY to aid Engineering faculty.
On the darker side: PL–480 funds of Fullbright Commission will
be spent in FY 1960; need more sales of excess agricultural products to
finance long-­range educational program launched in 1958–59.
Commentary
The Embassy believes that the Bi-National Center in Paraguay is
very important undertaking and that every effort should be made to
expand its activities and coordinate them more in the public-­relations
sense than in the purely academic sense, and we have really not begun
to realize the full potential of this Center. Every effort will be made with
the changing of the Director to set up a program which will comply
with this goal.
The Embassy believes that public relations, including the facet of
publicity, is a two-­way street. A constant flow through the two main
channels available in Paraguay’s controlled radio and controlled press
of American information and propaganda has been extremely helpful
here. It is in good hands, and we are enjoying good, voluminous copy.
In the past two years we have also tried to pump into the U.S. press
accurate information regarding Paraguay, its opportunities, and its
relations with the U.S. While Paraguay is a small nation and does not
deserve much space, we feel quite satisfied that it has had its amount
proportionately for the first time in history. This channel should be kept
open. It benefits our economic opportunities here for American enter-
prise and benefits Paraguay and certainly benefits relations between
the two countries and U.S. objectives abroad.
[5 pages text not declassified]
Walter C. Ploeser

PA–9.
Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation with the
President1
Washington, November 2, 1959
The President said he had before him the letter from Stroessner2
with our draft reply regarding his request for transport planes. The
President said our draft reply talks about our love of Paraguay and says
the President will have the appropriate agencies study this request.3
The President said it seemed to him we could make a quick survey
to see if any planes of these types were even available; the President
doubted we had any left. The President said he would rather just say no
than to give this sort of soft-­soap reply which cast the President in the
role of a Pontius Pilate. The Secretary said that had not been the intent
of the letter, although the drafting might be improved. The intent was
to get it away from the Presidential channel back into diplomatic chan-
nels. The Secretary said we are principally worried about the financial
angle, i.e. that Stroessner can’t really afford to build up this kind of
thing. The Secretary suggested the President might wish to send the
letter back and let us redraft it. The President said he would put in his
own thoughts and return it to the Secretary.4
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers. Confidential. Information on the
source text indicates that this conversation took place at 11:55 a.m.
delivered to the Secretary of State by the Paraguayan Minister of Finance, General César
3 The Department of State’s draft reply to President Stroessner’s letter was sent to the
White House under cover of a memorandum from the Secretary to the President, dated
October 27, 1959, not printed. (Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Paraguay”)
was sent directly from the White House. A copy of the verbatim text was also sent to
the Embassy in Asuncion in telegram 131. The reply stated in part the following: “I have
noted your request for various transport aircraft and have instructed appropriate agen-
cies of the Government to begin an immediate study of the request. Let me assure you
that this matter will be accorded most careful consideration and that the result of the
study will be communicated to your Government, through normal diplomatic channels,
as soon as possible.” (Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Paraguay”)

Paraguay  1017
PA–10.
Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Managing Director of
the Development Loan Fund (Brand)1
Washington, November 17, 1959.
Dear Vance:
For about six weeks now Dr. Gustavo Storm has been in Washington
conducting negotiations with U.S. Government agencies and the IBRD
for a loan for a Paraguayan economic development bank which he is
to head.
I understand that the IBRD after consideration of Dr. Storm’s
­proposals has now made conditions that would preclude them from
participating in the loan at this time. It is my understanding that the
IBRD set up-­criteria which were beyond the capacity of the organiz-
ers of the bank. In view of the limited financial resources available in
Paraguay it is clear that the IBRD requirements for additional capital
participation by the Paraguayans and a substantial amount of junior
capital from other sources could not be realized.
There is an important need for a banking establishment in Paraguay
dedicated to economic development loans. For over two years the gov-
ernment of Paraguay has adhered to a stabilization agreement which
has called for a large degree of financial austerity. It has become the ten-
dency of political and economic leaders in Paraguay to associate stabili-
zation with reduced economic growth or even stagnation. An economic
development bank could do much to allay the fears of Paraguay that
the U.S. Government supports stabilization programs but is not as sym-
pathetic to their economic development aspirations. In addition, there
is a real economic justification for a development bank which would
devote its resources to productive loans which cannot be made by the
present banking system.
ARA, therefore, supports the Paraguayan efforts to obtain a loan
for each bank from the DLF. Since the IBRD has now decided not to par-
ticipate at this time, we urge you to press forward with an arrangement
with Dr. Storm on a more limited scale without the IBRD. ARA would
envisage a bank which might have an initial Paraguayan capitalization
of about $1 million and a loan from the DLF of about $2 million.
memos 1959–1960.” Drafted by Albert Post of the Office of Inter-American Regional
Economic Affairs, and cleared with Mann, Rosenson, and [illegible in the original].

Such a bank can make an important contribution to the economic
development of Paraguay and help expand production in the vital
export sectors.
I have discussed this natter fully with Assistant Secretary Mann
and he concurs with the views expressed.2
Sincerely yours,
R.R. Rubottom, Jr.,
2 In a memorandum to Assistant Secretary Mann, dated November 17, covering this
memorandum, James A. Lynn, Assistant Chief of the Economic Development Division,
stated the following:
“Although Mr. Rubottom’s letter makes no mention of any conditions, staff of ARA,
DLF and E all agree that Dr. Storm should be provided with definite conditions prece-
dent to consideration of the loan by the DLF. This is essential in order that there be no
misapprehension on the part of prospective contributors to the Bank’s equity. Conditions
should include the assurance that appropriate reserves were established before disburse-
ments of dividends and that the bank would not limit itself to making loans to its stock-
holders. It should be remembered in this connection that up to the moment Dr. Storm has
actually not secured any payments from prospective stockholders.”
PA–11.
Editorial Note
Between August 29 and September [?], 1960, an International
Monetary Fund mission was in Paraguay to investigate the coun-
try’s current economic situation. The mission, headed by Geraldo
Costanzo, also included Kemal Kurdas and Edgar Pichiotto from the
Fund’s Washington headquarters, and Richard A. Radford, the Fund’s
Resident Adviser to the Paraguayan Central Bank. In despatch 76 from
Asunción, August 29, 1960, the Embassy informed the Department
On October 7, 1960, the Fund’s Executive Board approved a one-­

Paraguay  1019
PA–12.
Memorandum of Conservation, Department of State1
Washington, September 29, 1960
SUBJECT
U.S.-Paraguayan Relations
PARTICIPANTS
Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs
Ambassador Harry F. Stimpson, Jr.2
C. A. Boonstra, Director, Office of East Coast Affairs, ARA
Charles C. Carson, O-in-C, Paraguayan Affairs, ARA/EST
William T. Pryos, Staff Aide, ARA
Ambassador Stimpson reviewed his conversations regarding
Paraguay’s political-­economic situation over the past two weeks with
officials of the Department and other U.S. agencies and of certain inter-
national agencies. He stated that, out of those talks and out of his expe-
riences in Asunción during the last twelve months, he had come to the
conclusion that, the troublesome stigma of dictatorship of the Stroessner
government notwithstanding, the U.S. should pursue a policy of work-
ing with the regime. [text not declassified] Meanwhile, he continued,
we should encourage Paraguay to move forward with the nationwide
municipal council elections slated for October 16 and, subsequently,
with other steps toward more representative government. We should,
for example, try discreetly to foster an agreement between the GOP and
the opposition—­including the Liberal Party, the Febrerista Party and
dissident elements of the ruling Colorrdo Party—­so that the latter, with
guarantees of a free press and other civil liberties, could be persuaded
to take part in the next congressional and presidential elections.
The Ambassador noted that, the Paraguayans have amply demon-
strated their friendship for the U.S. Surely it is in our best interests to
try to preserve that reservoir of good will in the area. One of our pri-
mary political objectives in Paraguay should be to make certain that it
continues to cooperate with U.S. policies in the OAS and in the UK. By
diplomatic efforts we should do everything possible to maintain politi-
cal stability in Paraguay—­and in the River Plate region generally—­and
help to prevent any further communist and leftist infiltrations into the
country from neighboring states. Our next step, once the threat to inter-
nal security is eliminated, should be to try to convince Paraguay of the
wisdom of reducing the size of its armed forces and of using its now
in the original].
2 [text is illegible].

largely wasted military manpower on constructive economic projects
much on road building and maintenance. With modern equipment and
better training a much smaller military establishment could in ordinary
circumstances fulfill Paraguay’s internal security requirements.
Paraguay is desperately in need of developmental capital for
increasing its primary production and export trade; and the Ambassador
suggested that action by the U.S. to assist the Paraguayan economy
should be along the following broad lines:
1. Encourage the GOP to cooperate to the fullout extent with the
DLF and continue with the monetary stabilization program.
2. Urge the GOP to work closely with the Inter-American
Development Bank and other international agencies both for the pur-
pose of obataing credits and for guidance into the fiscal and adminis-
tration reforms needed to enhance Paraguay’s qualification for credits.
The merits of self-­help should be particularly stressed in dealing
with the Paraguayans.
3. Hold to a policy of not granting U.S. funds for direct budgetary
assistance, but make available for economic development substantial
amounts from the international lending agencies. The U.S. should con-
sider early loans for the following purposes:
a. To assist in the creation of a privately-­operated Paraguayan
Development Bank to provide substantial medium and long-­term
credit for the country’s leading cattle raisers and industrialists.
b. To Support the National Development Institute ([illegible
in the original] to National de Fernanto) which is being set up
to replace the moribund Bank of Paraguay and to provide credit
mainly for the smaller farmers and business men. U.S. aid to this
organization should be conditioned, however, on the realization
of the GOP’s announced policy of [illegible in the original] capital
inverstment (approximately $1 million) each year in the institute.
c. To provide additional help in the GOP’s road construction
program—­preferably under a coordinated plan prepared by the
IADB.
d. To support the GOP in the construction of a hydroelectric
project on the [illegible in the original] river system on the Brazilian
border near Foz do Iguaszu. The total cost, including dam, power
station and transmission lines to Asunción, could reach some $20
million. A project in Paraguay of this magnitude would have to
be undertaken with the aid of several of the Washington lending
agencies on a group basis. The present line of thinking is for the
GOP to build and own the works but to lease it to private enter-
prise under a long-­term management contract. The IADB should
be the prime mover for this undertaking. It could be tied in readily

Paraguay  1021
with the IADB’s subsequent operations in Paraguay, to include
feeder roads off the Brazil hold and other developments aiding the
exploitation of the newly-­opened fertile area of eastern Paraguay.
4. Special emphasis of the ICA should be on increasing production
in the fields of stockraising and agriculture, with education and health
being given second and third priorities respectively. (The Ambassador
noted that in the field of education he favors more scholarships for
Paraguayans to study in the U. S. and financial assistance for the con-
struction of some normal schools in the interior of the country. He also
noted that he favors the proposed ICA aid to a new public health center
in Asunción but not at the expense of the more important priority of
increased agricultural and pastoral production.)
5. If an expanded economic aid program becomes a reality in
Paraguay, [illegible in the original] activities should be closely coordi-
nated with the aim of making an appropriate impact on the population.
The Ambassador said that in his talks with officials of the IADB he
had found great sympathy for the current economic plight of Paraguay.
He noted that Mr. Roger Williams, loan officer for the region, is plan-
ning a trip to Asunción about mid-November and that the Paraguayan
Ambassador in Washington is returning home for consultations about
the same time. He was hopeful that these consultations will result in
some definite priorities and planning for Paraguay. The Ambassador
said it is his impression that IADB officials are thinking of assistance
to Paraguay during the first year of operations to the extent of some
$5 million—with perhaps about $1 million for the National Development
Institute and rest of the remainder for the hydroelectric project. It might
also be necessary for the Bank to expend something on feasibility
studios.
[text not declassified]
The Ambassador notes that save for the continuity of regular ICA
technical assistance and a small food distribution program under Title
III of P.L.-480 the U.S. has not given new help to Paraguay over the past
twelve months. Meanwhile, most serious deterioration of the economy
had occurred. He said he felt that the time is long over due for getting
U.S.-Paraguayan relationships out of the doldrums. The Ambassador
reiterated that he feels very strongly we ought to proceed without delay
to assist the GOP with the two banks, the hydroelectric project, further
road construction and with other credits as may seem appropriate to
increase national production and exports. He concluded by saying that
he wished to receive guidance from the Department before returning
to his post since he did not wish to be placed in the position of hav-
ing definite recommendations by the Embassy along the above lines
repeated in Washington on grounds of the dictorship issue.

Mr. Mann said he was inclined to question the need of Paraguay,
with its primitive and limited economy, for the two banking institu-
tions. The Ambassador replied that he agrees with the findings of U. S.
and international financial agencies which have [gone?] thoroughly
into the problem and which believe that there is room for both. At
present, he noted, credit has become practically nonexistent except
on extremely short terms and high interest rates. The proponents of
the private development bank represent the Paraguayan community’s
most successful ranchers and business men. They are the only elements
of private enterprise know-how and success in the country and they
can be expected to make effective use of a bank that would be free of
governmental interference and political pressures. At the same time,
there is need of a state banking instrument to play the traditional role
of the Bank of Paraguay for the smaller borrowers.
Having had that point clarified, Mr. Mann stated that he could see
no objection to U.S. action the general lines which the Ambassador had
set forth. He said that when the time comes to get down to specifics he
felt confident that he would be able to support the recommendations on
which the Embassy and the Office of East Coast Affairs are in mutual
accord. He added that in his opinion we should not be inhibited by fear
of strictures for [going?] in underdeveloped areas such as Paraguay
that which we honestly think is best for all concerned. When we meet
with unfavorable criticism for having tried to improve the economy of
Paraguay, we will simply have to stand up to it.

Peru: U.S. Relations with Peru
PE–1.
Editorial Note
In a letter of January 27, 1958, to Per Jacobsson, Managing Director
of the International Monetary Fund, Peruvian Minister of Finance
and Commerce Augusto Thorndike proposed a $25 million standby
arrangement. The Embassy in Peru transmitted a copy of this letter
The standby arrangement which Peru entered with the Fund in the
1959, doubled the dollar amount of the previous standby arrangement.
For further information, see International Monetary Fund, Annual
Report or the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 1958
arrangement, the Fund entered into a new standby arrangement with
information, see International Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the
Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 1959 (Washington,
1959), page 25 (table). The Fund increased its standby arrangement
28, 1961. For further information, see International Monetary Fund,
Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Year Ended April 30, 1960
(Washington, 1960), page 23 (table).
On February 7, 1958, Acting Secretary of the Treasury Julian B.
Baird and Peruvian Ambassador Fernando Berckemeyer had signed
a one-­year exchange agreement effective February 17 in the amount
of $17.5 million. This agreement enabled Peru to request the United
States Stabilization Fund to buy Peruvian sales, if necessary for main-
taining orderly exchange conditions on the certificate market, at
realistic rates, between the Peruvian sol and the United States dol-
lar. Under terms of the agreement, Peru would subsequently repur-
chase the soles for dollars. Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Tom
B. Caughran sent copies of the exchange agreement to the Secretary
On February 27, 1959, this agreement was extended for one year effec-
tive March 1. Assistant Secretary of the Treasury T. Graydon Upton sent

a copy of the exchange agreement extension to the Secretary of State
In a letter of February 7, 1958, to Acting Secretary of the Treasury
Baird, Ambassador Berckemeyer stated that the Banco Central de
Reserva del Perú had entered into $17.5 million in credit arrangements
for stabilization purposes with private United States banks. (823.131/
4–2158) Ambassador Berckemeyer informed Assistant Secretary of the
Treasury Baird in a letter of February 27, 1959, that the Peruvian Central
Reserve Bank had renewed these stabilization credit arrangements.
On August 27, 1958, the Export-Import Bank of Washington
authorized a credit of $40 million to the Central Reserve Bank of
Peru for financing essential imports. Peru used and repaid $15.5
­million of this loan. For further information, see Export-Import Bank
of Washington, Report to the Congress for the Twelve Months Ending
balance of payments support loan, the Central Bank was able to
maintain its reserves because of increasing exports. As a result of the
strengthened financial position of Peru, its monetary authorities on
May 16, 1960, unified Peru’s two exchange systems by suspending the
exchange certificate system which had been in existence for 10 years.
For further information, see International Monetary Fund, Annual
Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 1960,
pages 118–120.
PE–2.
Editorial Note
During the years 1958–1960, the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development made the following loans for economic development in
Peru:
1. $15 million to the Peruvian Corporation Limited for rehabil-
itation and modernization of the Central and Southern Railways
on April 3, 1958. For further information, see International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, Thirteenth Annual Report, 1957–1958
sion and improvement of that port on September 17, 1958. For

Peru  1025
further information, see International Bank for Reconstruction and
page 32.
3. $5 million to Banco de Fomento Agropecuario del Perú
(Agricultural Livestock Development Bank of Peru) for its program of
investment credits for the development of agriculture on June 1, 1960.
For further information, see International Bank for Reconstruction and
page 34.
4. $25 million to Lima Light and Power Company (Empresas
Eléctric as Asociadas) for the program to increase generating capacity
for highway improvement. For further information, see International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Sixteenth Annual Report,
PE–3.
Editorial Note
Embassy to negotiate with the Peruvian Government for the sale of
modities) worth of United States surplus wheat, rice, and dairy
products under Title I of Public Law 480, the Agricultural Trade and
Development and Assistance Act of 1954. Enclosed was a draft sales
was effected by notes exchanged at Lima on April 9, and it entered
into force on the same day. The text of the agreement was sent to
the Department of State with despatch 769 from Lima, April 15.
ments of this agreement by notes exchanged at Lima September 10
UST 1762, respectively.

PE–4.
Memorandum of Conversation, by Sandy M. Pringle of
the Office of South American Affairs1
Washington, April 14, 1958.
SUBJECT
Naval Vessels for Peru
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Berckemeyer, Embassy of Peru
Miguel Grau – Minister Counselor, Embassy of Peru
ARA – Mr. Rubottom
OSA – Mr. Pringle
Ambassador Berckemeyer said that he had been instructed by the
Foreign Minister to take up the matter of naval vessels for Peru and
to obtain the Department’s comments on certain specific questions.
While the Ambassador did not so phrase them, they can best be stated
as follows:
Why are two submarines and two destroyers being earmarked
for Chile under the pending naval ship loan bill when Peru is only to
receive two destroyers? Why is the U.S. spending $10 million for main-
tenance work on Chile’s two cruisers in U.S. shipyards when it refuses
to sell Peru a cruiser? Does the Department have any comments on
rumors that Chile is obtaining an aircraft carrier in the U.S. or else-
where? Was the UK’s withdrawal of its offer to sell Peru two destroyers
the result of pressure from the U.S.?2
In reply, Mr. Rubottom said that he would first like to make a few
very general remarks about U.S. military assistance. He explained
that the furnishing of assistance to Latin America is based on military
considerations and that the favoring of one nation over another is not
involved in any way. He said that assistance is based on an estimate of
the military threat to the hemisphere, the requirements for equipment
to meet that threat, the availability of equipment, and the capability
of recipient countries to use it. He said that the U.S. is attempting to
develop the anti-­submarine warfare capability of the Latin American
countries and that, with this in mind, it extended Peru a $16,600,000
credit for the purchase of two modern submarines.3 He pointed out
April 16.
vol. VI, American Republics: Multilateral; Mexico; Caribbean.
3 For documentation on the loan to Peru for purchase of two submarines, see
ibid. The military assistance loan agreement of August 1, 1955, with Peru amounted to
$515,663,744.

Peru  1027
that this credit, the largest single military credit extended to any Latin
American government, was arranged at the request of the Peruvian
Government at a time when the U.S. was unable to agree to the loan or
sale of any naval vessels from its Reserve Fleet. He also pointed out that
the U.S., at the request of the Peruvian Government, recently agreed to
the postponement of payments on the principal of this loan for three
years in order to ease Peru’s balance of payments problems.4
Mr. Rubottom said that, for the purpose of developing Latin
American anti-­submarine warfare capability, two destroyers are ear-
marked for Peru under the pending naval ship loan bill. Under the
same program, Chile is scheduled to receive two destroyers and two
submarines, so that it can improve its ability to defend its long sea lines
of communications. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that this information
had long been known to Peru and had been the subject of discussions
between Prime Minister Cisneros and Ambassador Achilles a year ago.
With regard to the maintenance work being done on the two
Chilean cruisers in U.S. shipyards under the Mutual Security Program,
Mr. Rubottom said that it would cost not $10 million but approximately
$4 million. He also pointed out that we similarly assist Peru in the main-
tenance of units of its Navy—for example, the three destroyer escorts
it obtained from the U.S. in 1951. He said that the Chilean cruisers had
been brought to the U.S. because the maintenance could best be done
here, whereas the maintenance of Peruvian vessels could be done in
Peruvian shipyards with spare parts furnished by the U.S. He said that
it would seem to be advantageous to Peru to have maintenance work
on its vessels done in Peru rather than in the U.S., thus providing addi-
tional work for its shipyards.
Referring to the rumors that Chile might be obtaining an aircraft
carrier, Mr. Rubottom said he could assure the Ambassador that Chile
was not getting one from the U.S. and that, so far as he knew, was not
obtaining one elsewhere either. As for the cancellation of arrangements
for Peru to purchase destroyers from the UK, Mr. Rubottom said that
the Peruvians themselves had informed the U.S. that they had decided
not to buy the vessels. He pointed out that Admiral Llosa had given
Admiral Peterson this information on August 5, 1957, and Ambassador
Berckemeyer acknowledged that this was correct. Mr. Rubottom said
that, if the Peruvians had agreed to buy the destroyers from the UK, he
felt sure that the latter would have sold them, whether the U.S. felt it to
be desirable or not.
4 The agreement under reference was concluded by a note of January 9 from Finance
Minister Thorndike to Ambassador Achilles in Peru. A copy of that note was transmitted

The present status of the naval ship loan bill was then mentioned.
Mr. Rubottom said that it had been introduced in the Senate and that
committee hearings might be held soon. He said that the bill had the
strong support of both the Defense and the State Departments and that
we hoped it would pass.5
After leaving Mr. Rubottom’s office, Ambassador Berckemeyer
told Mr. Pringle that the conversation had been very useful. He said he
suspected that the military members of the Cabinet had been putting
pressure on the new Foreign Minister, Raúl Porras, and hoped that the
report of the conversation with Mr. Rubottom would give the Foreign
Minister a better perspective on the problem. The Ambassador said that
he himself was thoroughly familiar with the background of the matter
but that Foreign Minister Porras undoubtedly was not.
to lend eighteen ships to countries in Latin America; for text, see 72 Stat. 376.
PE–5.
Letter from President Eisenhower to President Prado1
Washington, April 22, 1958.
Dear Mr. President:
It gives me special pleasure to transmit to you through the Vice
President of the United States, Richard Nixon,2 my warm greetings.
I am gratified that the Vice President was able to accept the cordial invi­
tation which you so kindly extended for him to visit Peru.
Almost two years have passed since I had the pleasure of meet­
ing you at Panama3 and of sending the Secretary of State, John Foster
Dulles, as my personal representative to your inauguration.4 Since
that time, it has been my privilege to correspond with you on several
occasions regarding pressing world problems. I have been particularly
source text bears a stamped signature.
for documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VII, American Republics: Central
4 Secretary of State Dulles attended President Prado’s inauguration in Lima on
August 28, 1956.

Peru  1029
conscious of your deep personal concern with international affairs and
of the steadfastness with which you and your representatives have sup-
ported constructive measures to advance the cause of world peace with
justice. I have also followed with great interest the impressive progress
made during your administration in the consolidation of true democ-
racy in Peru and in the maintenance of a free and stable economy.
Peru and the United States share a firm dedication to the principles
of liberty and freedom, and we have also dedicated ourselves with high
purpose to the Organization of American States, an inspiring example
of peaceful regional cooperation among nations. Long united by bonds
of closest friendship, our countries will, I am confident, work together
with even greater good will and understanding in the years to come.
In extending my personal regard to Your Excellency, I desire to con-
vey to you and to your countrymen the sincere best wishes of the peo-
ple of the United States for the continued welfare of your great nation.5
Sincerely,
5 In his reply of May 13 to President Eisenhower, President Prado commented
favorably on the subjects raised in President Eisenhower’s letter and he stressed the
need for U.S. participation in efforts to achieve [illegible in the ­original] in Latin America.
PE–6.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Peru (Achilles)1
Lima, May 7, 1958.
SUBJECT
Political and Economic Situation
PARTICIPANTS
Manuel Prado, President of Peru
Raúl Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister (last part only)
Richard M. Nixon, Vice President of the U. S.
Roy R. Rubottom, Asst. Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs
Theodore C. Achilles, Ambassador to Peru
source text, sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 848 from Lima, May
13, bears the notation that it was approved in draft by Assistant Secretary Rubottom.

The Vice President presented President Eisenhower’s letter2 and,
after an exchange of pleasantries, opened substantive conversation by
asking whether the President considered the Communist problem bad
in Argentina. The President replied that the combination of Peronism
and Communism was indeed bad. Communism was also a serious
problem here. In Cuzco a local Soviet had recently emerged and taken
over the city for two days until additional troops could be sent. In Puno
Communists crossed the border freely from Bolivia. If Peru’s economic
problems were not solved, there would be an increasingly serious
Communist threat in Southern Peru.
President Prado and the Vice President agreed that the economic
problems of Peru and the U.S. were similar and due to the world-
wide fall in prices rather than to policies in either country. President
Prado stated that mining represented a major part of Peru’s economy
whereas it represented only a small factor in the U.S. economy. The Vice
President mentioned our awareness not only of the importance of the
mining problem to Peru but also agricultural problems and stated that
our surplus disposal program was conducted with every effort to avoid
disturbing the economies of friendly countries.
The Vice President inquired how it was that Peru had been able
to develop such sound economic and political policies in contrast
with some other South American countries. The President replied that
the Peruvian people saw the advantages of such policies, as did the
Government, and he would see that they were fully maintained. The
Vice President cited Peru as a model of a policy of free enterprise, free
exchange and a completely free economy. The President said that Peru
was currently encountering financial difficulties but was proud that it
had not had to dip into the $60 million Stabilization Fund, although
there was great pressure to do so, particularly for public works and
housing. The Vice President commented that the U.S. had similar
problems.
At this point the Foreign Minister entered and the conversation
returned to Communism. It was pointed out that although Communism
was illegal in Peru under the Constitution, there was no legislation per-
mitting the Government to take action even against the ringleaders
in such flagrant situations as the temporary occupation of Cuzco. He
had presented legislation to the last session but Congress had refused
to pass it on the grounds that it was undemocratic and could be used
against persons other than Communists. Peru had not only complete
political freedom but also almost excessive freedom of the press. The
Foreign Minister mentioned that Communism in Cuzco was not limited
2 See Document PE–5.

Peru  1031
to trade unions but included politicians and students. Twenty of the lat-
ter had recently returned from a visit behind the Iron Curtain.
President Prado mentioned his long-­standing antipathy to
Communism and his efforts in 1942 to persuade President Roosevelt
that Communism would be a major threat after the war. Neither
Roosevelt nor Mrs. Roosevelt had agreed. In response to the Vice
President’s request, he agreed that the latter might refer in his press
conference tomorrow to President Prado’s long-­standing antipathy to
Communism and that he continued to hold the same views.
In concluding the conversation, the President stated that Peru
shared U.S. principles on both economic and political matters and that
Peru could always be depended upon as a friend of the U.S. in the UN
and elsewhere. He mentioned his initiative for coordination between
the OAS and NATO in dealing with the world Communist threat. The
Vice President expressed appreciation for Peru’s cooperation.
PE–7.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor for
Economic Affairs of the Embassy in Peru (Linville)1
Lima, May 8, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Augusto Thorndike, Minister of Finance and Commerce; Mr. Federico Hilbok,
Minister of Development & Public Works; Mr. Andres Dasso, President Central
Reserve Bank; Mr. Hipólito Larrabure, General Manager Central Reserve Bank;
Mr. Fernando Berckemeyer, Peruvian Ambassador to the U. S.; Rud. Carlos Jurgens,
Archbishop of Cuzco; Mr. Herbert Havlik, I.B.R.D. Mission to Peru; Mr. Roger
Chaufournier, I.B.R.D. Mission to Peru; Mr. Samuel G. Waugh, President Export-­
Import Bank and Francis A. Linville.
SUBJECT
PERUVIAN ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PROBLEMS.
Mr. Thorndike said that Peru’s need for economic assistance from
abroad is very great. Something must be done to improve the economic
position of the Indian population, especially in the South of Peru. In
that area the Communists have become very strong. He asked the
Archbishop of Cuzco, who had played a vital role in maintaining peace
source text was sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 835 from Lima,
May 8.

and order in Cuzco during the recent Communist uprising there, to
describe what had happened.
The Archbishop said that the Communists had been planning to
cause trouble in the South. The increase in the price of gasoline was
merely an excuse for action.2 They had 15,000 people under their con-
trol. They had worked out complete plans for seizing and dividing up
the large farms of the area and for sacking the homes of the prosperous
people of Cuzco. Groups had been chosen for these tasks. It was not,
however, possible for the Communists to carry through these plans.
The Archbishop described the way in which the Communist group
had used to their advantage the fact that a boy had been critically
injured during the rioting by a bullet fired by the police. The boy was
carried around by the mob on a large theater sign and permitted to die
without medical attention.
The Communists used the common technique of putting women
and children in the front of their group during demonstrations.
The Archbishop spoke of his personal difficulties in trying to inter-
vene in the situation. He was not permitted to speak from the cathedral
to the 15,000 or more people massed in the central plaza. He had to go
to the headquarters of the Labor Union, where he was able to address
the people. He offered to serve as an intermediary with the Army, if the
people would be willing to go to their homes and behave in an orderly
fashion.
After this arrangement was worked out a people’s militia of about
one thousand took over the task of keeping order during the period
after the police and troops were withdrawn in order to avoid bloodshed.
Since the Army had only about 500 troops in Cuzco at the begin-
ning of the uprising, the Communists thought that they could be smoth-
ered by the large group of people which they could mobilize. During
the night after the major uprising, however, more troops arrived by
plane and overland, and they were able to get the situation under con-
trol. The Communists managed to interrupt traffic by cutting ditches
across the highways. The troops coming overland had to go the last ten
kilometers by foot.
After order was restored by the military the Communist newspa-
per in Cuzco said that what happened in the city was merely a skir-
mish; next time the uprising will be on a national scale.
chauffers’ strike, April 7–11, over a new gasoline tax. A violent general strike developed
Lima, June 12, the Embassy transmitted an eyewitness report by Richard P. Schaedel

Peru  1033
The Archbishop said that the basic cause of the serious situation in
the South is economic - too little work and too little income.
Mr. Waugh spoke of the active role being played by Communist
groups in Uruguay and Bolivia and of the determined anticommunist
activity by the Government in Paraguay. He commented on the need to
work against Communism through the schools, labor unions and the
church.
Financial Problems of Peru
Mr. Waugh said that the Exim Bank had decided a few years ago
that the greatest help it could give to Peru would be by making loans to
private companies, especially in the field of mining where large invest-
ments are needed. Later the Bank began to make numerous equipment
loans to sugar mills, chemical plants, etc. It also made a loan to finance
hospital equipment, though it is not particularly interested in loans of
this type. He said he believed that more small loans had been made to
finance supplies for Peru than for any other Latin American country,
except perhaps Mexico or Brazil.
He said he had been discouraged by Peru’s failure to pass legislation
which would make it feasible for the Marcona Mining Co. to expand its
operation. The Exim Bank is prepared to loan about $10 million for this
purpose, while $15 million or more would come from other sources.
This would help Peru’s foreign exchange situation both immediately
and in the long run. He said he wondered if it had been a good idea
to include the legislation for the Marcona project in a bill covering an
entirely unrelated irrigation project.
The Minister of Finance said that there was strong political backing
for the irrigation project but that it had run into some difficulties since
congressmen from other regions had raised objections to the use of all
the Marcona royalties for this project. However, he thought the bill in
question would have been passed by Congress if the session had not
come to end so soon. He anticipates that the bill will be passed quite
promptly by the next session of Congress.
Mr. Waugh said that the United States makes funds available
through the Exim Bank and, as one stockholder, through the I.B.R.D.
The two banks try to coordinate their programs. They exchange infor-
mation regularly.
Mr. Waugh said that Peru badly needs coordination of its devel-
opment programs. It is very difficult for the Exim Bank to know what
projects to assist because Peru has worked out no system of priorities. It
shifts from one project to another in accordance with political pressures
of the moment. Peru should have an inter-­agency planning group with
a small staff. Some of the political pressures to which the individual

Ministers are subjected could be eliminated if decissions were made
by a high-­level inter-­agency group rather than by individual Ministers.
Ambassador Berckemeyer said that Peru has legislation providing
for a coordinating body but that it has not been implemented.
Mr. Waugh said that he had found during his trip that countries in
Latin America are having trouble at the present because of low prices
for export products, an effort to carry forward economic development
programs at a faster rate than is actually possible and payment of social
benefits in excess of economic capacity. Peru is better off than most
countries in Latin America, and its long run prospects appear good.
However, good development planning is needed, especially at the pres-
ent time.
Mr. Thorndike said that he is sure that Peru will be in a good posi-
tion in five or six years but in the meantime does need to obtain large
loans from abroad. He gave Mr. Waugh a copy of the attached memo-
randum outlining Peru’s problems.3 (This memorandum, except for the
attachment dealing with minerals, is Thorndike’s rewrite of a memo-
randum prepared for him by Pedro BELTRAN, publisher of La Prensa.)4
As we were leaving the meeting I told Mr. Thorndike that we are
very much troubled by the new tax bill which has just been passed
involving discrimination against foreign companies. The bill includes,
among other things, a 196 tax on foreign loans in Peru which would
be unjust and would discourage foreign investment. He professed not
to know about this aspect of the bill. He said that it has not yet been
promulgated and that either on Saturday or Monday he would ask me
to come over and go over the provisions of the law in detail before he
takes any action regarding promulgation. I said we should be delighted
to have an opportunity to do this.
(The next morning at the airport he said he would wish to include
the problem of reconciling Peru’s tariff increases with its GAM obli-
gations in our proposed discussion. He said he would call Monday to
arrange a time for such a meeting.)5
3 Not printed; in an appendix to its memorandum, the Peruvian Ministry of Finance
and Commerce stated that Peru had relied on loans from private U.S. commercial banks
but that it no longer could do so. To meet general needs and service the external debt,
Peru needed about $40 million a year for the next 5 years.
4 The memorandum by Pedro Beltrán was not further identified.
orandum of conversation between Thorndike and Linville, May 12, on Peru’s new dis-
11, the Embassy reported that at the Intersessional Committee meeting of the contracting
parties in Geneva, June 3-4, Peru received a temporary de facto waiver of its obligations
under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, permitting increases of 50 percent

Peru  1035
PE–8.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Peru (Achilles)1
Lima, May 8, 1958.
SUBJECT
Anti-Nixon Demonstrations, Boundary Dispute and Armaments
PARTICIPANTS
Sr. Raúl PORRAS Barrenechea, Foreign Minister
Dr. Augusto THORNDIKE, Finance Minister
Vice President Nixon
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
T. C. Achilles
Col. Walters (Interpreter)
Contrary to his established custom of not making calls on
Foreign Ministers, the Vice President called on Sr. Porras this after-
noon on the advice of the Embassy and at the insistence of the Finance
Minister, in view of the delicate psychological situation arising
from the anti-American demonstrations this morning.2 The Foreign
Minister opened the conversation by advising the Vice President of
the Peruvian Government’s regret at this morning’s incidents and of
his action in ordering that the floral tribute containing the American
and Peruvian flags be reproduced and replaced at the statue of San
Martin. The Vice President expressed appreciation and understand-
ing that the incidents in no way reflected the true feelings of Peru. He
hoped that they would serve to alert Peru to the extent and immedi-
acy of the danger.
The Foreign Minister then discussed the Ecuadoran frontier prob-
lem along the lines he had taken with me on May 6,3 namely that it was
both important to settle the problem quickly as this matter of demar-
cating a few kilometers was poisoning the atmosphere of the whole
continent and promoting a chain reaction of armament increases. The
Vice President and Mr. Rubottom reiterated the interest of the United
Text sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 858 from Lima, May 15.
2 For a report on these demonstrations, see Document PE–7.
3 According to his memorandum of the May 6th conversation, Ambassador Achilles
suggested to Foreign Minister Porras that Peru offer “practical economic and psycholog-
ical benefits which would make a boundary settlement acceptable in Ecuador.” Foreign
Minister Porras replied expansively to this suggestion; “Certainly, anything of that

States Government, as one of the Guarantors of the Bio Protocol,4 in a
permanent and mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute and the
interest of the United States Government in seeing arms expenditures
throughout Latin America minimized and expenditures for construc-
tive development maximized.
4 Reference is to the Protocol of Peace, Friendship, and Boundaries between Peru
and Ecuador, signed at Rio de Jeneiro, January 29, 1942, and entered into force February
26, 1942. Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States also signed the Protocol as guar-
antors. For text, see 3 Bevans 700.
PE–9.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the
Department of State1
1000. Department please advise Secretary.
VP schedule disrupted today because of demonstration at San
Marcos University. Information yesterday indicated students San Marcos
would close university, not permit VP to enter and demonstrate against
him. VP decided this morning proceed visit San Marcos but meeting
political leaders had to be rescheduled for afternoon. VP party stopped
as it entered street in front San Marcos by hostile student crowd led by
Communists. Nevertheless VP tried carry out scheduled visit. Embassy
officer observed university gates promptly locked, VP asked students
whether they were cowards and afraid to hear him talk. Shouting stu-
dents carrying signs reading “Fuera Nixon”, etc., made impossible VP
proceed. Stores and other missiles thrown, one of which grazed VP. Police
intervened and enabled VP party depart, VP then made unscheduled
visit Catholic University where met by friendly students, and had highly
successful meeting in which he was vigorously cheered and applauded.
Student leader said his visit not official schedule and regretted therefore
they could not welcome him officially but they welcomed VP as private
citizen. VP said he came that capacity, “I went to San Marcos to see if
there was liberty and freedom of speech and I found there was not. I
Niact.

Peru  1037
have come to Catholic University and found that there is such freedom.”
During meeting Communist demonstrators from San Marcos set up rival
loudspeaker but students severed wires.
In meantime, Communist agitators led group from San Marcos
to Plaza San Martin where they marched around Plaza changing “no
se vende Peru.” Police kept crowd from hotel and it gathered around
statue San Martin. Crowd took floral offering VP had placed hour
earlier and tore off U.S. flag done in flowers as well as part of center
depicting U.S. leaving only Peruvian flag and SA. Police made no effort
prevent desecration U.S. flag. Wreath was replaced by government at
7:30 p.m. under police protection.
VP party returned hotel from Catholic university 11:30 a.m. and
crowd upon seeing his car broke from statue and surged toward hotel.
Traffic prevented VP car proceeding to hotel and he descended and
walked remaining 200–300 yards. Crowd shook fists, spit and threw
leaflets and some fruit, while shouting and waving placards. Police
conducted VP hotel and demonstration continued another 15 minutes
when assault guard finally moved in swinging clubs and crowd scat-
tered. Possibly 50–75 students represented nucleus demonstration with
maybe 400–500 more curious onlookers. Police chased leaders all way
back to San Marcos.
Remainder VP schedule rearranged because these events. At press
conference VP said he was advised not go San Marcos but decided he
should because important not allow minority element deny freedom
expression in great university. Stated principal concern safety innocent
students and had cautioned police against pushing students. Said he
was touched by Peruvian expression regret including Foreign Minister,
VP, etc., and desire of Rector San Marcos apologize. Said no official
protest made and none necessary. Had not had contact as yet with
President. Said it was not personal affront but demonstrators were spit-
ting on Peru, on ideals of San Martin and millions who have fought for
liberty. Regretted effect on San Marcos because no university great that
cannot assure freedom of expression. Said the day will live in infamy
in history San Marcos. Demonstrators he said [illegible in the original]
not physical but intellectual cowardice because they are afraid of truth.
They thought they had won victory [illegible in the original] suffered
defeat because they had shown [illegible in the original] they [illegible
in the original]. Peru now knows what would [illegible in the original]
most [illegible in the original].

PE–10.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the
Department of State1
1034. While long-­range effects of VP’s visit there cannot yet be
forecast, I submit following at this time.
(1) Weak government here was hoping to utilize visit to seek
more U.S. loans and may not have been averse to prospect of mild
Communist anti-U.S. demonstrations to impress us as to need for
help. Seriousness of demonstrations however surprised, mortified
and shocked government. Demonstrations were partially designed
to embarrass ­government and after-­effect has been considerably to
weaken government’s already shaky position.
Some coolness on part Peru Government apparent before incidents
and even more thereafter with attempt shift blame to U.S. rather than
face up to own responsibilities for maintenance order, social advance-
ment and avoidance discouragement of foreign investment. We should
help them regain confidence and face but continue remind them tact-
fully of their own responsibilities.
(2) One strong impact has been on university ferment where pot
already boiling before visit due not only traditional excessive politick-
ing by LA students but to frustration of students over poor teaching,
facilities and prospects. Too early yet to evaluate this.
(3) Public reaction has been one of humiliation, admiration for
VP and reiteration of traditional warm friendship for U.S. But most
have shown more shame for violence and discourtesy than liking
for U.S. policies. Reaction has also shown undertones of widespread
latent non-Communist antipathy toward U.S. because of its wealth
and power and resentment at certain aspects of its economic policies
or actions as they adversely affect Peru, notably of course re lead and
zinc. In this connection U.S. editorials citing latin resentment at U.S.
policies have been widely reprinted here. It is this latent antipathy and
periodic resentment, coupled with low living standards, which makes
Communism dangerous out of all proportion to its numbers. Reaction
has shown that trade far more important than aid. Latter nevertheless
important here, particularly when it works from bottom up to help
maximum number neediest help selves and avoids bureaucratic ten-
dency toward bigness. It has hitherto done both and same grass roots
approach even more necessary in future to combat Communism. Some
Priority. This telegram was sent in two sections.

Peru  1039
military aid also needed to maintain armed forces as strong stabilizing
and anti-Communist element.
(4) Pain of favorable reaction diminished by wide criticism here,
and reprinting of criticism in U.S. press, over sending U.S. troops to
Caribbean.
(5) Events here and at Caracas dramatically revealed ability of
Communists in LA to arouse mob support and cause trouble. This
demonstration of Communist strength has obviously caused jubila-
tion in Moscow and presumably impressed uncommitted peoples
everywhere.
(6) Immediate effect in Peru has been in some respects strongly
favorable to U.S., in other unfavorable. Long-­term effect here and else-
where will depend upon whether (1) Communists are emboldened
to stir up even stronger anti-U.S. feeling and obtain wider support in
doing so, or (2) public opinion in the Americas is sufficiently alerted to
Communist threat to their own freedom to check further Communist
proselyting and assure effective government action. This presents real
challenge to all of us, particularly in field.
(7) More fundamental problem is how U.S. can overcome latent
antipathy aroused by its power and periodic resentment over its pol-
icies or action, from which Communists get wider support, or prefer-
ably transform these feelings into friendly ones. We occasionally get
credit for our unselfish and altruistic use of our mighty position but
only occasionally. This requires good presentation abroad but, more
fundamentally, avoidance of any moral basis whatever for criticism.
(I recall Secretary’s simile of “spot of coal dust on face of movie actress
far more conspicuous than same amount on face of miner”). It means
not repeat not preaching but making obviously clear in deeds as well
as words our devotion to our basic ideals. Among other things it means
finding better answer than we have in past, and VP in statements here,
Caracas and elsewhere has made much progress toward it, to problem
of making clear our antipathy to dictatorships without slipping into
intervention. It means, without in any way impairing our policies of
developing individual and collective strength, de-­emphasizing as far
as possibly military aspects of our policy. This involves maximizing
civilian, and controlling military, influence on foreign policy. It means
making our economic policies and actions conform to those we profess,
those we know to be in real national interest, and avoiding insofar as
possible damage to friendly countries. This involves obtaining frequent
majorities in Congress along lines of national rather than local or sec-
tional interest.
This presents even greater challenge to us all, particularly to those
at home.

Please excuse foregoing long and rather presumptious moralizing.
I know the difficulties. Please give copy to VP.
I have no objection to foregoing being declassified for congressio-
nal or other official use, with deletion paragraph (4) and first word and
two words just before last word of first paragraph of (1) and all of sec-
ond paragraph of (1).
Achilles
PE–11.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Peru (Achilles)1
Lima, May 27, 1958.
SUBJECT
Gravity of political situation
PARTICIPANTS
President Manuel Prado
T. C. Achilles
I had for sometime been considering the advisability of attempt-
ing to impress personally on President Prado the gravity of the pres-
ent political situation in the country and the necessity of more effective
measures being taken to deal with the underlying problems. Receipt
last Friday of Vice President Nixon’s thank-­you letter2 to him provided
an occasion to request an appointment which was granted for 10:00 a.m.
this morning. I reached the decision to take up these matters with him
despite some trepidation in view of his great vanity and widely known
reluctance to discuss or even admit the existence of serious internal
problems. We spoke in French since neither my Spanish nor his English
was up to a conversation of this delicacy.
After giving him Vice President Nixon’s letter which he read and
for which he expressed appreciation, I said that I wished to speak of
other matters as a friend of his, of Peru and of democracy. I had admired
from the beginning of his Administration his efforts to strengthen
­initialled by Achilles, was sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 910
from Lima, May 27.
2 Not found in Department of State files.

Peru  1041
democracy in Peru. France was not the only country struggling at the
moment with a “crise de regime”. Peru was too and for the same rea-
son, a very wide-­spread feeling that the Government did not or could
not exert sufficient authority to deal with the country’s pressing prob-
lems. I said that until a few months ago most of the dissatisfaction in
Peru had been directed not toward revolution but toward more or less
complete Cabinet changes. This was encouraging evidence of a grow-
ing maturity of democracy in Peru. At the present time, unfortunately,
many people, and not just habitual conspirators or malcontents such
as the Miro Quesadas,3 junior Army officers or the Accion Popular but
honest and substantial people, were saying that it was too late for the
situation to be solved by a Cabinet change since the President himself
was unwilling sufficiently to face up to the problems involved. I hoped
profoundly that they were wrong and that Peru could still show that
political maturity which I believed it was capable of showing and which
I knew was his primary objective. I hoped that the situation could still
be saved but believed that the hour was already very late. It would be
presumptions for me or any foreigner to offer him advice but I hoped
that he could profit from the advice of the wisest, most honest, stron-
gest and most patriotic Peruvians he knew, particularly those outside
the Government, since there were always more good men outside any
Government than in it, and that he would then act as his conscience
dictated, but firmly.
To my surprise the President both listened to what I had to say
without interruption and took it in good part. He launched into a
long discussion which he continued for half an hour, although he
was repeatedly interrupted by telephone calls and his aides advising
him that others were waiting. He began with a diatribe against Pedro
Beltrán. During his previous Administration4 he had offered Beltrán
various Cabinet posts but the latter had declined and accepted only
the Embassy in Washington.5 During his present Administration he
had again at various times offered Beltrán Cabinet posts but the latter,
while incessantly criticizing, refused to accept responsibility. Beltrán
was playing a double game, accusing the Government of not exercising
authority and at the same time stirring up dissatisfaction against it.
He turned to attack the leading bankers, particularly Enrique
Ayulo, President of the Banco de Credito, and Alfredo Alvarez Calderon,
principal lawyer for the Bankers Association. He recounted their past
3 Reference is to the Miro Quesada family which stood on the extreme right in
Peruvian politics.
4 The previous administration of President Prado was during the period December
5 Pedro Beltrán served as Peruvian Ambassador to the United States during the
years 1944–1946.

misdeeds and corrupt practices. He said that they and many others
longed for the favored position they had had under the Odria6 regime
and were seeking to bring down his Government. They were doing this
by refusing to accept any settlement of the bank strike,7 which they
had turned into a “lockout”. A decree had been prepared for his signa-
ture yesterday terminating this situation but he had not signed it in the
hope that the banks would reopen this morning. Since this had not hap-
pened, he would sign the decree. (When I left, the Minister of Labor, the
President’s nephew Max Peña Prado, and a number of others whom I
believe were members of the Bank Workers Union, were waiting.)
The President said that he had never lacked energy. It was easy to
issue decrees (I was tempted to interject that it was too easy to issue
them but hard to make them stick) and it would be easy to use armed
force. This was not his way and he preferred democratic solutions.
At this time he digressed to express for the first time patently
sincere regret at the unfortunate incidents which had occurred during
Vice President Nixon’s visit. He said he profoundly regretted the inci-
dents and the blot they placed on Peru’s reputation but what could he
do? The Prefect of Lima had been shoulder to shoulder with Nixon in
the mobs. I said that I had been at all times shoulder to shoulder with
the Vice President, or at least as close to him as anyone could stay,
and that I had not noticed the Prefect. He indicated surprise and said
he had photos to prove it. (He could be correct. I know the Prefect
only slightly and might not have recognized him. Anyway, I did not
notice him nor did he have any noticeable effect on events.) Had he
ordered mounted police or the Army to charge the demonstrators or
the police to enter the sacrosanct university premises, the situation
would have been far worse. I observed that the police had known in
advance the names of those who were organizing the demonstrations.
He said he had personally taken steps to have the principal instiga-
tors arrested and he would see they were punished although Peruvian
justice did not operate in quite the same way as Anglo-Saxon justice.8
He said he had done his best to obtain passage by Congress of a law
regulating labor unions and a law enabling the Government to act
8 The Embassy reported on the arrest on May 16 of the “Communist leaders allegedly
responsible for demonstrations May 8 against Vice President Nixon in despatch 875 from
respectively)

Peru  1043
against Communists but that in each case he had been widely accused
of incipient dictatorship.
I reiterated the hope that he could find answers to his pressing
problems which would be both democratic and effective and that he
could obtain the advice, assistance and support of the best men he
could find outside as well as inside the Government. He thanked me
and said that he would be glad to receive me at any time I wished to
discuss such matters with him. I said I had nothing further to say at this
time but that I understood the French Ambassador,9 wished to talk with
him along similar lines. (I learned later that he has asked the French
Ambassador to see him at 7:00 p.m. tonight.)
Our conversation concerning Mr. John R. Neale has been reported
separately.10
9 Léon Brasseur.
Government’s request that John R. Neale continue indefinitely as USOM Director or for
gram 1069 from Lima, May 27, Achilles reported Neale’s willingness to remain during a
PE–12.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chargé in Peru
(Neal)1
Lima, June 13, 1958.
SUBJECT
Economic Situation
PARTICIPANTS
Sr. Luis Gallo Porras, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance
Francis A. Linville, Economic Counselor
Jack D. Neal, Chargé d’Affaires, a. i.
source text was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 993 from
Lima, June 17.

I handed Gallo Porras a letter containing Ambassador Achilles’
congratulations.2 I told him Mr. Linville and I also were happy he had
accepted the Prime Ministership and position as Minister of Treasury;
that the Embassy was ready to cooperate with him in every possible
way.
He said he was concerned about the economic situation and that
Pedro Beltran was in the United States at the present time discuss-
ing financial matters. He had taken some documents there regarding
Peru’s financial needs. Gallo Porras said they were planning to nego-
tiate for a loan in the United States. I asked whether this meant the
work was not to be carried on here in Lima. He stated it was their
intention to negotiate through Ambassador Berckemeyer. He said they
felt it would be much better to carry on the talks in Washington away
from interference and opposition of Communist elements and political
opponents. When questioned further, Gallo Porras stated the request
for a loan had not actually been prepared but was being worked on
here presently.
I told him Mr. Samuel Waugh of the Export-Import Bank had pos-
sibly informed him (Gallo Porras) as I know he had former Minister of
Treasury Thorndike that it was essential for Peru to make a detailed
exposé of its financial plan when requesting a loan. I told him that only
one week ago in Washington the Department of State had also advised
me to so inform Peruvian officials concerned. I stated this was strictly a
business matter, that Peru was dealing with precise “Boston Bankers”
and, therefore, their case must be well presented. Gallo Porras indi-
cated his understanding.
Gallo Porras said the situation was critical and that an extraordi-
nary session of Congress was being called next week. He said the coun-
try was heavily in debt; that it owed Grace & Co. 50,000,000 soles (Gallo
Porras was in error on the amount. Peru owes Grace & Co. 25,000,000
soles and 52,000,000 to International Petroleum. The total debt to vari-
ous local concerns is estimated at 350,000,000 soles.) and Ferreyros and
Company a large sum.
I told the Prime Minister I knew he was extremely pressed for
time; however, I wished to inform him of the Embassy’s preoccupation
with the climate for foreign investment and particularly the treatment
of American business. I stated I was leaving with him a Memorandum
concerning the main points at issue.3 I said the climate for invest-
ment had deteriorated during the past eight months. The treatment of
International Petroleum Company—he asked what I meant, “their not
2 The referenced letter was not further identified.
3 The referenced memorandum was not found in Department of State files.

Peru  1045
being granted an increase for their products?” I said no; that first it was
forcing a 15 ­per cent wage increase on them4 and then not allowing them
to increase the price on their products. I explained that IPC was partially
owned by Standard Oil of New Jersey which was not only influential in
the U. S. financial circles but also has holdings throughout the world;
therefore, any adverse decisions affecting the company is quickly known
throughout the world and carries great influence in financial circles.
Gallo Porras said that I had seen what the local effect of an
increase in price granted to the retailers of gasoline had been. He
said he didn’t see how an increase could be granted to IPC at this
time. I said the company was making no money. Gallo Porras acted
rather surprised and said, “No?” I said, “Very little, if any.” As a
result I felt certain it would be necessary for IPC to curtail activities
(Mr. Ashworth, the manager of IPC, had already informed me that he
was closing six of his eleven drilling rigs and laying off 560 workers
but that IPC had not yet informed the Government.) and cut person-
nel. Gallo Porras said, “Well, they have too many workers anyway.” I
said I didn’t know, but laying off personnel would cause a problem—
which Gallo Porras admitted.
I told the Minister I was leaving him copies of two notes which we
had sent to the Foreign Office regarding taxes which affected Americans.5
The “foreigners tax” was causing us a great amount of difficulties
and was a source of constant complaint by American citizens. I said we
felt the tax unjust and discriminatory and that it should be repealed, I
showed him the Foreign Office reply6 received today saying our Note
had been referred to Congress for appropriate committee handling. I
stated that was not satisfactory since time was a factor and Americans
would have to pay the tax before July 1. I stated what we desired was
an immediate suspension of the law until Congress could repeal it. I
said we would appreciate a decree by the President or if proper, one by
him as Minister of Treasury.
Gallo Porras said he didn’t know anything about this but would
look into it.7
The other note we wore leaving with him concerned the increase
in taxes on American firms - the complementary-­tax. I pointed out to
Government on April 11 decreed a 15 percent wage increase for petroleum workers for
5 The two notes under reference were not found in Department of State files.
6 Not found in Department of State files.
Prado signed on that day the new Foreigners’ Tax Bill, which provided for payment by
foreign residents of a nominal fee beginning in 1959 rather than a foreigners’ tax based

him that there was an increase from zero to 19 per cent on “income
from service, interest and rent obtained by companies not established
in Peru.” Mr. Linville informed him this phase of the bill had been
inserted by Congress, reportedly without the knowledge or suggestion
and approval of the Ministry of Treasury.
I said we felt these two taxes had added to the unfavorable climate
for investment and that he himself had in his letter of acceptance to
President Prado stated the need for foreign capital.
At one point early in the conversation when I mentioned Gallo
Porras’ letter to the President, he thought I meant a letter which evi-
dently he has written to Vice President Nixon.8 He said he told the Vice
President that he shouldn’t go to San Marcos—it was a mistake, etc.,
etc.—that he and the Vice President upon reaching the Hotel Bolivar
“there were only cheers; he shouldn’t have gone to Son Marcos.” Since
Mr. Linville and I had not called on him to get into a discussion on the
Nixon visit, I gave him no reply but turned him back to his acceptance
letter to President Prado.9
With reference to the economic troubles, I told Gallo Porras
there was no need for Peru to import experts to advise them on their
needs because he had right, on the same floor with him two finan-
cial experts from the International Bank. I stated both Mr. Havlik and
Mr. Chaufournier were friends of Peru, and their viewpoint was profes-
sional, had nothing to do with their respective governments and there-
fore their advice could be relied upon implicitly. I said the Embassy
had faith in them.
Mr. Linville stated Mr. Havlik and Mr. Chaufournier would know
precisely what procedures were required in applying for loans. Mr.
Linville added that Mr. Larrabure of the Central Bank and Mr. Romulo
Ferrero could also be relied upon for good advice.
8 The referenced letter was not further identified.

Peru  1047
PE–13.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of West Coast Affairs (Silberstein)1
Washington, June 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Peru’s Financial Problems
PARTICIPANTS
Sr. Pedro Beltran, Editor and Publisher of La Prensa, Lima
W – Mr. Dillon
OSA – Mr. Silberstein
Sr. Beltran referred to conversations he had been having with
Mr. Waugh and his staff at the Export-Import Bank,2 and also with
Mr. Rubottom,3 concerning Peru’s financial problems. He said he was
very encouraged by the reception he had had. He thanked Mr. Dillon
for giving him the opportunity to acquaint him directly concerning
these problems. Peru is now facing a critical balance of payments
situation, similar to that of Colombia and some of the other Latin
American countries. Colombia’s crisis came upon it rather pre-
cipitously, while Peru’s developed more gradually because of the
substantial exchange reserves built up in 1956. However, as world
prices of Peru’s raw materials exports declined, these reserves had
been consumed during the last half of 1957, because of the mistaken
policy of trying to hold the rate firm at 19 soles to the dollar. By
February of this year the acuteness of Peru’s balance of payments
problem had become evident. It is estimated that foreign exchange
income this year only from lead, zinc, copper, cotton and sugar will
be $85 million less than last year.
Sr. Beltran expressed appreciation of the constructive advice he had
received at the Export-Import Bank. The Bank officials had carefully
explained to him all the data which Peru would have to develop and
present to document a request for a balance of payments loan. When he
returned to Peru he would explain this to the Government.
The trouble with balance of payments loans, however, is that they
are understood only by bankers and businessmen, and have no mean-
ing for or impact on the people in general. Peru has two serious social
3 A memorandum of conversation between Beltrán and Rubottom, June 19, is in file

problems, the critical need for housing, and the need to resettle Indians
who live in the relatively crowded and unproductive altiplano and are
a ripe target for Communist agitators. There is plenty of virgin cultiva-
ble land on the other side of the Andes, but funds are needed to build
access roads and to clear the lands.
If the United States were to provide financial assistance for hous-
ing and resettlement, it would have an immediate impact on Peruvians
all over the country and would make a great contribution toward coun-
tering the appeal of the Communists.
Sr. Beltran’s idea is to apply the soles obtained from selling the dol-
lar exchange provided as balance of payments assistance to financing
housing and resettlement projects. The Peruvian Government has an
excellent housing program, drafted by experts provided through ICA,
which could be quickly implemented if funds could be obtained in this
way. The Government would not build houses itself, but would finance
technical services and provide mortgage loans in the manner of the
HOLC and Fanny May programs in the United States.
The United States need not fear it would be creating an uncomfort-
able precedent for itself by financing housing in this way, since it could
be pointed out to other prospective borrowers that the loan to Peru was
related to a balance of payments problem. Sr. Beltran emphasized that
the financing needs for housing were large. He implied that the size of
any loan the United States might make to Peru at this time should be
measured by the extent of the housing problem rather than the balance
of payments problem.
Mr. Dillon said he was not certain whether it would be feasible
to arrange a loan in the way Sr. Beltran had suggested.4 He thanked
Sr. Beltran for taking the time to fill him in on the situation on Peru.
loan to the Government of Peru for housing, resettlement, and roads. For information,
all Development Loan Fund, Report of Activities During Calendar Year 1960 (Washington,
PE–14.
Editorial Note
the transfer of naval vessels to friendly foreign countries (72 Stat. 376).
In telegram 68 to Lima, August 13, the Department of State instructed

Peru  1049
the Embassy to offer two destroyers to Peru for $7 million rehabilita-
and 26, 1960, the two Governments agreed to a five-­year loan of three
United States naval vessels (one destroyer and two frigates) to Peru.
For the text of the agreement, see II UST (pt. 2) 2254. In an exchange of
agreed to a five-­year loan of a destroyer to Peru with the cost of rehabil-
itation and equipment charged to Peru. For the text of this agreement,
see 12 UST 364.
PE–15.
Letter from President Eisenhower to President Prado1
Newport, September 21, 1958.
Dear Mr. President:
Once again I consider it advisable to communicate with you
directly on a matter of mutual concern. Following months of painstak-
ing effort to find a solution to the problem of the world oversupply
of lead and zinc, I have felt obliged to take action now to relieve the
genuinely distressed condition of this industry in the United States by
establishing import quotas.2
Contrary to my hopes and expectations, the minerals stabiliza-
tion plan, which had been proposed as an alternative to accepting the
recommendations of the United States Tariff Commission,3 although
approved by the Senate, was defeated in the House of Representatives
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Peru.” Drafted by Ernest V.
Siracusa, September 20; approved by President Eisenhower by telephone, September 21;
and transmitted by telegram 125 to Lima, September 21.
for text, see 23 Fed. Reg. 7475.
ing of injury to the domestic lead and zinc industry from foreign imports. Three
Commissioners proposed restoration of the tariffs in the Tariff Act of 1930, [illegible
in the original] to remedy the injury. The other three Commissioners proposed a larger
tariff increase and quantitative limits on imports. For further information, see the

by a narrow margin.4 In this connection you will recall that the
Commission, responding to appeals by United States producers who
had been forced to curtail production by about 25%, recommended
some months ago that I not only impose quotas but increase the duties
on lead and zinc as well.
In an effort to find some other solution, the Department of State,
in cooperation with your distinguished Ambassador in Washington,
endeavored to obtain agreement of other major exporters to a tempo-
rary, voluntary reduction of exports. It was hoped that such an agree-
ment would allow time to study the causes of imbalance between
world supply and demand for lead and zinc and to consider the best
means for dealing with this problem. While a majority of the interested
nations were found willing to undertake a study of the longer range
problem, these discussions, as well as those which followed in London
under the auspices of the United Nations,5 revealed that a temporary
arrangement to cope with the existing emergency would not immedi-
ately be feasible.
The action which I have thus taken will obviously have the effect
of reducing Peruvian exports of lead and zinc to the United States
market. It does not, however, alter the existing tariff structure and will,
I am hopeful, prevent a further decline in the prices which Peruvian
exporters obtain for these commodities in this market. Moreover,
these import quotas, which are compatible with international discus-
sions regarding export controls, are subject to review whenever cir-
cumstances may warrant, including possible resolution of the current
problem of imbalance through multilateral action. The Department
of State has therefore been instructed by me to maintain its efforts to
this end in cooperation with other governments. I am confident that
Peru will continue to take a most constructive part in this endeavor.
I wish again to affirm the high regard I have for your Excellency
and for the Peruvian people.6
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
industry, passed the Senate, July 11, but was rejected by the House of Representatives on
August 21.
5 Representatives of 32 countries and six observers met in London in September
1958 to consider the current and future condition of lead and zinc production and con-
sumption. A Lead and Zinc Committee was established to consider the views of partic-
ipating governments and report to a subsequent meeting. Relevant documentation is in
President Prado’s reply, urging reconsideration or suspension of the import quotas

Peru  1051
PE–16.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Peruvian Affairs (Pringle)1
Washington, September 25, 1958.
SUBJECT
Peruvian Reaction to U.S. Imposition of Lead and Zinc Quotas.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Rául Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister of Peru
Dr. Juan Bautista de Lavalle, Peruvian Ambassador to the OAS
Sr. Miguel Grau - Minister Counselor, Embassy of Peru
ARA – Mr. Rubottom
WST – Mr. Siracusa; Mr. Pringle
Foreign Minister Porras2 said that resentment against the U.S.
was very strong in Peru as a result of the imposition of quotas on lead
and zinc. He said that newspapers and labor organizations were urg-
ing him to leave the U.S. immediately and return home. The resent-
ment extended to the very top of the government. He emphasized that
President Prado had cooperated closely with the U.S. since the begin-
ning of his first term of office (1939–45) and that this cooperation had
been outstanding during World War II. More recently, however, the
President had felt disillusioned with the United States and had noted
its coldness toward Peru. Dr. Porras said that other Latin American
countries had received much more consideration and aid from the U.S.
than Peru and that the time had come for the U.S. to demonstrate its
friendliness by helping Peru to solve certain problems. He said Peru
was suffering a political crisis, due largely to social discontent aris-
ing from the economic situation, fanned by Communist agitation, and
that some military plotting was taking place. After speaking of the
democratic nature of the Prado Administration, he said he assumed
that the U.S. considered it in its best interest to have Peru governed
by a democratic president rather than a military dictator, to which Mr.
Rubottom indicated firm assent. Dr. Porras then said that he did not
want to go back to Peru empty-­handed, that, politically, he must take
back some concrete demonstration of continued U.S. friendship and
cooperation. (Here the Foreign Minister brought up the Peru-Ecuador
Drafted September 26.
2 Foreign Minister Porras was in Washington for the Informal Meeting of American
­footnote 5.

boundary dispute and the Development Loan Fund, which are the
subjects of separate memoranda.)3
Much later, Mr. Rubottom reverted to the subject of lead and zinc,
saying he wished to talk frankly about the matter, as was his custom.
Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the U.S. Tariff Commission had found
four years ago that the U.S. lead and zinc industry was being injured by
foreign imports and had ratified this finding only this year. During all
of this period, the U.S. had refrained from increasing tariffs or impos-
ing quotas. It had spent many millions to stockpile these minerals, as
well as additional sums in bartering surplus agricultural commodities
for them. It had presented a bill to Congress proposing subsidies as a
means of assisting the domestic industry with a minimum of adverse
effect on foreign producers, but the bill had failed. The Administration
had engaged in discussions in Washington and London directed
toward a multilateral solution, but such a solution had not been arrived
at. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that, in a democracy, the Administration
could not ignore the pressures of public and Congressional opinion.
To do so would prejudice many other aspects of its international poli-
cies. The President had finally decided to take action very much along
the lines of that which Peru and Mexico had favored at the London
conference. The President had assured the Presidents of both countries
that his decision was subject to review and that he hoped a multilateral
solution could be arrived at.
Mr. Rubottom then expressed his regret that some of the forego-
ing explanations of the imposition of quotas by the U.S. had not been
brought to the attention of the Peruvian people. He said he did not
feel it fair for the press and public in Peru to talk as if this action by
the U.S. marked the end of all U.S. efforts to cooperate with and assist
Latin America. He added that he did not feel that the U.S. deserved to
become the subject of threats because of its action on lead and zinc.4
Foreign Minister Porras said that he and the Peruvian Embassy
in Washington were aware of the background and the political factors
which Mr. Rubottom had outlined. He said that he personally would
help to explain the U.S. action and to make it understood in Peru, but
that he needed something to take home with him as a concrete demon-
stration of the fact that the U.S. was still cooperating with Peru.
9–2558; the memorandum of conversation on the Development Loan Fund is printed as
Document PE–17.
4 According to a memorandum of conversation in Washington on October 15,
Foreign Minister Porras mentioned to Assistant Secretary Rubottom a tentative Czech
offer to buy Peruvian lead and zinc. In commenting on this offer, Rubottom pointed out
that “the Soviet Bloc was a net exporter of lead and zinc and that any purchases would be

Peru  1053
Mr. Rubottom mentioned the recent $40 million Eximbank loan as
a very concrete demonstration. He said that the loan constituted one
more example of the fact that the U.S. was always ready to consider
appropriate and well-­documented Peruvian requests for assistance.
(Subsequent to the above conversation, Minister Grau asked
Mr. Pringle to assure Mr. Rubottom that all of the officers of the Peruvian
Embassy in Washington fully understood the U.S. reasons for imposing
the quota, that their position was an awkward one in view of the very
strong reaction in Lima, but that the Embassy’s very close working rela-
tionship with the Department would be in no way affected.)5
on September 29 Ambassador Berckemeyer described to Assistant Secretary Rubottom
“his efforts to influence sober Peruvian reaction to lead-­zinc quotas rather than emo-
tional, unreasoned attitude adopted to date.” The Department instructed the Embassy
PE–17.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Peruvian Affairs (Pringle)1
Washington, September 25, 1958.
SUBJECT
Peruvian Desire for Development Loan Fund Assistance
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Rául Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister of Peru
Dr. Juan Bautista de Lavalle, Peruvian Ambassador to the OAS
Sr. Miguel Grau, Minister Counselor, Embassy of Peru
ARA – Mr. Rubottom
WST – Mr. Siracusa
WST – Mr. Pringle
The Foreign Minister, in discussing the reaction in Peru to the
imposition of lead and zinc quotas by the U.S., said that he wished
to bring about a greater understanding in his country of the reasons
which had led the U.S. to take this action. However, in order to do this
and in order to demonstrate that the U.S. was still cooperating with
Drafted September 26.

Peru, he would have to take something back as concrete evidence of
U.S. assistance.
Dr. Porras handed Mr. Rubottom a short memorandum requesting
a loan to finance a National Health Plan.2 Mr. Rubottom asked whether
the plan had been worked out in detail, and the Foreign Minister gave
him a copy of a three-­page letter dated July 24, 1958, from Minister
of Health Sánchez to Dr. Vintinner, Director of SCISP in Peru.3 The
letter describes a national health plan envisaging the construction of
numerous hospital and health centers in different parts of the country,
the establishment of public health and nursing schools, and the imple-
mentation of many other plans for the improvement of public health.
The letter requests that the U.S. loan an amount of money sufficient to
permit the development of the plan during a three-­year period. (Dr.
Porras indicated that the sum involved might be in the neighborhood
of $30 million.)
Mr. Rubottom said that this matter would be studied but that he
must say in all frankness that the DLF was very reluctant to make loans
in the fields of public health and housing. He explained that the prob-
lems involved in those fields were so tremendous that the U.S. could
not possibly afford to finance their solution. He said it had been esti-
mated that a billion dollars could be spent annually on housing in Latin
America for a generation without solving the housing problem. For
that reason, he added, the U.S. tries to direct its economic assistance
loans toward productive enterprises so that Latin American nations can
increase their productivity and finance the solution of their social prob-
lems as their economies grow.
Dr. Porras then mentioned a Peruvian application for DLF assis-
tance for roads which he said had been presented in Lima. Mr. Rubottom
said that he had no information regarding this application but that the
Department would query Embassy Lima about it.4
Dr. Porras said that he would be at the UN in New York for perhaps
a week and that he hoped it would be possible for him to take back a
favorable decision on a loan to finance the National Public Health Plan
when he returned. Mr. Rubottom said that the request would be stud-
ied but that he could give the Foreign Minister no encouragement in
his hope.
2 The referenced memorandum by the Peruvian Ministry of Public Health and
Social Assistance is attached to the source text, but not printed.
3 The referenced letter is attached to the source text, but not printed.
see Development Loan Fund, Report of Activities During Calendar Year 1960 (Washington,

Peru  1055
PE–18.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Peruvian Affairs (Pringle)1
Washington, October 15, 1958.
SUBJECT
Peruvian Desire for Economic Assistance
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Raúl Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister of Peru
Sr. Miguel Grau, Chargé d’Affaires, a.i., Embassy of Peru
Sr. Guillermo Hoyos Osores, Counselor, Peruvian Foreign Office
Admiral Luis Llosa, Naval Attaché, Embassy of Peru
ARA – Mr. Rubottom
WST – Mr. Siracusa; Mr. Pringle
Dr. Porras referred to his September 25 conversation with
Mr. Rubottom on the subject of economic assistance and spoke once
more of his need to take back to Lima some new and specific evidence
of U.S. willingness to assist Peru. He said that President Prado had
instructed him by telephone to call on Mr. Rubottom for this purpose
and particularly to seek immediate approval of a credit to the Banco
Minero for small loans to Peruvian mining companies.
Mr. Rubottom said the Department had received a message from
Embassy Lima outlining this proposal in broad terms2 and that the
Eximbank was prepared in principle to consider such an application. He
added, however, that considerable detail, including information on the
types of loans the Banco Minero proposed to make, would be required
in order for the application to be properly evaluated. Mr.  Siracusa
observed that the assistance should probably not be sought for lead
and zinc, already in overproduction, but for other minerals.
Dr. Hoyos then gave a long, rapid-­fire description of Peru’s
exploding population, deep poverty, Indian problem, social unrest,
communist agitation, and political instability, concluding with a plea
for substantial U.S. assistance to help it overcome these problems. In
the course of the description, he observed that Latin American dicta-
tors had happened to be in power during the good economic times of
the post-Korean War period, while democratic regimes such as that of
National Emergency Lead-Zinc Committee had proposed to Ambassador Achilles on
October 10 that the Export-Import Bank of Washington extend credit to Banco Minero
which would make loans for small mining companies to exploit mineral deposits other

President Prado had to face, in addition to the other problems confront-
ing democracy in Latin America, the handicap of an economic reces-
sion. He observed that many of Peru’s requirements for U.S. aid were
shared by most Latin American countries but that Peru’s needs were
particularly urgent.
Mr. Rubottom said that the U.S. was sympathetically aware of the
problems facing Peru and other Latin American nations and that we
wished to cooperate closely with Latin America in striving to solve them.
He said that the economic development needs of Latin America obvi-
ously could not be met merely from U.S. economic assistance resources,
but he expressed confidence that substantial progress could be made
through U.S.-Latin American cooperation. In reply to a remark by Dr.
Hoyos concerning a reference in his Santa Barbara speech of October
103 to the importance of private capital in economic development, Mr.
Rubottom pointed out the role which foreign private capital had played
in the development of the U.S. economy prior to World War I. He also
spoke of the vital role which domestic private capital could play in the
economic development of Latin America and of the importance of cre-
ating conditions which would induce capital to stay in the country.
After some further exchange on economic development and basic
commodity problems, Dr. Porras again referred to his need to take
some concrete offer back to Peru with him and asked whether he could
be given a commitment for a specific sum of money as a credit to the
Banco Minero.
Mr. Rubottom said that he could not give such a commitment and,
furthermore, that he did not believe such a step would be in the best
interests of either the U.S. or Peru. He referred to the press statement
released by Embassy Lima on October 14 and to the sentence express-
ing the readiness of the U.S. to give careful and sympathetic consid-
eration to any applications made by the Peruvian Government for
loans to finance sound and constructive projects, especially projects
designed to alleviate distress in the mining areas. Mr. Rubottom said
that the Department and other U.S. Agencies stood fully behind that
statement and that he believes it constituted an important assurance to
the Peruvian Government that any sound loan applications made by it
would receive prompt and sympathetic attention in Washington.
Dr. Porras asked whether he could assure the Peruvian
Government and public that the United States was prepared to
give expeditious, careful and sympathetic attention to any Peruvian
3 For the text of Assistant Secretary Rubottom’s speech, see the Department of State
4 The statement under reference is quoted in telegram 196 from Lima, October l.

Peru  1057
Government loan applications for sound projects, and Mr. Rubottom
said that he wished to give the Foreign Minister his personal assur-
ance: that this was the case.5
Embassy that the Export-Import Bank doubted the political value of a loan to Banco
Minero if only an insignificant number of applicants could meet the Export-Import
PE–19.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Peru (Achilles)1
Lima, December 11, 1958.
SUBJECT
Petroleum Price Increases
PARTICIPANTS
President Prado
T. C. Achilles
During my call on the President this morning, he expressed hope
of my support for U. S. financing for a number of development proj-
ects, which gave me an opportunity to say that the U.S. attitude toward
both public and private investment in Peru could not but be greatly
affected by a number of factors, including the strength and stability of
the Government and its ability to secure legislation from Congress, a
balanced budget, and the treatment of foreign investment as exempli-
fied by the petroleum price problem.
I continued that I recognized the domestic political prob-
lems involved but that petroleum prices had long been held by the
Government at an abnormally low level and that a level permitting
continuation of a viable petroleum industry in Peru could not but be
of great importance to the future U.S. attitude toward investment here.
He replied that he was fully aware of the importance and diffi-
culties of the petroleum industry and of the need for petroleum price
increases. He would see that they were granted. There was currently
The source text was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 566
from Lima, December 11.

a tremendous political uproar over the budget but the Government
would nevertheless push through a balanced budget before the end of
the month. Then it would take up the petroleum price increases. There
would be a similar uproar, probably with strikes and demonstrations,
but the price increases would nevertheless be granted.
I said I had been disturbed by Prime Minister Gallo Porras’ state-
ment to me yesterday that Congress would not approve the legislation
and that the increases should be enacted by decree after Congress had
adjourned, subject to approval next July.2 The Company had repeat-
edly been promised some such action without results and believed that
legislation was necessary. Without specifically stating that it would be
done by legislation, although he said there would be another extraor-
dinary session of Congress in January, the President reiterated that the
price increases would be put through as soon as the budget had been
passed, no matter what the uproar might be.
2 The memorandum of conversation between Prime Minister Porras and
Ambassador Achilles, December 10, was transmitted to the Department of State with this
memorandum of conversation.
PE–20.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1
Washington, December 18, 1958.
SUBJECT
Deteriorating Situation in Peru
This is to call your attention to the deteriorating situation in Peru,
where the vacillating government of President Prado faces growing
unrest. It has exerted no real leadership and has lost all of the prestige
which it originally enjoyed for giving Peru a democratic administration
after eight years of military dictatorship.
by Pringle. The source text bears the following note of December 19 from Murphy to
Rubottom: “As Achilles is coming up for the holidays, let us have a discussion with him
about this.” No record of the projected discussion was found in Department of State files.

Peru  1059
Lima despatches report Ambassador Achilles’ serious concern
over increasing disintegration of the political and social fabric. Signs of
this disintegration include the seizure of property by landless persons,
near-­chaos in most universities, a bitter and prolonged doctors strike,
and public demonstrations reflecting growing disrespect for law.
Similar situations in Peru’s past have usually led to military coups,
and the Ambassador believes the likelihood of such a development in
the near future cannot be excluded. Although high military officials
appear determined to maintain constitutional processes, Peruvian
military coups usually come from the middle ranks rather than the
high command. Looking further into the future, the Ambassador does
not exclude the possibility of a bloody social uprising of the poverty-­
stricken highland Indians unless the ruling elite takes far more action
to raise the masses’ standard of living than it has shown any intention
of doing.
While communist activity has so far played a relatively minor role
in Peru, the field for its development is becoming increasingly fertile.
This potentially explosive situation comes at a time when our
­lead-­zinc quotas have severely exacerbated U.S.-Peruvian relations.
The Ambassador foresees no improvement in Peru until that nation
begins to experience a greater measure of prosperity and of firm gov-
ernmental leadership.
PE–21.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs (Siracusa)1
Washington, January 20, 1959.
SUBJECT
IPC Problem in Peru
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Michael L. Haider, President of IPC and a Director of Standard Oil of
New Jersey
Mr. Milo Brisco, Vice President of IPC
Mr. Martin Jones, Director of Public Relations, Standard Oil of New Jersey
Mr. Siracusa, WST; Mr. Silberstein, WST
Co-drafted by Joseph A. Silberstein.

Mr. Haider explained they had come to fill the Department in
on IPC’s problem in Peru. The company has been in contact with the
American Embassy in Lima and Mr. Haider presumed the Department
was generally familiar with the situation. At Mr. Haider’s request,
Mr. Brisco explained that according to the terms under which it oper-
ates in Peru, IPC is obliged to supply 80% of the domestic market’s
needs. The Lobitos Company, in which IPC recently purchased a 50%
interest, must supply 15% of the domestic requirements and a few
small companies make up the balance. Back in the early ’40s when this
requirement was established, it was not an onerous one as only about
40% of IPC’s production had to be devoted to the internal market. Since
then, as domestic consumption has risen, while production has been
relatively stabilized, it has reached the point where some 80% of IPC’s
production must be devoted to the Peruvian market. Mr. Brisco went
on to explain why this obligation to supply the domestic market places
such a burden on the company. At the beginning of World War II, the
Peruvian Government placed price controls on many necessities. These
controls were lifted after the war on everything except bread and petro-
leum products. With the exception of some minor adjustments allowed
in 1953–54, the Government has hesitated to permit further price
adjustments because of its fear of the political and social repercussions
which might ensue. In the meanwhile, the sol has depreciated in value
and production costs have risen. Today the controlled prices net IPC
a return of only 70c⁄ a barrel at the well-­head. He emphasized that this
calculation is reached by subtracting only the costs of the refining and
distribution operations and without including a profit return on those
operations. The comparative price in the United States for the equiv-
alent grade of crude would be about $3.25 a barrel. Today it costs IPC
about a dollar a barrel to produce the crude which is netting only the
70c⁄/barrel return. Mr. Brisco pointed out that the Government-­owned
petroleum company which produces some 2600 barrels a day by itself
and receives another 500–600 barrels in royalty crude is not obliged to
supply the domestic market and in fact, has resisted efforts to make it
supply that market on the grounds that it cannot do so profitably at the
prices presently allowed. Most of the Government company’s crude is
exported. It supplies small quantities for the refinery at Iquitos area
where the controlled price is well above the price permitted in the rest
of the country.
In response to a question, it was brought out that IPC expects to
just about break even this year on its Peruvian operations, since the
profit on the foreign marketing of about 20% of its production will be
just enough to cover the losses on its domestic processing and sales
of the other 80%. This contrasts to an overall profit last year of about
in Peru, however, is upwards of $200 million.

Peru  1061
The relationship of IPC’s problem to the Peruvian balance of pay-
ments was also discussed. Under the present circumstances, IPC is
not disposed to make additional investments needed to increase pro-
duction and believes the day will soon arrive when Peru will be a net
importer of petroleum. If, however, it can obtain satisfaction on the
pricing problem, IPC would make investments in secondary recovery
which it would hope would maintain output and possibly make a mod-
est increase. This would maintain Peru’s ability to export petroleum
for a longer period and put off the day when Peru would become a
net importer of petroleum products, which while probably inevitable,
would still be perhaps eight or ten years in the future. IPC does not,
however, expect any major discovery which would alter the long-­range
prospect that Peru would eventually become a net importer.
In addition to the affect it is having on Peru’s balance of payments
situation, Mr. Brisco pointed out that the unrealistic petroleum pric-
ing policy is also serving to discourage development of Peru’s hard
fuel sources. Peru, he said, has ample coal resources, but there is no
inducement to develop them. He pointed out that at the Chimbote
steel plant, they find it cheaper to use kerosene in the coal drying
operation than coal.
Mr. Brisco then went on to review the proposal which IPC has
made to the Peruvian Government, which the Government has so far
not acted upon. In return for an adequate pricing policy, IPC has offered
to place its operations under the 1952 Petroleum Law and give up its
present fee-­simple status for a 40 year concession and to pay the GOP a
50 percent tax on all its profits in Peru. It has further offered to extend
$25 million in low interest loans to the Government for road building,
housing and other projects.
When asked, based on their experience in the country and knowl-
edge of its political problems, what might be the reaction to the kind of
relief which IPC seeks, Mr. Brisco responded as follows: He said that
the inefficiency and vacillation of the Prado administration has clearly
cost it much of its support and in fact generated much opposition to
it. He realizes that a sharp increase in petroleum costs would have a
major public impact and said that he would not attempt to predict that
this act might not be the straw that would break the camel’s back and
bring about the overthrow of the Prado regime. On the other hand, he
pointed out that many of the features of IPC’s offer to Peru are such that
the Government could make a strong logical case to defend its actions
and point out how it would serve the interests of the country.
In response to Hr. Haider’s request for comment on the proposals
made by IPC, Mr. Siracusa suggested that, while he could not evaluate
them from an expert point of view, he did recognize, consistent with
what Mr. Brisco had said, that the proposals contained many points

which should be appealing if evaluated logically. He said, however,
that emotions are likely to prevail over logic and wondered whether,
because of this, the inclusion of the 50–50 formula was sound. The feel-
ing is fairly general, he said, that the 50–50 formula is on the way out
and the Peruvian Government’s acceptance of it, as something almost
passé might cause it problems and might be one of the reasons for its
holding back.
Messrs. Brisco and Haider thought the point was well taken and
merited study even though they thought that the proposal was an emi-
nently fair one in the Peruvian context. Mr. Brisco then said that he
should like to make it clear that IPC’s position is flexible and that it
would be most happy to receive a counter-­proposal from the Peruvian
Government on which it could negotiate.
Mr. Siracusa said that he was certain the visitors were aware that
Ambassador Achilles had been actively interested in their problem and
had, in fact, discussed it on numerous occasions with the President and
the Minister of Finance. Although both of these gentlemen assured the
Ambassador of their intention to take necessary action, the Ambassador
is not convinced that they will actually do so. In fact, he tends to believe
that their actions will be much less courageous than their words.
Mr. Siracusa then said he felt it would be timely to support the
Ambassador’s efforts at Lima. He would propose that Mr. Rubottom
call in Ambassador Berckemeyer specifically for the purpose of dis-
cussing this case with him, indicating the Department’s strong inter-
est, and urging him to recommend that his Government press for an
acceptable solution.2 He said that in discussions with the Ambassador
he felt it would be appropriate to bring up the importance of solving
the petroleum problem to Peru’s balance of payments problem, and
thus to its credit-­worthiness for the kind of development loans which it
will be seeking shortly from the U.S. and other financial institutions. He
said while such a relationship would not be mentioned as a quid pro quo,
the fact that Peru’s ability to service loans will be affected by the petro-
leum situation made it logical and fair that the matter should be raised.
Mr. Brisco and Mr. Haider expressed their pleasure at the proposal
to consult with the Ambassador. While they raised some questions
about Peru’s desire for development loans, they did not in any way
challenge the expressed intent not to make an IPC solution a quid pro
quo for the loans. They left with Mr. Siracusa copies of a study recently
made by the company reviewing the history of the problem and
2 A memorandum of conversation of February 2 stated that Assistant Secretary
Rubottom told Ambassador Berckemeyer that the IPC’s pricing problem in Peru was “an
extremely serious one which was having an adverse effect” on the investment climate in

Peru  1063
outlining the proposals made to the GOC, and also one made in 1954
by an independent consultant.3
3 The referenced study was not found in Department of State files. The Peruvian
Government raised petroleum prices and granted compensatory increases in transportation
tariffs and wages on July 26. When an ensuing protest strike by chauffeurs unions became
violent, the Government suspended constitutional guarantees on July 30 and broke the strike
PE–22.
Editorial Note
By an exchange of notes at Washington on June 15, 1959, Peru and the
United States concluded an agreement for a five-­year renewable loan of a
dry dock to Peru. The agreement provided that Peru assume the costs of
the transfer of the dry dock and make available the dry dock and its naval
yard to naval vessels of the United States and of Latin American nations
that had concluded military assistance agreements with the United States.
For the text of the agreement, see 10 UST 1053. Documentation on its
PE–23.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary
of State (Dillon)1
Washington, June 29, 1959.
SUBJECT
Peruvian DLF Loan Application
Background:
The Peruvian Government has applied for a $4.1 million
DLF loan to cover most of the local currency costs of the $9 million
Use Only. Drafted by Pringle; the source text is an unsigned carbon copy. Pringle had
written a similar memorandum, June 26, which was addressed from Silberstein to
Rubottom and is filed with the source text.

Aguaytía-Pucallpa road project. The IBRD gives the project its highest
priority in Peru and is prepared to finance the $4 million foreign cur-
rency costs. The Peruvian Government, which is suffering serious eco-
nomic and financial difficulties, will provide the remaining $900,000 in
local currency. The project is considered an excellent one from the stand-
point of economic development. It would improve a very inadequate
existing road to the head-­waters of navigation of the Amazon-Ucayali
Rivers at Pucallpa, thus opening up promising areas for settlement
and providing an all-­weather route for transporting products from the
trans-Andean area to Lima.
The Peruvian application has been discussed by the DLF Board,
where it not a cold reception. There has been some opposition to the
loan because it is for local currency costs, while Mr. Waugh is under-
stood to oppose any DLF loan to Peru at the present time. Various alter-
native methods of financing were discussed by the Board, i.e. utilizing
the “sterilized” local currency proceeds of the Eximbank’s $40 million
line of credit to Peru or inducing the IBRD to finance the local as well as
foreign currency costs. I understand that both of these ideas have been
abandoned and that prospects are for further inconclusive consider-
ation by the DLF.
I believe it is important that the DLF grant this loan promptly. It is
a meritorious one from the standpoint of economic development, and
there are certain political considerations which make its approval of
great importance.
1. Our relations with Peru have been under a strain for some time,
to a large degree as a result of commodity problems with that country.
Our establishment last September of quotas on lead and zinc, Peru’s
second most important export, was the severest blow to U.S.-Peruvian
relations in years, but cotton and sugar problems have also contributed
their share to the strain. Cotton is Peru’s most important export, and
the Peruvian Government has repeatedly expressed grave concern over
our upland cotton export program for the 1959–60 marketing year. This
program, which will lower by five cents per pound the price of U.S. cot-
ton after August 1, has been characterized by Peru as “dumping” and
“economic aggression.” Peru is similarly concerned over the current
Tariff Commission investigation to determine whether our long staple
cotton import quota should be reduced. I believe that the granting of
a DLF loan for the Aguaytía-Pucallpa road would tend to ease some
of the present strain and would have a beneficial effect on our overall
relations with Peru.
2. The Prado Government is in such financial difficulties that it
has been able to undertake almost no economic development projects

Peru  1065
and desperately needs for internal political reasons to be able to point
its finger at some worth-­while project it has initiated. Despite some of
its obvious weaknesses, the Prado Administration was democratically
elected and is trying to give Peru democratic Government. I believe
it would be in the United States’ interest to strengthen it by granting
the loan.
3. Having embarked upon a stabilization program, the Government
has expected that as a consequence it would be eligible for loans from
the U.S. for economic development. It has complained that such
loans have not materialized; the Aguaytía-Pucallpa loan application
offers the opportunity to grant a sound loan and to overcome those
complaints.
4. Although the Peruvian Government did not formally present the
application to the DLF until May 19, 1959, it was long under the mis-
taken impression that it had done so as of late January 1959. Peruvian
officials have been extremely displeased over the delay resulting from
this unfortunate misunderstanding, especially since they understand
that the IBRD had been prepared for some time to finance the foreign
currency costs of the road, providing that Peru could arrange the local
currency financing.
Request for Action:2
In view of the urgent political considerations in favor of this loan
and of the difficulties which have so far beset the Peruvian applica-
tion, I would greatly appreciate anything which you may be able to do
to assure favorable consideration of the Peruvian request by the DLF
Board as soon as possible.
2 There is no indication on the source text of Under Secretary Dillon’s action on
this request. The Development Loan Fund signed a $4.5 million loan agreement with the
Government of Peru on December 19, 1960, for improvement of the Aguaytía-Pucallpa
further information, see agency for International Developments, Status of Loan Agreements

PE–24.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the
Department of State1
Lima, August 3, 1959.
No. 60
SUBJECT
Beltrán’s Program
There is enclosed a memorandum of long conversations with
Sr. Beltran over the week-­end.2
His program, both with respect to a sound, free economy, based
on private enterprise and stimulation of domestic and foreign invest-
ment and to the urgent need of social progress, is in broad terms sub-
stantially identical with what the Department, other agencies of the
U. S. Government, and this Embassy have long advocated. After three
years of weak and vacillating Peruvian Government we now have one
headed by a man who deeply shares our views as to what is necessary
and is determined to do it. He will work closely with us and seek our
advice but he will not need much of it. What he needs most is our moral
and some material support. I believe the latter will be both relatively
small and soundly based but its psychological effect will be great.
On my return I find more support for him and more optimism that
he can succeed than I expected. Despite the great difficulties he is hav-
ing, he has a good fighting chance to succeed. If he fails, as was pointed
out in Mr. Sayre’s Despatch No. 41 of July 22,3 not only will Peru be in a
grave situation economically, politically and socially, but the American
philosophy of free economy and free enterprise will also be gravely
discredited in Peru.
I am doing everything I can morally here by radiating confidence
in the new Government to all and sundry and will be asking con-
crete assistance as soon as sound projects are developed. I know the
Department will appreciate the importance of rapid, and wherever pos-
sible, favorable action.
Theodore C. Achilles
3 Not printed; it reported the Embassy’s views on the background selection, and

Peru  1067
[Enclosure]
Memorandum of Conversation
August 3, 1959.
SUBJECT
Beltran’s Program
PARTICIPANTS
Sr. Pedro Beltran, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance
T. C. Achilles
Over the week-­end I was the only guest at Beltran’s hacienda and he
and I spent Saturday afternoon and evening and all day Sunday discuss-
ing what he hoped to achieve, how he hoped to do it, and what assistance
from the U.S. might be practicable. His hopes from us are much more
modest and much sounder than those of his recent predecessors.
Why He Accepted Office
Having participated in 48 hours of soul searching with him last year
before he turned down the same two positions, I was surprised that he
had accepted them this year. He said that a month ago he had been con-
vinced that Prado was about to fall, that no successor to the President
or Prime Minister was in sight who could hope to change the three-­year
drift into inflation and economic stagnation and the centuries-­old resis-
tance to social progress. He foresaw nothing but accelerated deterio-
ration, with or without a military government, and probably an early
Communist-­fomented social revolution. He believed that the President
would not have turned to him except from similar acute pessimism. The
friends he had consulted had urged him to accept as a patriotic duty. He
had debated waiting until after “one more government had fouled things
up worse” but concluded that might be too late.
The President had promised him full support. He did not count
on this except insofar and as long as the President considered their for-
tunes linked. He had been assured of full support by the military and
believed them. (Top Army and Navy sources have confirmed this to
me.) He had not sought APRA support but had been assured of it at
least on a trial basis. (Prialé4 has confirmed this.) He could count on the
support of the wealthy class in their own interest, except for the Miro
Quesada group. (Presumably correct.) In Congress the MDP would
have to support him in their own interest. They with APRA constituted
4 Ramiro Prialé, Secretary General of APRA.

a majority. The Christian Democrats generally shared his views and,
while they had refused to join his government and might vote against
him, probably would not cause him too much trouble. He expected all
out opposition only from the Communists, Acción Popular and the
Miro Quesadas, whose El Comercio5 has been following the Communist
line increasingly strongly. He had accepted and would wage an offen-
sive rather than defensive fight for his program.
Principles
A sound, free economy was fundamental to everything else. Next
to that, economic and social progress were essential and urgent if a
social revolution were to be avoided.
Financial Program
The first requisites were to stop inflation, restore confidence and
stabilize the currency and prices. He was inheriting a billion-­sol deficit
for 1959 and the prospect of a larger one in 1960 unless drastic measures
were taken. He could not perform miracles but he would do everything
humanly possible and as quickly as possible. He felt that the private
sector had been squeezed hard enough and that the public belt must
be tightened.
The first essential step was to stop borrowing from the Central
Bank. He had done so and would not resume. This in itself would do
much to stop inflation and exchange depreciation. He could neither
reduce this year’s budget nor reduce salaries but he would cut expen-
ditures all he could. He had already found some expendable personnel
and would get rid of them; more could be done through attrition by
non-­filling of vacancies as they occurred. Military expenditures, partic-
ularly for new equipment, could and would be cut. The President and
three military Ministers had promised to cooperate on this. He realized
that difficulties would arise when it came to specific cuts but he was
determined to make them and thought he could count on a reasonable
measure of cooperation.
He did not believe further tax increases at this time feasible either
politically or economically. He was trying to speed up tax collection.
(IPC’s new agreement with the Government provides paying the lat-
ter 50 per cent of its net profits. The Company already makes monthly
estimates of its annual income and has agreed to make monthly antic-
ipatory tax payments on the basis of such estimates. Beltran hopes to
persuade other American and Peruvian companies to do the same.) He
also expects to tighten tax enforcement. He had not been aware of the
5 Luis Miró Quesada Guerra was the Director of the conservative newspaper, El
Commercio (Lima).

Peru  1069
tax enforcement measures recommended by Costa6 and approved by
Gallo Porras, many of which have not yet been given effect, and was
delighted to hear about them.
Ending price controls on meat and raising the controlled price on
bread and rice to a realistic level should ease the deficit by from 100 to
200 million soles.
Nevertheless he believed he would need an additional one billion
soles (roughly $40 million) for operating expenses until next June 30.
He was determined not to resort to the Central Bank. IPC had agreed
to lend $20 million for this purpose. He wondered whether IPC could
make it $40 million. I said the Company’s manager7 here had had dif-
ficulty persuading the head office to approve the $20 million and felt
that one company alone should not be called on for the whole amount.
He thought small amounts might be raised from others such as Grace,
Cerro de Pasco, Southern Peru Copper, and the Telephone Company
(he volunteered that he hoped for an early solution of the telephone
problem) but probably not much.8 Could the U.S. Government make a
loan for operating expenses? I suggested that we first explore the pos-
sibility of using the existing EX–IM credit for this purpose. He read-
ily agreed. He would agree to any reasonable conditions attached to
any U. S. loan and could write some himself. He recalled his article in
“Foreign Affairs” in 1956 in which he had written that the conditions
attached to U. S. loans were of more value to the recipients’ economy
than the loam itself.
He realizes that the 1960 budget will be a major problem and
battle. He does not think he can reduce it below this year’s total and
believes that, given this year’s wage increases, it will be a major victory
to hold it to that level. He is counting on increased business activity,
some based on renewed confidence and some otherwise stimulated,
and non-­inflationary financing to provide the revenue. His social pro-
gram, particularly in housing, should also stimulate business.
Social Program
Beltran feels strongly that unless the reactionary feudal attitude
of the Government and ruling class is changed quickly, there will
be a social explosion, sparked by the Communists but participated
in by most of the underprivileged 95 per cent of the population. He
hopes to follow the British pattern of “social progress by conservative
6 [illegible in the original] United States Operations Mission in Peru.
7 Jack Ashworth.
8 Compañía Peruana de Teléfonos (Peruvian Telephone Company), a subsidiary
of International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, sued the Government over a
December 23, 1958 decree setting up a committee to establish new procedures for rate

government” and believes that the time is ripe for far-­reaching mea-
sures, that enough men in his Cabinet and in the ruling group in Peru
share his view to make them practicable, and that they need not be of
a nature to arouse excessive opposition from the wealthy. (I hope he is
right and believe the outcome of his attempt will have profound conse-
quences for Peru’s future.)
He believes that the slums of Lima, Arequipa and a few other cities
and the over-­populated Cuzco-Puno-Arequipa area in the South are the
danger areas. (So do I.)
As stated in his radio broadcast on assuming office,9 he gives top
priority to housing, roads and land reform.
Housing
He believes that housing has the greatest single appeal for the
urban and many of the rural underprivileged. He opposes government
financing and construction and is insistent on private enterprise and
private financing through the building and loan association method.
His recently established association in Lima has reached a capital of
5 million soles. He intends to push wealthy Peruvians to increase this
to 15 million soles very shortly and then to apply to the DLF for a loan
(amount as yet undetermined although $4 million has been mentioned)
to be invested in the association on a sol for sol basis. He then plans
to establish similar associations in Arequipa, Puno, Cuzco and other
cities. He believes that once these associations begin making loans, the
inflow of savings from small depositors will be enormous. The building
trades should also boom.
Roads and Land Reform
He considers these inter-­related in that much of the land to be
provided those seeking it must be in newly developed areas. Road
improvement will also stimulate increased production and better land
utilization. He believes the opening of new lands in the jungle more
economic than further irrigation on the coast.
Assuming that the IBRD and DLF loans for the Aguaytía-Pucallpa
road will shortly be approved, he gives top priority to penetration roads
in the South. I urged that priority be given to the Bagua-Yurimaguas
road in the North on the grounds that it would open up the best land,
that engineering studies for it had been completed, and that the qual-
ity of the land would attract the Indians even from the far South. He
granted the first two and thought the Yurimaguas area of great impor-
tance for the future but did not believe that the Southern Indians would
9 The Embassy informed the Department of State of Prime Minister Beltrán’s

Peru  1071
go there or stay if they did. He stated that most of the Indians who had
migrated to the upper Huallaga (between Tingo María and Tarapoto)
had stayed less than a year. The South was urgent.
He gave first priority to a road from Sandía to the Tambopata. The
Indians were already moving into the Tambopata area in large num-
bers even though they had to go and come and carry their produce by
trail. The terrain was difficult but the distance short and the Indians
had proved they wanted to settle there. He would like to see the road
built as a dramatic example of U. S.-Peruvian cooperation, surveyed by
U. S. Army engineers using helicopters, jointly financed and built by
the Peruvian Army with the engineering equipment already furnished
by the U. S.
(Beltran is keenly interested in using the Army, and other services
where practicable, for constructive development of the country and
also in popularizing it, within the Army and without, to bulwark the
country’s future internal order. He also shares our views on the value of
using the conscription period for civic and technical training.)
I shared his interest in the dramatic but reminded him that no real
engineering studies had been made of a Tambopata road, of the time it
took to get from conception through studies, financing and construc-
tion to completion, and the slow progress being made on the nearby,
similar purpose, Smathers-­financed Macusani-San Gabán road. He
agreed to expedite progress on the latter but insisted on the advantages
of a dramatic approach to the Tambopata road and of constructing it “a
la Yanqui” rather than “a la criollo”. I agreed to look into the possibili-
ties, primarily of ICA financing a study by U. S. and Peruvian engineers
of the practicability of the road.
He is now pushing his Commission on Housing and Land Reform
to complete its study on the latter subject by the end of this year and
hopes to be able to take specific measures next year.
Livestock Development
I told him that former Minister of Agriculture10 had nearly com-
pleted studies of a program designed to make Peru self-­sufficient in
meat and that I had found Washington favorably disposed to consider a
loan for this purpose, provided the price of meat was freed from control
as had now been done. He had not known of this and was delighted.
He thought the first step should be studies of pasturage, on the coast,
in the Sierra and in the jungle, and then the importation of improved
breeds. Technical assistance would be needed. I asked about the financ-
ing of the local expenditure. He thought it should be done by the Banco
10 Reference presumably is to Emilio Foley, Peruvian Minister of Agriculture, March

Agropecuario, which in turn should be financed to an increasing extent
by the commercial banks rather than by the Central Bank. This raised a
problem of interest rates but he believed it could be handled.
Identification of U. S. with Program
He said he knew his financial and social programs could succeed
only with close U. S. cooperation and help and that it would be in the
best interests of both Governments for the U. S. to be closely identified
with progress on all fronts. I entirely agree. He stated that he wished to
formulate the specific aspects of his programs, and carry them out, in
close consultation with us and to give the U. S. maximum credit in the
process. I am sure he will.
PE–25.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Peruvian Affairs (Poole)1
Washington, August 7, 1959.
SUBJECT
Peruvian Request for Military Aircraft
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Berckemeyer, Embassy of Peru
Maj. Gen. Guillermo Van Oordt, Air Attaché, Embassy of Peru
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
WST/P—Mr. Poole
Ambassador Berckemeyer and General Van Oordt called at the
Ambassador’s request to discuss further the Peruvian Government’s
request to purchase military aircraft. The Ambassador apologized to
Mr. Rubottom for disturbing him when the latter was about to leave
for the Santiago Conference2 but explained that he felt it was urgent to
inform Mr. Rubottom of the replies he had received from Lima on the
matter. In addition, he said General Van Oordt was being transferred
to Lima to become Chief-­of-Staff (i.e. Commander) of the Peruvian Air
Force and he wanted the General to explain the Peruvian position to
August 11.
2 Assistant Secretary Rubottom served as principal adviser to Secretary Herter at the
Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs at Santiago, Chile, August

Peru  1073
Mr. Rubottom and to convey the latter’s reactions to Lima. General
Van Oordt said he planned to leave for Lima on or about August 11.
Mr. Rubottom congratulated the General on his important assignment.
Ambassador Berckemeyer said that some time ago, through his
Air Attaché, he had asked his Government to review its request for
aircraft. Immediately after his conversation with Mr. Rubottom of
August 4,3 he had again asked for a review of the matter, and he and his
Air Attaché had just received replies – ­the latter from the Air Ministry
– ­asking them to press the existing request without any reduction. The
Ambassador then asked General Van Oordt to explain the matter more
fully.
General Van Oordt expressed the opinion that this request was
not extravagant. He argued that the planes were necessary to keep the
Peruvian Air Force in existence and that they were the minimum needed
for defending Peru’s frontiers, not to speak of hemispheric defense. He
claimed that this request conformed to the views of the U.S. Air mission
to Peru. He then went into the details of the request as follows:
12 T–37’s—These jet trainers were needed to replace obsolete
T-34’s which were uneconomical to maintain, and to provide neces-
sary jet training for Peruvian pilots. General Van Oordt estimated that
the planes would cost about $1.5 million. (While the General did not
make this clear in his talk with Mr. Rubottom, he explained to Mr.
Poole afterwards that the Peruvian Government’s request for T–34’s
in its note of June 94 was incorrect and that it should have read T–37’s.
He said that on his return to Lima he would see to it that Ambassador
Berckemeyer received the necessary amending instructions. Thus, he
said, the total cost of the Peruvian Government’s request was actu-
ally considerable higher than originally estimated. He stated that
the Peruvian Government wished to purchase these T–37’s on three-­
years credit.)
Eight F-86-F’s—These would be strictly replacements. The
Peruvian Air Force originally had 14 F–86–F’s, of which eight had been
wrecked. General Van Oordt said that these were nearly obsolete in the
U.S. and hence available. He estimated the total cost at $200,000. When
Mr. Rubottom asked for a clarification of the June 9 Aide Memoire which
simply said “acquire” without specifying terms, General Van Oordt
3 In a memorandum of the August 4 conversation, Assistant Secretary Rubottom
asked that the Peruvian Government reconsider its request for aircraft in view of Prime

said this should have read purchase for cash. (Afterwards, however, he
told Mr. Poole that he should have said purchase on three-­years credit.)5
18 B–26’s—These would be used unarmed for training, thus releas-
ing for active duty the Peruvian Air Force’s present armed B-26’s which
were now being used for training. These too, General Van Oordt said,
were nearly obsolete in the U.S. and available. He estimated the total
cost at $140,000. (He told Mr. Poole that these were to be purchased for
cash as stated in the Aide Memoire of June 9.)
Six C–46’s—(General Van Oordt did not mention the earlier request
for six C–46’s in his talk with Mr. Rubottom, but he confirmed to Mr.
Poole afterwards that this request was postponed although not can-
celled.6 He explained that there was considerable pressure from the
commercial airlines for these transports to be taken off of commercial
runs, although, on the other hand, the routes they were now running
were not covered by commercial lines and some would not be econom-
ical to run on a commercial basis.)
General Van Oordt argued that, practically speaking, there were
only seven planes flying on active duty in the Peruvian Air Force. In
answer to Mr. Rubottom’s query about the British planes in the Peruvian
Air Force, the General said that these Hawker Hunters are to all intents
and purposes grounded for lack of parts. It was not only a question
of acquiring replacement parts but of making some 50-­odd alterations
which had been developed in this model subsequently, and for which
the planes would have to be sent to England. He said that these planes
had not fired a shot nor dropped a bomb.
General Van Oordt then explained that he was a great protago-
nist of the principle of hemispheric defense, of arms standardization in
the hemisphere, and of purchases in the United States. He said that he
opposed the purchase of the British planes. He would like to continue
making purchases in the U.S., but said that the Air Ministry is never-
theless studying the possible purchase of British, French or Canadian
planes in case they were unobtainable in the United States. He hoped
that the Ministry would not have to do this.
General Van Oordt asked that all these factors be carefully consid-
ered in studying the Peruvian Government’s aircraft request.
5 The Peruvian Embassy reduced this request from eight to six F–86-F’s in an aide-­
6 Ambassador Berckemeyer requested the six C-46 aircraft in an aide-­mémoire
Berckemeyer on May 20, Assistant Secretary Rubottom asked that Peru consider this
request “in the context of many other, more burdensome Peruvian military expenditures.”

Peru  1075
Mr. Rubottom said he appreciated General Van Oordt’s speaking
with such frankness and that he would like to reply with equal frank-
ness. He agreed that the needs of hemispheric defense and the desir-
ability of standardization made it far preferable to purchase military
equipment in the U.S. rather than elsewhere. He explained, however,
that the U.S. felt the need to hold down the level of military purchases
to what appeared really necessary, although, naturally, we could not
interfere with a country’s sovereign right to decide for itself how it was
to spend its money in accordance with its own judgment of its needs,
capabilities and resources. He added that the Department of State is
under constant pressure from certain sectors of the Congress to limit
military equipment going to Latin American countries. Additionally, he
continued, we are often accused by the Latin Americans themselves of
unnecessarily arming the Latin American countries.
Mr. Rubottom then referred to Prime Minister Beltran’s talk with
Ambassador Achilles about his new program, some of which had
appeared in the press, and he referred particularly to Beltran’s desire
to reduce military expenditures. Mr. Rubottom said we were particu-
larly disappointed that the Peruvian Government should be pressing
its request for aircraft without a downward revision as we had urged,
and despite Peru’s difficult economic and financial situation. However,
we now had no recourse, he continued, but to process the request in
its present form, although we were very doubtful of favorable action.
He explained that there were other government agencies involved in
the matter and that their decisions on possible Peruvian request for
economic and financial assistance might well be prejudiced by any
such commitment of funds or credit to military expenditures of this
magnitude.7
Embassy in Peru that it had approved these purchases, but it suggested that the U.S. Air
Mission Chief should try to dissuade Peru from purchasing two B–578 aircraft because
of their unit cost of $126,500 and possible maintenance and spare parts problems.
In telegram 803 to Lima, May 24, the Department of Defense, with Department
of State concurrence, offered Peru four or five T–37’s from the fiscal year 1961 Military
Assistance Program and night F–86F’s under a Military Assistance Program grant in fis-
In telegram 1011 from Lima, June 1, the Embassy in Peru informed the Department of

PE–26.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(Rubottom), Temporarily in Puerto Rico1
Ambassador Achilles will meet plane at Talara with Prime Minister
and Mrs. Beltran. Beltran intends explain his “program” to Secretary2
and you, probably along following lines:
Immediate objective is restore sound economy based on balanced
budget, exchange and price stability, private enterprise and stimulation
of domestic and foreign investment. Longer range but concurrently
will seek accelerated social evolution primarily through private hous-
ing, road construction into new areas and land reform.
Immediate financial program includes:
(1) Complete stoppage of borrowing from Central Bank;
(2) Expediting tax collection; and
(3) Tightening tax enforcement.
Plans reduce expenditures by:
(1) Some reduction in government employees;
(2) Greater reduction through forced attrition; and
(3) Cutting military expenditures particularly for equipment.
Has been promised cooperation of President and armed services on 3.
Anticipates achieving exchange and price stability by mid-1960.
Despite expected saving from above measures and termination food sub-
sidies and increased revenues he expects need one billion soles ($40 mil-
lion) to meet treasury operating expenses until then without recourse to
Central Bank. Of this International Petroleum Co. is loaning $10 million.
To make up balance hopes Eximbank will agree amend stabilization loan
agreement permit Peruvian Treasury use sol proceeds (presently steril-
ized) from sale dollars borrowed from Exim.
Following cabled tonight to Achilles.3
Beltran intentions as outlined Embassy4 appear to contemplate
significant steps towards coping with GOP economic and financial
Drafted by Silberstein and signed by Siracusa. Assistant Secretary Rubottom stopped at
Ramey Air Force Base in Puerto Rico en route to the Santiago Meeting of Consulation.
plane made a refueling stop in Talara, Peru, August 11, en route to the Santiago meeting.
outline appears in the first part of the present telegram.

Peru  1077
problems. You may inform Beltran USG views his objectives with sym-
pathy and desires to cooperate with him in his efforts restore financial
stability, improve climate for private investment, and create condi-
tions favorable to national economic growth. Beltran, of course, should
understand that basic stabilization effort will have to be made by GOP
itself within limits of current balance of payments availabilities includ-
ing existing EximBank credit. As for loans for development assistance
they will, of course, have to be considered on case by case basis.
“EximBank probably prepared amend loan agreement permit
Treasury drawing soles provided Exim satisfies itself not inconsistent
with stabilization program Peru is developing with IMF. Bank would,
however, like have explanation rationale of this operation since using
counterpart only different in form from any other recourse to Reserve
Bank and since apparently necessary in any event obtain approval
Peruvian Congress for changing loan agreement. We dubious about
any attempt make the/use of counter-­part appear to be method of
avoiding inflationary impact direct borrowing from Bank.
We note Beltran expects one billion sol budgetary deficit to mid-
1960. Would appreciate your explanation gap this magnitude, which
equal that anticipated 1959, in view anticipated additional tax revenues
and economies.”5
PE–27.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the
Department of State1
132.
Secretary, Prime Minister Beltran, Rubottom and I had long mutu-
ally satisfactory talk at Talara this morning. Beltran described his
program along lines outlined in Embassy telegram 892 and Embassy
despatch 60. He stated he hoped shortly to submit concrete requests for
Repeated to Santiago for information.

Export-Import Bank loan for livestock development, DLF housing loan
for Savings and Loan Association and for help in studying practicabil-
ity of Tambopata penetration road in south. Secretary cited importance
to whole program of early concrete action in these fields and urged
Beltran to submit specific applications as quickly as possible. Beltran
has issued orders that this be done.
Secretary issued statement to press stating Beltran had outlined
his program to him and the Secretary had great confidence in ability of
Peruvian Government and people to surmount their present problems
and progress steadily toward bright future.3
I believe meeting and Secretary’s statement will help Beltran con-
siderably with Peruvian Congress.
Achilles
PE–28.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the
Department of State1
[Extract]
Lima, August 26, 1959.
No. 97
SUBJECT
Communism in Peru
VIII. RECOMMENDATIONS
1. With the Beltran Cabinet2 we have the best opportunity we have
had in the last three years to help the Peruvian Government and to
encourage measures that will improve the economic, social and polit-
ical situation in Peru. The most effective weapon against communism
in Peru is the adoption of such measures. We should therefore do
Drafted by Robert M. Sayre, Second Secretary, Embassy in Peru. Omitted are 46 pages of
this report.
2 The Cabinet of Pedro G. Beltrán Espantoso, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance
and Commerce, took the oath of office July 20.

Peru  1079
everything possible to help the Beltran Cabinet succeed. This means
primarily consistent encouragement of the Peruvian Government to
develop an effective economic and social program and prompt favor-
able action on our part on soundly conceived development projects
which require foreign financing.
2. Some way must be found to give the Indians and mestizos a
stake in the free enterprise system. The Indians are more contented
when they have their own land—the Vicar General of the Catholic
Church in Puno asserts that the higher incidence of land ownership
among the Indians in Puno as opposed to that in Arequipa and Cuzco
is one of the primary reasons communism is not making as much head-
way in Puno. Such measures as agrarian reform, housing, and highway
construction to open new areas as proposed by the Beltran Cabinet, will
help considerably. These and other programs that will demonstrate that
the free enterprise system will assure a higher standard of living and
a better distribution of the wealth will do more than anything else to
make communism less attractive as a solution. We should encourage
such programs and identify ourselves with them. We should encourage
not only Government officials to adopt such measures but also opinion
leaders whenever the opportunity presents itself.
3. The cooperative agriculture program (SCIPA) should be strength-
ened, especially its program of supervised credit. The credit program
of the Maryknoll Fathers in Puno and the SCIPA supervised agricul-
tural credit program in general have been successful and opened up an
avenue for improvement of the standard of living which as a practical
matter has not existed for the lower classes. We should not make the
mistake of expanding too rapidly and possibly discrediting the pro-
gram, but we should broaden this program as rapidly as is consistent
with sound management. Other ICA programs are making a sound and
welcome contribution, but increased and better production is needed
more than anything else in Peru not only to raise the standard of living
but to combat communist activities.
4. Our information effort should be concentrated primarily on
identifying the United States with the aspirations of Peru and creating a
climate for economic measures and reforms that will achieve these aspi-
rations. This can probably best be done by U.S. officials encouraging
the Government to adopt such measures and, once proposed, helping
through our information program to develop a favorable atmosphere
for them. Some of the unpopularity of the Prado Government during its
first three years has rubbed off on the United States because of our sup-
port of his administration. Our reputation is even more at stake with
Pedro Beltran as Prime Minister because he and his announced policy
and his actions are closely identified with the United States. This will be
a distinct advantage to us if he succeeds and we should help build a cli-
mate to help him succeed. At the same time we do the constructive job

of demonstrating that the programs and policies we espouse will offer
Peru a higher standard of living we must effectively refute the commu-
nists. In the Lima area we can probably do this best by assisting media
to do the job for us. In southern Peru, however, the job is much harder
but this is where the communist danger is greatest and this is where we
should concentrate our effort. We can probably make a greater impact
on public opinion if we concentrate our leader grant program on peo-
ple who help form public opinion on a daily basis, i. e., Congressmen,
newspapermen, labor leaders, etc.
5. [text not declassified]
6. We should intensify our efforts in the universities along the
lines we are now proceeding. The close working relationship between
USOM and the medical faculty at San Marcos University has paid off
in considerable good will toward the United States. The financial sup-
port we have given to this Faculty including laboratory and technical
equipment has helped to make it one of the most stable faculties in
the University. The exchange of students between the University of
Indiana and San Marcos has also paid off. We should encourage more
such exchanges, and in addition encourage any interest arising on the
path of mature, responsible American students and scholars to study
at Peruvian universities. Such a program would involve risks in that
all participants might not be effective representatives of the U.S. The
advantages to be gained in such exchanges, however, would greatly
outweigh the disadvantages. The relatively few students from the U.S.
in Peru have handled themselves extremely well. The “hotbeds” of
communism in the universities are usually the economics and law fac-
ulties. We should concentrate our exchange professor program in these
two faculties in an effort to propagate our economic philosophy and
our legal concept on the balance between duties and responsibilities
of the citizens and the State. Our effort should be more in the constitu-
tional law field than any other.
7. The real battleground in the student field is not, however, in the
universities but in secondary education. It is only a small percentage
of Peruvians who ever get to the universities. Our efforts in secondary
education should be directed at the student body in teacher training
schools in Peru. We cannot hope to influence directly the large mass of
Peruvian secondary students but we can influence them through their
teachers. The more secondary school students who can be assisted to
spend at least a year at school in the U.S. the better.
8. The Church in Peru should be encouraged to take a more active
role in improving social conditions in the country. The Church should
support a more equitable distribution of wealth. It should help in a

Peru  1081
housing program by sponsoring community action on this subject. In
general we should seek to have the Church throughout Peru carry out
a program along the lines now being pursued by the Maryknoll Fathers
in Puno. At the same time we should encourage the Church to take a
vigorous stand against communism.
9. We should encourage the military in Peru to support a positive
program to improve the standard of living of Peruvians, including
the necessary social and economic reforms. We should support the
general desire of the Peruvian Government and the military to have
the military take a more active role in the economic development of
the country and agree to the use of MAP furnished equipment for
this purpose provided this can be done in keeping with commitments
under bilateral military arrangements. We should lend our support
to the announced desire of the military to indoctrinate recruits in
civism and against communism and to provide them agricultural,
mechanical and trade training. Within available resources, we should
provide material and technical resources toward that end. The mil-
itary should be encouraged to carry out its anti-­communist policy
with more vigor.
10. We should keep in mind that anti-­communist legislation is
required in Peru and bring it to the attention of the Government at
appropriate opportunities, but until the Beltran Cabinet has made an
effective start on its program and has solidified its position better, we
should not press on this point. When this subject is discussed with
Government officials we should seek legislation in terms of strength-
ening the Penal Code, and not a separate anti-­communist law which
would be an open target for the communists and easily repealed.
11. We should encourage the Government to eliminate commu-
nists from the Government. Wherever possible we should identify such
persons, but this should always be done on the basis that the Peruvian
Government itself must investigate to determine the facts.
12. We should seek termination of Government support, in what-
ever form, to communist-­led labor unions. (It is not sound practice in
any case for the Government to be subsidizing labor unions, but it is
especially wrong when this involves communist-­led unions.)
For the Ambassador:
Robert M. Sayre
Second Secretary of Embassy

PE–29.
National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, 13 October 1959.
THE OUTLOOK FOR PERU2
THE PROBLEM
To estimate the outlook for political and social change in Peru
through mid-1962.3
CONCLUSIONS
1. Peru has long been ruled by an oligarchy which until recently
has shown little regard for the welfare of the majority of the popu-
lation. This political system is being increasingly subjected to pres-
sures for change. APRA, a social revolutionary (but anti-Communist)
mass party, has been the principal advocate of such change.4 APRA is
feared and distrusted by the oligarchy in general; it has at times been
driven underground and might be again if it were to seek direct con-
trol of the government. APRA, however, can deliver a decisive vote to
that faction of the oligarchy which offers it the most favorable terms,
and can thus exercise significant political influence. The incumbent
president, Manuel Prado, was elected with APRA support in 1956.
2. After Prado’s accession and until mid-1959, the Peruvian
economy encountered increasing difficulties attributable primarily
to worsening terms of trade. Until recently, the Prado administra-
tion’s attempts to cope with this adverse trend were vacillating and
ineffective. Now, however, a new Prime Minister, Pedro Beltrán, has
announced a vigorous program of fiscal reform and a long-­range pro-
gram of economic development. Barring a general worsening of Peru’s
terms of trade, which we consider unlikely, we believe this program
will succeed over the short run, especially if Beltrán obtains foreign
assistance. (Paras. 24–32)
1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret.
2 The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, should be classified
“FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.” [Footnote is in the source text].
3 According to a note on the cover sheet, the Central Intelligence Agency and the
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force,
and the Joint Staff participated in the preparation of this estimate.
4 Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana. [Footnote is in the source text].

Peru  1083
3. Under these circumstances it is likely that the Prado government
will serve out its term and that there will be reasonably free elections
and an orderly transfer of power in 1962. All the presidential candi-
dates in such an election will be likely to be members of the oligarchy,
but the candidate supported by APRA will almost certainly be elected.
4. If, on the other hand, Beltrán’s program should fail, he would
probably resign, and another serious effort to curb inflation and to deal
with long-­range problems would be unlikely prior to the elections.
Under these circumstances, Prado would have to rely more heavily on
military support to serve out his term. Should there be severe and per-
sistent economic difficulties, the outcome would probably be a return
to at least provisional military rule. (Paras. 35–36)
5. Even if the Beltrán program succeeds, it will only provide a basis
for long run development measures. In the long run the dominant posi-
tion of the politico-­military elite will probably come under increasing
attack from the lower classes. If basic measures for economic devel-
opment and accommodation to popular pressures are delayed indefi-
nitely, it is probable that violent social revolution will eventually take
place. (Para. 38)
6. Since 1956 the Communist Party in Peru has grown in mem-
bership and in influence in student and labor organizations, espe-
cially in the south (Cuzco and Arequipa). During the next few years
the Communists are likely to play an influential but not decisive role.
However, the Communists are still far weaker than APRA in strength
and influence, and the latter will remain the more effective competitor
DISCUSSION
I. Background
7. Peru is the fourth largest country in Latin America in area and
the fifth largest in population. Its area is about twice that of Texas and its
population of about 10.5 million is increasing at a rate of about two and
one-­half percent a year. Over half of that population is Indian, making
Peru one of the three states of South America which is predominantly
Indian. Over half of its people are illiterate—­most of these being Indian.
8. Peru is characterized by sharp geographical, economic, and eth-
nic contrasts. Along the narrow coastal plain, and particularly in the
Lima-Callao area, a relatively modern, predominantly Hispanic soci-
ety of commercial agriculture, petroleum production, manufacturing
and trade has developed. With about a quarter of the population, this
area accounts for slightly over half Peru’s GNP. In contrast, the two
other major divisions of the country, with their predominantly Indian
population, are largely outside the modern society. Although the Sierra

or Andean high-­land lying parallel to the coast is an important pro-
ducer of copper, lead, zinc, and other minerals and contributes some
wheat, wool, and other products to the cash economy, most of its six
million inhabitants carry on subsistence agriculture and herding, much
in the manner of their pre-Hispanic ancestors. The sparsely populated
Montaña, a region of tropical forest east of the Andes and including
over 60 percent of the area of the country, is also for the most part eco-
nomically and socially backward.
9. These social and economic disparities have helped perpetuate a
traditional political society from which the Indians have been largely
excluded and in which high political and military office has been a near-­
monopoly of the upper class of the coastal region (less than one percent
of the population). Revolutions have been frequent during Peru’s 138
years of independence, with only about a quarter of the governments
resting on a constitutional basis. Such revolutions have almost always
reflected struggles for power within the ruling politico-­military elite.
Political parties, often no more than working alliances among indi-
vidual politicians, have generally been short-­lived. Regional parties
reflecting the middle class interests of the provinces have been consis-
tently overshadowed by the powerful political interests of the coast and
have not been able to overcome the latter’s neglect of other sections.
10. However, traditional military-­upper class dominance has been
progressively challenged by the economic and social changes which
have taken place over the past generation. Increasing numbers of
Indians have migrated to the coastal cities and farms over the years,
there to be assimilated into the modern economy or left on its fringes
as a body of partially employed unskilled workers. As a result the tra-
ditional elite is being confronted with increasingly serious competition
from liberal and radical elements which draw on middle class and pro-
vincial dissatisfaction but derive their strength primarily from labor
support.
11. The most important and broadly representative manifestation
of this popular pressure is APRA.5 APRA, Peru’s largest and best orga-
nized party, is a moderately leftist and anti-Communist organization
led by middle class intellectuals. Over the last decade or two, Peruvian
politics have largely centered around the efforts of the elite (and par-
ticularly the military) to cope with APRA—­with the Communists and
other forces playing secondary though sometimes important roles.
12. After 12 years of official suppression, APRA was legalized as
a political party in 1945, by outgoing President Prado. His successor,
5 For further details on the party, see Appendix A, “Major Political Parties in Peru.”
[Footnote is in the source text; Appendix A is not printed.]

Peru  1085
President Bustamante,6 owed his election to APRA’s organized political
support. APRA also elected a congressional majority and gained rep-
resentation in the cabinet. However, its alliance with the Bustamante
faction of the elite soon broke down as a result of growing conservative
fear that APRA was becoming too strong. In 1948 APRA was again out-
lawed and soon thereafter a military regime headed by General Manuel
Odria seized power. However, Odria’s authoritarian methods resulted
in growing opposition, first at popular levels and eventually within the
military and the upper class. Under pressure from these elements for
a return to constitutional rule, elections were held in 1956, in which
APRA and most of the upper class leaders supported the election of
ex-President Prado. Upon his election, Prado again legalized APRA,
which had before this been able to seat significant minorities in both
chambers by running its candidates as independents.
II. Political Situation
13. The Prado government, essentially conservative in leadership,
has proven until recently to be a weak administration, even though
it has managed to preserve constitutional order. The 70-­year old Prado
has become increasingly unpopular because of his failure to assert firm
leadership in the face of deteriorating economic conditions which have
led to considerable labor discontent and subversive activity. To cope
with unrest, the government has suspended constitutional guarantees
on several occasions and made a series of cabinet changes. In the most
recent of these—­in mid-1959—Prado felt obliged to appoint Pedro
Beltrán, one of his strongest critics and a forceful leader among less
conservative elements in the oligarchy, as Prime Minister and Finance
Minister. Beltrán’s determined approach to Peru’s economic difficul-
ties has restored confidence, to some degree offsetting his lack of orga-
nized political support, and is a major stabilizing factor in the current
situation.
14. The Prado government is basically dependent on the cooper-
ation of the country’s diverse political forces and on the acquiescence
of the military. The political base of Prado’s government is an uneasy
working relationship of political opposites: APRA and the Movimiento
Democratico Peruano (MDP), which is a loosely organized group of
conservatives and other Prado supporters. The principal bond between
them is the common desire to avoid a return to military rule. Fearing
repression and seeking respectability, APRA has followed a policy of
moderation and cooperation with Prado, even though this policy has
placed increasingly heavy strains on party unity and has caused a drain
on its popular support. At the same time, the government and the MDP

have depended on APRA’s support in Congress to give them a working
majority and on APRA’s strong influence in organized labor to give the
administration an advantage in dealing with this force.
15. The military are more reluctant than formerly to intervene in
political affairs but remain the ultimate arbiter of political power.7 As
elsewhere in Latin America, they are increasingly inclined to concern
themselves only with professional interests and with the maintenance
of constitutional order. Military leaders have been generally critical of
the Prado administration’s vacillating policies, but they have them-
selves little desire to assume the responsibilities of government. They
have pressed Prado to take a stronger stand against labor disorders
and Communist agitation. Prado’s political modus vivendi with APRA
has restrained the military from taking a strongly antagonistic position
toward that party. Some of them may appreciate its utility as a counter-
force against communism and a check on labor unrest. Nevertheless, the
military leaders probably remain fundamentally apprehensive about
the government’s dependence on APRA, which many still consider to
be a greater threat than the Communists. Moreover, APRA’s sympathy
with Castro’s Cuban revolution has disturbed military as well as civil-
ian officials and has hampered APRA’s efforts to convince the military
of its new moderation. In circumstances of great political tension it is
conceivable that military rule would be established to maintain order
and to suppress radicalism.
16. [text not declassified]
17. In the climate of political toleration of recent years, the influ-
ence of the Communist Party (PCP), which was outlawed in 1948, has
been growing. Its membership is now upwards of 6,000 and may be as
high as 12,000, with a considerably greater number of sympathizers.8
Its strength is concentrated in the cities, principally in the Lima-Callao
area and in southern Peru, where there is normally discontent with the
central government. At the important San Marcos University in Lima,
the Communists in combination with independents recently broke
APRA’s control of the student federation. Communists have been most
successful with disaffected mestizos and migrant Indians in urban areas,
particularly in Arequipa and Cuzco, where the party controls the depart-
mental labor federations. In these two cities the Communists also con-
trol university student federations. With these assets the Communists
are capable of taking over one or two southern urban areas for a day or
7 For a description of armed forces capabilities, see Appendix B. [Footnote is in the
source text.]
8 The Partido Obrero Revolucionario (POR), a Trotskyite Communist Party, has about
2,500 members. While it adheres to a more radical line than the PCP, it and other small
Communist splinter groups on occasion provide support for the PCP. [Footnote is in the
source text.]

Peru  1087
two until the government can bring in additional security forces. They
demonstrated this capability in Cuzco in 1958.
18. Communists have been less successful elsewhere. They have
had little direct influence on the government, although there are a few
Communists in Congress and a number of Communists hold second-
ary or minor government positions. Most of Acción Popular’s congres-
sional representatives have or have had Communist ties. However, the
PCP has publicly broken with Acción Popular’s leader Belaunde. While
they control a large minority in the labor movement, Communists have
failed to break APRA’s hold on the central labor confederation. They
have demonstrated only limited capability for gaining influence among
the rural Sierra Indians in central and southern Peru, largely because of
the isolated and self-­contained nature of the rural Indian society.
19. The major area of political agitation in Peru is organized labor.
This force of roughly 400,000, mainly affiliated with the central labor
organization (CTP), is overwhelmingly urban and is largely engaged in
white collar and service activities, principally in the Lima-Callao area.
APRA supporters control the executive committee of the CTP and the
majority of its most vigorous member organizations. However, APRA’s
entente with the government has resulted in a weakening of its revo-
lutionary coloration and a reduction of APRA’s freedom to press labor
demands. This has been of direct benefit to the Communists, who have
been able to consolidate their position in Arequipa and Cuzco and
have also made some progress, in competition with APRA, in organiz-
ing miners in central Peru. The Communists have also benefited from
upper class disposition to encourage them as rivals to APRA.
20. Another, though less important, arena for political agitation
is among university student groups, principally those in Arequipa,
Cuzco, and Lima. Although Peruvian student groups, like their coun-
terparts in other Latin American countries, are generally a breeding
ground for radical ideas and action, they suffer from factionalism and
generally have little voice in national politics. However, they have con-
tributed substantially to political and social unrest, and with the decline
in APRA’s traditional popularity among student groups matched by a
rise in Communist influence, the potential for Communist-­inspired stu-
dent agitation is on the increase. This potential was manifested in the
riots attending Vice President Nixon’s visit in May 1958.
III. Economic Situation
21. Despite the abundance and variety of its resources, Peru is a
largely undeveloped country in which up to two-­thirds of the popu-
lation (including most inhabitants of the Sierra and Montaña) live at a
bare subsistence level outside the money economy. Rail and road links
between the coast and the interior are few and far between and even

these along the coast are limited. However, the modern sector of the
economy centered in the Lima-Callao area is a vigorous one, includ-
ing a growing small-­scale consumer goods industry and one major
industrial enterprise—­the government-­sponsored iron and steel plant
at Chimbote—­as well as extensive commercial agriculture, petroleum
production, fish canning, and mining. About a quarter of Peru’s total
population is urban, and the proportion is growing.
22. Peru’s economic growth and prosperity depend heavily on for-
eign (especially U.S.) trade and investment. Exports are equivalent to
about a fifth of GNP, with imports providing for over a quarter of all
goods absorbed into the economy. The production of U.S. and other
foreign-­controlled and operated firms accounts for about a quarter of
GNP and for over half Peru’s foreign exchange receipts. Foreign invest-
ment is concentrated principally in mining, petroleum production, and
public utilities.
23. The initial postwar decade was one of notable prosperity and
growth for the Peruvian economy. The general trend in world raw mate-
rial prices was upward, and the relatively diversified nature of Peru’s
exports9 cushioned the economy against downward fluctuations in
demand for individual items. Spurred on by a substantial government
development program (contributing about a quarter of total investment
for the period) and by a sustained high level of foreign investment
(amounting to another 15 percent), the level of gross investment rose to
an estimated 22 percent of GNP in the latter part of the decade. Along
with advances in mining, manufacturing, and construction, over-­all
agricultural output increased by about 50 percent—­though per capita
output of foodstuffs for Peru’s fast-­growing population increased very
little. Over the decade GNP grew at an average real rate of over five
percent annually.
24. However, signs of trouble began to appear before the present
Prado government took office in 1956. The previous Odria regime’s
ambitious efforts to spur development, to improve social welfare and
education, and to support the military involved increasing dependence
on deficit financing. This resulted in inflationary pressures which
increased prices by about eight percent a year. In 1957, moreover, world
prices for most Peruvian exports fell and the dollar value of exports
declined by about 15 percent. At the same time the costs of imports
increased.
25. Although the government was able to obtain substantial cred-
its from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the U.S., and private
9 In order of importance: cotton, sugar, copper, lead, silver, iron and zinc. [Footnote
is in the source text.]

Peru  1089
U.S. banks.10 its efforts to maintain purchasing power and consumption
in the face of this worsening of the terms of trade led to a progres-
sive depletion of Peru’s foreign exchange reserves—­a downward trend
accelerated by a weakening of the position of the Peruvian sol and a
consequent flight of capital. By the end of 1958 official gold and foreign
exchange reserves had fallen to less than half of the $67 million on hand
at the end of 1956, and by mid-1959, when Peru halted its borrowing
from the IMF, reserves were reportedly down to $20 million. Although
Peru still had $25 million in unused EXIMBANK credits, the availabil-
ity of all but $5 million was contingent upon restoration of Peru’s credit
with the IMF.
26 Meanwhile, the government and most private employers were
forced to yield to labor demands for higher wages to counter increas-
ing living costs. Inflationary pressures were further increased by the
liberal credit extended by the banks in an effort to maintain business
momentum and by the fact that the government, faced with increased
costs and lowered revenues, increased its borrowings from the Central
Bank. Although the government made some efforts to check these
inflationary trends, it made little headway in the face of continuing
heavy demands for private credit and the government’s need to pay
its own bills.
27. With the appointment of Beltrán as Prime Minister and Minister
of Finance in mid-1959, Peru is now committed to a far more vigorous
attack on these problems. Emphasizing the need to balance the govern-
ment’s budget, stabilize prices, and restore Peru’s international credit
and exchange position, Beltrán has called for the cessation of govern-
ment borrowing from the Central Bank, more rigorous tax collection,
the restoration of the 18 percent legal reserve requirements for com-
mercial banks, and other measures to curb inflationary private lending.
He has already embarked on some curtailment of government payrolls
and military purchases abroad, has removed costly food subsidies,
and has permitted increases in prices for petroleum. Previous low ceil-
ings had contributed to a decline of oil production in recent years to a
level little over that of domestic requirements. Longer range objectives
$25 million on the basis of the latter’s acceptance of certain monetary and fiscal require-
ments laid down by the Fund. Peru also obtained a $17.5 million U.S. Treasury com-
mitment, and another $17.5 million credit from three U.S. banks. With the subsequent
agreement of the EXIMBANK to provide $40 million for balance of payments support,
Peru had $100 million in stabilization assistance available. However, by September 1959,
all but $25 million of the EXIMBANK credit had been exhausted, and of this $20 million
cannot be touched until the IMF permits further borrowings. [Footnote is in the source
text.]

include road construction, housing construction, and attention to land
tenure problems.
28. In the short run, Beltrán enjoys certain advantages. Although
collection of back taxes will irritate some propertied interests, the
general objectives of Beltrán’s program are clearly to the benefit of
the elite group. An increase in exchange reserves (from $20 million
to $33 ­million as of mid-September 1959) and a strengthening of the
sol (from 31 to 28 per dollar) since Beltrán’s appointment reflect the
confidence of business groups in his program and some improvement
in trade prospects. Furthermore, wage increases decreed in May and
extended to government workers since Beltrán came into office have
quieted labor demands. The inflationary pressure stimulated by these
wage increases, the removal of subsidies, and petroleum price increases
will probably be offset to some extent by better crop prospects and
expected increases in food production. In general the outlook for export
of Peru’s minerals has improved.
29. Beltrán’s program is, however, currently hampered by the
need to find financing for budget deficits estimated to equal as much
posed budget management devices may reduce the 1959 deficit by
$5–10 ­million, but retrenchment efforts may be limited by the follow-
ing political and economic factors: over half the government’s budget
represents wages and salaries and further cuts in the already reduced
development program would mean abandonment of plans for expan-
sion of production in the coastal areas, an important element in cur-
rent as well as future employment. Moreover, gains derived from the
drive on delinquent taxes and other one-­time reforms available in 1959
will not be available in 1960. Committed to avoid further Central Bank
borrowing in order to regain IMF and U.S. standby support, Beltrán is
urgently looking for foreign assistance to achieve his objectives.
30. While no firm bill of financial needs has been formulated,
Beltrán is seeking currently to renegotiate certain outstanding obliga-
tions as well as to secure new sources of funds. Among the measures
mentioned are: (a) the use of frozen counterpart soles accruing from the
sale of dollars drawn against the EXIMBANK credit to finance the gov-
ernment budget deficit; (b) the use of sol deposits voluntarily set aside
by the Peruvian Government against the maturity (in 1961) of pay-
ments due on CCC rice purchases; and (c) the use of required sol depos-
its against the already postponed principal payments on purchases of
submarines in the U.S. Beltrán has also proposed a customs and tax
loan offer in the form of advance tax payments from the International
Petroleum Company—­an offer Beltrán hopes to accept if he can avoid
giving the impression that the loan is tied to recent petroleum price

Peru  1091
increases. In addition, the Peruvian Government is negotiating: (a) a
PL 480 Title I Agreement which would make available local currency
for development purposes; (b) a DLF loan to provide initial capital for
a savings and loan association, which will make loans to finance hous-
ing construction; and (c) IBRD and DLF loans for various road build-
ing and irrigation projects. This group of loans could total as much as
$20 million.
31. Foreign assistance for this program may enable Beltrán to
appease most significant political and economic elements and to suc-
ceed in his monetary stabilization effort, thus preserving the country’s
free exchange system, which has been a model for similar efforts in
other Latin American countries. Under these conditions he could move
on to developmental measures and take some steps toward resolv-
ing the long-­range problem of the social and economic integration of
Peru. An important problem is that of increasing agricultural output
of the country, which will require heavy investment in transportation
and irrigation in order to open presently unsettled lands. Execution of
such measures would create favorable conditions for a resumption of
growth in the modern sector of the economy, thereby providing addi-
tional employment opportunities for Indians from the Sierra.
IV. The Domestic Outlook
32. Barring a general worsening of Peru’s terms of trade, which we
consider unlikely, we believe that Beltrán’s program will succeed over
the short run. The measure of Beltrán’s success will in part be related
to his ability to obtain the foreign financial assistance he seeks. There
will probably be some rise in the production of Peru’s food supplies
and exports, and prospects are good for increased efficiency in fiscal
management under Beltrán’s guidance. Hence, the outlook for foreign
and domestic investment will be favorable.
33. Under these circumstances, it is likely that the Prado gov-
ernment will serve out its term and that there will be reasonably free
elections and an orderly transfer of power to a duly elected successor
government in 1962. Although APRA may feel compelled to press its
social and economic demands more vigorously in order to avoid loss
of lower class support to Acción Popular and the Communists, it will
probably seek to avoid going so far as to invite military repression.
The military, for the most part, will probably be reluctant to return to
authoritarian rule unless it believes this necessary to maintain the dom-
inant position of the elite.
34. The result probably will be an electoral campaign in which
class lines are blurred. All the presidential candidates will probably
be members of the conservative elite. The real contest will be between
the candidate supported by APRA and the one supported by Acción

Popular. The more reactionary elements of the elite, lacking strong sup-
port of their own and bitterly opposed to APRA, will probably continue
to support Acción Popular and will give at least covert encouragement
to the Communists in an effort to cut down APRA’s strength. However,
the presidential candidate favored by APRA will almost certainly win.
35. If, on the other hand, Beltrán’s economic program failed, any
progress toward solution of Peru’s longer range economic problems
would be seriously impaired. With the growth of inflation and unem-
ployment, the chance of serious strikes and riots would greatly increase,
probably leading to Beltrán’s resignation. It is highly unlikely that another
man of his stature and vigor could be found, and Prado would probably
have to rely more heavily on military support to serve out his term.
36. In the event of a severe and prolonged economic relapse lead-
ing to widespread privation and discontent, the eventual outcome
would probably be a return to at least provisional military rule. This
would probably lead to the suppression of APRA and other popular
political movements, thereby forcing them to turn to more violent and
extremist tactics.
37. During the next few years the Communists are likely to play an
influential but not decisive role. As long as constitutional order is main-
tained, APRA will continue to compete effectively with the Communists
for mass support. On the other hand, it the economic situation deterio-
rates seriously and APRA is suppressed, Communist prospects would
obviously improve.
38. Even if the Beltrán program succeeds, it will only provide a basis
for long run development measures. In the long run the dominant posi-
tion of the politico-­military elite will probably come under increasing
attack from the lower classes. If basic measures for economic develop-
ment and accommodation to popular pressures are delayed indefinitely,
it is probable that violent social revolution will eventually take place.
V. Foreign Policy
39. Peru has maintained a policy of close and friendly ties with the
U.S. and has been firmly pro-West in orientation. Of the major Latin
American countries, Peru has the least contact with the Soviet Bloc. The
only bloc mission, a Czech legation, was expelled in 1957 for engaging
in subversive activity. While Peru now has generally friendly relations
with the other Latin American countries, its boundary dispute with
Ecuador continues to cause sporadic periods of strained relations with
that country.
40. Peru is generally dissatisfied with U.S. commercial policy,
and the U.S. imposition of lead and zinc quotas in 1958 provoked
widespread criticism of the U.S. In the National Congress there was
demand for an increase in Peru’s minimal trade with the Soviet Bloc.

Peru  1093
A similar reaction against the U.S. would probably occur, especially in
Congress, should Beltrán fail to obtain the U.S. and international finan-
cial assistance which he seeks. Should APRA or Acción Popular gain
strong influence in a successor government, Peru probably would be
more assertive in its dealings with the U.S. and more prone to take an
independent position in international bodies. However, in neither case
would there be likely to be a major change in Peru’s relations with the
U.S., with which Peru has its strongest trade and investment ties.11
11 A map of Peru in the source text is not printed.
PE–30.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1
Washington, October 26, 1959.
SUBJECT
Acquisition of Vessels by Peruvian Navy
PARTICIPANTS
Assistant Secretary Rubottom, ARA
Ambassador Fernando Berckemeyer of Peru
Mr. Miguel Grau, Minister-Counselor, Peruvian Embassy
Admiral Luis Llosa, Naval Attaché, Peruvian Embassy
Robert M. Phillips, WST
After the usual amenities, Ambassador Berckemeyer stated that
he had come on orders of his Government to explain with complete
frankness the attitude of the Peruvian Government (i.e., the President
and his Cabinet) with regard to the purchase of a cruiser from the U.K.
Many units of the Peruvian Navy were becoming obsolete and needed
to be replaced, and the most convenient and economical way this could
be done was to take advantage of the availability of a cruiser from the
U.K. The price of the vessel was only L–1 million sterling, payable in
five annual installments of L–200,000. Payments would be made from
funds available only to the Navy on the basis of a special law, and the
Navy’s funds might be supplemented by a special public collection
of voluntary donations which might total as much as 1 million soles

annually. Therefore, the proposed purchase would have no effect on the
Government’s general budget and no particular effect on Peru’s balance
of payments position, especially since Peru has a favorable sterling bal-
ance of payments. The Peruvian Government was, of course, aware of
the other implications of its acquisition of this cruiser and wished to
assure us that these had all been carefully considered.
Mr. Rubottom said he was grateful to Ambassador Berckemeyer
for coming in to explain the Peruvian position. Three years ago, he
had talked with the Ambassador and with Admiral Llosa regarding
the possibility of transferring a U.S. cruiser to Peru, and he regretted
that it had not been possible to arrange for this. Nevertheless, speak-
ing as a representative of a country which has enjoyed particularly
close relations with Peru and which has wanted to give maximum
assistance to Peru’s economic development, Mr. Rubottom said we
were very much surprised by the present proposal for the purchase
of a cruiser, even if we accepted the logic of the agreements advanced
by the Ambassador. What Peru should consider was the psychologi-
cal impact in the U.S. and other countries of this transaction. As the
Ambassador undoubtedly knew, a strong current was developing in
the U.S. against our military aid programs. It would be extremely diffi-
cult for him (Mr. Rubottom), in testifying before Congress, to justify our
military and economic assistance to Peru in the light of the proposed
purchase of the cruiser. In view of Peru’s difficult financial position,
we had tried to do everything possible to accommodate the Peruvians
on the question of releasing the soles frozen in the submarine purchase
account, making funds available for the highway project, and arrang-
ing for grant assistance in rehabilitating the vessels offered under our
ship loan bill. While we recognized Peru’s sovereign right to take any
measure it considered necessary for its own defense, we could not but
feel that the cruiser purchase would make cooperation between our
two countries more difficult.
Ambassador Berckemeyer agreed that there would be some unfor-
tunate repercussions from this deal, but he pointed out that it would
be very difficult for Prime Minister Beltrán, despite his austerity pro-
gram, to oppose a national defense measure which had been approved
many years previously, especially since the special laws like that set-
ting up the Navy fund were “untouchable.” Actually, the purchase of
the cruiser was economically justifiable on the basis of the high cost of
maintaining the obsolete units which it would replace. Also, we should
take into account the important role of the Navy in educating the young
men of the country, training them in modern techniques and teaching
them to be good citizens. Further, we should consider the fact that the
Peruvian Navy had had thirty years of cordial relations with the U.S.
Naval Mission.

Peru  1095
When Mr. Rubottom asked whether the Peruvian Government had
already contracted for the cruiser, Ambassador Berckemeyer replied in
the affirmative. Mr. Rubottom then asked whether there was any truth
in rumors we had heard that Peru might acquire a second cruiser from
the U.K. Admiral Llosa said that there appeared to be some substance to
these rumors and that it was his understanding that if the U.K. were to
offer a second cruiser on the same conditions as the first, the Peruvian
Navy would probably make an effort to obtain the second ship. He
indicated that a specific vessel—not named—now in service under the
British flag was involved. Ambassador Berckemeyer, however, said
he wished to make it clear that he had received no official notification
regarding the second cruiser.2
Mr. Rubottom told his callers that he could only say that the news
of the cruiser purchase contract had been very badly received by himself
and all his colleagues in the Department, including Secretary Herter and
Assistant Secretary Mann. He was also sure that Undersecretary Dillon,
presently away from the Department, would not be pleased by this
development. Even taking into account all the arguments advanced by
the Ambassador, it would be impossible for the Department to attempt
to reconcile the cruiser purchase with the policy of austerity proclaimed
by Prime Minister Beltrán. It was paradoxical that Mr.  Beltrán, who
was well-­known and well-­liked in the U.S., had often criticized our
Government before U.S. audiences for giving military assistance to
Latin America. Mr. Rubottom himself had debated this issue in public
with Mr. Beltrán.
Ambassador Berckemeyer said he agreed but pointed out that
Sr. Beltrán was in a most difficult position. In any event, there was no
escaping the fact that the obsolete vessels had to be replaced. When
Mr.  Rubottom asked whether we had been advised concerning just
which ships would be replaced, Admiral Llosa said that this informa-
tion had already been supplied to the Department.
Admiral Llosa then went on to say that one important factor
remained to be considered. This was that as a consequence of the lack of
support for the Peruvian Navy by our own Navy and the Department
of State, particularly in relation to the aid extended to the navies of
neighboring countries, the naval equilibrium in the area had been
upset. In fact, the situation was continually becoming worse due to the
unequal treatment received by Peru. National pride, and the Navy’s
pride, had been wounded by the favoritism shown to Chile, Ecuador
and Colombia. Even the continental defense program was working
Embassy in Peru that Peruvian Minister Counselor Grau informed the Department on

against the interests of the Peruvian Navy. Since the Peruvian Navy
had much of its strength in submarines, it resented the fact that we
were training navies of neighboring countries in anti-­submarine war-
fare. Peru had, in fact, bought the submarines on U.S. advice. Peru now
considers itself menaced by an “adventure”—not a war but a surprise
raid—on the part of the much more powerful Ecuadoran Navy. For this
reason, the purchase of the cruiser was desired by the entire nation.
Admiral Llosa continued that Peru had not necessarily asked to be
considered among those countries unable to pay rehabilitation costs of
the vessels offered under the U.S. ship loan act. Peru had first offered
to pay these costs in installments over a period of five years. When it
appeared that it might be difficult for us to arrange five-­year credit,
the Embassy had sent a formal note asking for the two destroyers and
offering to pay the rehabilitation costs within three years.3 Since then,
Peru had been happy to learn that the U.S. would be able to rehabilitate
at least one destroyer under grant military aid,4 but the Admiral wished
to remind us that even in the ship loan program Peru was the subject
of discrimination. Peru had originally asked for three destroyers but
had been limited to two. Chile had first asked for two submarines and
then for two destroyers and had received approval for all four vessels.
Chile’s acquisition of the submarines in particular was very dangerous
as far as Peru was concerned.
Admiral Llosa said he wished to make the further point that Peru’s
economic progress would depend largely on the establishment and
maintenance of a climate of political stability and that the restoration
of the strength of the Peruvian Navy would make a very significant
contribution in this direction. Thus the purchase of the cruiser should
be considered as economically justified.
Mr. Grau said it was very important that any attitude which might
be taken by the U.S. with regard to the cruiser purchase not be one
that could be interpreted in Peru as a “reprisal” against the Peruvian
Government. Mr. Rubottom assured Mr. Grau that the question of
reprisals would never be considered.
3 The note under reference was not further identified. In telegram 138 from Lima,
September 12, 1958, the Embassy informed the Department of State that Peruvian Navy
Minister Tirado instructed Rear Admiral Llosa, the Peruvian Naval Attaché in Washington,
to inform the Department that Peru would accept two destroyers on three years credit
4 In a memorandum of conversation of October 19, Ambassador Achilles reported
that he informed Minister Tirado that the Departments of State and Defense had approved
rehabilitation of one destroyer plus the carryover of $850,000 in fiscal year 1959 funds for

Peru  1097
PE–31.
Editorial Note
A controversy arose in Peru over possession by the Texas Petroleum
Company in Peru of aerial photographs of Peru received from the United
States Government without clearance from the Peruvian Government.
The problem was taken up by the Peruvian Chamber of Deputies and
publicized in the Peruvian press. The Peruvian Government made rep-
resentations to the American Embassy in Lima and fined the company.
Documentation on these developments is in Department of State file
PE–32.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the
Department of State1
In hour with President last night I told him U.S. like other govern-
ments much interested in his arms limitation proposal and had high
hopes it could lead to concrete results.3 We therefore had difficulty in
believing Berckemeyer’s report Peru had purchased second cruiser.
One reason was categorical assurances we had received from GOP
it would not be bought and we had not thought of doubting Peru’s
word.4 Other was extremely adverse effect it would have on his arms
limitation proposal and his international reputation which proposal
had greatly enhanced.
This telegram was repeated for information to Santiago, Quito, Rio de Janeiro, Buenos
Aires, Bogotá, and Panama City for the Commander in Chief, Caribbean.
reported on his complaint to Prime Minister Beltrán, December 1–2, regarding Peruvian
December 3, Achilles reported a similar complaint that he made to Foreign Minister
Porras, December 2.
November 27 to President Alessandri of Chile, President Prado proposed inviting other
Latin American countries to a conference on arms limitation and the release of defense
the Embassy in Peru that on November 24 Ambassador Berckemeyer had given the
Department “Categorical assurance from Beltrán and Navy Minister Tirado that there

He stated Peru had been negotiating off and on since January 1956
for two British cruisers to replace two old ones recently scrapped, that
purchase of both had been consummated in October subject to inspec-
tion of second one when it returned to UK in December, that Peru had
recently proposed cancellation of second purchase but had reaffirmed
it when told by British that Ecuador wished to buy it and would if Peru
did not. (Last point probably reported by Peruvian Embassy London
but I doubt its truth).
He continued that effect of second purchase on his arms limitation
proposal would indeed be bad. (He did show strong personal inter-
est in possibilities of limitation). However, he was sure we well knew
necessity to any LA government of military support. He had obtained
their agreement to his proposal only with difficulty. Peru was more
fortunate than most in having sound and responsible military leaders
but he could not push them too far. EL COMERCIO was having con-
siderable effect with its allegations that he was undermining country’s
safety with his proposal. Full facts surrounding cruiser deal, including
possibility of Ecuadoran purchase, were well known to considerable
number in military circles, Foreign Office and Parliament. If he can-
celled it now his position would be untenable.
I recognized his problem with military but said he was still in
dilemma, other horn of which was effect on his international reputation
and loss of popularity among thinking people in Peru and elsewhere
who realized futility of armament race. Could he not escape dilemma
if he cancelled second purchase provided British undertook not sell it
to Ecuador or Chile? He doubted it, stressing Chilean naval strength
and effect in Peru when two Chilean cruisers, newly rehabilitated in
U.S., steamed down coast. U.S. was primarily to blame for whole arms
race in not, with other guarantors, forcing Ecuador to comply with Rio
protocol.
After discussing Ecuador at length (next telegram)5 I urged him
in leaving to give further thought to escaping from his dilemma.
While there is bare chance that, if British-Ecuadoran dealings were
found non-­existent and British would agree not sell cruiser to Ecuador
or Chile, he might still cancel second purchase, I believe his preoccupa-
tion with military and nationalistic public opinion is too great to offer
any real hope and that we must now re-­evaluate situation accordingly.
I continue to hope that eventual good can be obtained from arms lim-
itation initiative and that U.S. sanctions will be limited to armaments
rather than extended to economic development field.
Achilles

Peru  1099
PE–33.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy
in Peru1
FYI In response to Defense Dept request for apportionment for ship
loan program and prior to report of second cruiser purchase, Bureau of
Budget informed Defense it deferring funds for rehabilitation destroyer
for Peru pending re-­evaluation need for destroyer in light of Peruvian
cruiser purchase (i.e. first cruiser). Navy Dept alluded to this position
of Budget Bureau in discussing with Admiral Llosa adverse effect here
second cruiser purchase especially following various Peruvian assur-
ances. In any case Budget message3 is internal administrative step and
no final USG decision has been made re Peru destroyer loan. We are
however, going ahead with processing loan and rehabilitation two
MSFs. End FYJ
Ambassador Berckemeyer telephoned yesterday stating that,
based on information re Budget Bureau position as relayed by Llosa
to Peruvian Navy, he had received instructions from Foreign Minister
to make representations highest level concerning this “reprisal”,
including prospective GOF difficulty “maintain relations” U.S.
Naval Mission. Dept informed him no USG decision yet on destroyer
although of course second cruiser purchase had adverse impact
here and being analyzed as new factor in terms existing programs.
Berckemeyer replied that since no USG decision yet he did not see
need make representations. Peruvian Counselor4 said his Embassy
hopes soften possible intemperate attitude Navy Minister (based
on erroneous belief Budget position represents final USG decision)
which could have unfortunate consequences December 9 Cabinet
Meeting.
Drafted by Poole and Coerr and signed by Mallor V.
that Peruvian Naval Minister Tirado told Deputy Chief of Mission Neal on December
4 that if reports from Washington of U.S. reprisals against Peru for purchase of second
cruiser were confirmed, he would demand that the U.S. naval mission in Peru be closed
asked what representations the United States had made against the purchase of ships by
3 The referenced message was not further identified.
4 Miguel Grau.

Chile not acquiring two new destroyers from U.S.; Tirado informa-
tion probably refers to two destroyers ordered from UK.
Above for use your discretion.5
told Minister Tirado on the same day that no decision had been reached on the Peruvian
ship loan program, that it was being reexamined in the light of Peruvian cruiser pur-
chases, but that “any hasty action or threats such as he made to Deputy Chief of Mission
PE–34.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy
Coordinator for Mutual Security (Bell)1
Washington, December 16, 1959.
SUBJECT
Ship Loan Program for Peru
I understand that—­following the recent interagency correspondence
described in Appendix A2 and word of a second cruiser purchase by
Peru—­a draft proposed action under Circular 175,3 in implementation of
the Ship Loan Program as a whole, has been sent to the Defense Department
that for Peru includes two MSFs (converted minesweepers) but omits the
originally programmed destroyer. (See Appendix, para 4, re MSFs) The
omission of the destroyer was in reaction to Peru’s second cruiser purchase
and was made pending further consideration of the matter.
You are, of course, aware of our recent unsuccessful efforts to
induce Peru to forego the purchase of the British cruisers, which we
consider militarily unnecessary, economically wasteful and likely to
contribute to a Latin American arms race.
I have very carefully considered—in the light of Peru’s purchase of
the two cruisers and the cynical attitude of certain Peruvian officials in
going back on Peru’s assurances to us that they would not purchase the
Confidential. Drafted by Poole and Spencer. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 Not printed.
proper exercise of the treaty-­making power and the executive agreement-­making power
of the United States, and approval of texts and the making of arrangements for signature.

Peru  1101
second cruiser—whether it would serve our interests in Peru and the
hemisphere as a whole now to deny Peru the loan and rehabilitation of
the Ship Loan Act destroyer earmarked for Peru in the grant military
assistance program. I have concluded, for the reasons specified below,
that we can find no position that would adequately justify our denial of
the destroyer to Peru while to do so would greatly prejudice our rela-
tions with Peru and our ability to carry out basic constructive programs
in that country. I have therefore concluded that we must implement the
program as originally planned.
Our Position re Naval Vessels for Other Latin American Countries
Neither Peru nor other Latin American countries have assumed
bilateral or multilateral commitments which impose limits on the size or
character of military forces they may maintain for hemispheric or national
defense. In the absence of any such agreement, Peru obviously has the
sovereign right to determine unilaterally its military requirements.
We have not withheld, nor made known any intention to withhold,
U.S. naval vessels from other Latin American countries which have
acquired or are in process of acquiring naval vessels considered by us
to be militarily and economically unjustifiable. After U.S. representations
to the Brazilian and British Governments had failed in 1957 to prevent
Brazilian acquisition of a British aircraft carrier, we found it necessary
(in connection with the maintenance of a USAF missiles tracking facility
on Brazilian territory) to agree to provide Brazil with about $87 million
in military equipment, including four destroyers. One of these ships was
delivered this year; the others are to be delivered during the next two
years. Subsequent to Argentina’s acquisition of a British carrier in 1958,
we found it in our interest to comply with President Frondizi’s personal
request that we help him assure continued Argentine military support
for his forward-­looking economic policies, which serve U.S. interests, by
extending Argentina a sizable credit for the procurement of U.S. military
equipment, including two submarines scheduled for delivery this fiscal
year. Now Argentina is reportedly planning to purchase three British
destroyers as replacements for old vessels. We imposed no penalty when
Chile purchased two British destroyers (to be delivered in the near future),
Colombia two Swedish destroyers or Ecuador two British frigates, and
we have earmarked one ship loan vessel, or its equivalent in the case of
Ecuador, for each of these countries in the FY 1960 program. Although
Venezuela has acquired eleven European destroyers since 1953, we have
considered it necessary in view of our special defense and military credit
arrangement which bears upon the security of the Venezuelan oil fields,
to approve the sale to Venezuela of one submarine and two destroyers.
Probable Consequences in Peru if we Deny Destroyers
In the light of the instances described above, Peru would be certain
to regard the withdrawal or deferral of a programmed naval vessel as
discriminatory and retaliatory.

Our unsuccessful efforts at dissuading the Peruvians from pur-
chasing the British cruisers have already aroused in certain Peruvian
Government and military circles a resentment over alleged U.S. inter-
ference in a sovereign Peruvian decision. Although rational elements
(including Prime Minister Beltran) agree with our position, the cruiser
acquisition has been nationalistically applauded in the Peruvian
Congress and press. Our hopes that the purchase of the second cruiser
could be forestalled by advance assurance as the destroyer loan have
likewise proved fruitless. (We hear from Peruvian and UK sources that
both cruisers were purchased in one deal.)
To withdraw the destroyer would jeopardize our over-­all foreign
policy objectives by increasing existing resentment within the Peruvian
Government and military, as well as in the Congress, press, public, etc.
We already have reports that the Peruvian Navy might terminate our
Naval Mission, withdraw Peruvian naval personnel in the U.S. and
remove pro-American naval officers from positions of influence in the
Peruvian Navy. (Our Navy Department is most anxious to avoid these
possibilities and therefore is in wholehearted agreement with our posi-
tion on the destroyers.) It is also possible that Prime Minister Beltran,
whose pro-American views and whose opposition to excessive military
expenditures are well known, might find his position untenable is the
face of aroused nationalistic, anti-American feelings. The U.S. would
then lose a good friend and Peru would lose a man who is provid-
ing positive leadership in developing a forward-­looking economic-­
financial-­social program. There is reason to believe that the downfall of
Beltran would be a severe blow to Peruvian prospects of maintaining
economic and political stability.
I believe that our unilateral attempts to discourage excessive arms
purchases, as in the Peruvian ease, are severely limited by present
conditions and that we must try to develop an effective general Inter-
American approach to the problem.
Recommendations4
I recommend that U/MSC take necessary action as soon as possi-
ble to:
(1) Advise the Budget Bureau (See Appendix, para. 1), either directly
or through the Defense Department, that it will be necessary for foreign
policy reasons to implement the Peruvian Ship Loan Program as origi-
nally planned.
4 There is no indication on the source text of Bell’s action on the recommendation.
In airgram A–135 to Lima, January 15, the Department of State asked the Embassy to
offer Peru one destroyer and two converted minesweepers on a five-­year renewable loan.

Peru  1103
(2) Include one destroyer for Peru (in addition to the two MSFs)
in the Circular 175 memorandum which has been transmitted to the
Defense Department. (In order that the final U.S. decision regarding
the FY 1960 Ship Loan Program may be conveyed concurrently to
Peru and all other participating countries, it is essential that Circular
175 approval for the complete Latin American Ship Loan Program be
obtained in one single memorandum.)
PE–35.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Peru (Achilles)1
Lima, December 26, 1959.
SUBJECT
Budget, Financial and Social Matters
PARTICIPANTS
Sr. Pedro Beltrán, Prime Minister & Minister of Finance
T. C. Achilles
Beltrán has for some time been working day and night with
Congressional committees and party groups on the budget but came
up for air for a family Christmas dinner and long talk afterwards.
He is distinctly encouraged by the extent to which he has met
with cooperation rather than partisan politics. While the Christian
Democrats will continue publicly to express opposition they are in fact
working closely with him and being of considerable help with other
groups. He expects to obtain approval of his financial measures with-
out major changes or too much opposition.
Barring unexpected logrolling, he expects the budget to be passed
with a paper deficit of only $100 million. Since revenue is calculated
strictly on actual 1959 returns and conditions are improving he con-
fidentially anticipates ending 1960 with a slight surplus. (However,
the budget apparently does not provide for inevitable wage increases
during 1960 and substantially increased revenues will be necessary
to cover these. They have been costing the Government roughly
$500 million annually in recent years.)
Sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 380 from Lima, December 29.

I asked whether attrition had yet had much effect on the public pay-
roll. He said it had not, although the prohibition on all new hiring was
being strictly enforced, and that the rate of reduction was only about 5
percent per year. Retirement benefits for anyone who had worked for
the Government for seven years were so great as to make firing unprof-
itable but he was contemplating a considerable number of firings of per-
sons employed less than seven years. He was also continuing his hunt
for Communists, had unearthed a considerable number particularly in
the Bureau of Internal Revenue, and would get rid of them regardless of
length of service.
He was delighted with the unfreezing of the submarine sinking
fund,2 which would help materially in meeting his still difficult prob-
lem of meeting current expenses. After January 1 IPC would resume its
current tax payments and the Southern Peru Copper Corporation begin
its export payments. The new tax bonds would be floated beginning
in late January and he thought would bring in some $500 million. This
would be necessary not for the budget but to meet expenses during the
lean first five months of the year.
The inflow of dollars was continuing, although the Central Bank had
recently sold half a million. I told him we continued to spare Malcolm
Bryan’s3 worry that holding too rigid a rate would cause difficulty later
and he reiterated his intention shortly to let the sol rise gradually to 27.50.
I asked whether he did not believe the improvement in the sit-
uation warranted a moderate increase in credit. He thought that a
reduction of perhaps 5 percent in reserve requirements and equivalent
rediscounting might shortly be warranted.
I hoped that as soon as the budget was passed he would find time
for other matters, reminding him of our haunting preoccupation with
the prospect of social revolution unless steps were taken reasonably
quickly to bring about a rising standard of living for the lowest classes.
He replied that a balanced budget was the fundamental requisite and
that thereafter prosperity would follow naturally. I agreed but held that
prosperity for the wealthy and the business community would not be
enough unless unprecedented steps were taken to enable the Indians
and Cholos to participate in it to some degree.
2 In a memorandum of December 10 to Assistant Secretary Rubottom, Deputy
Assistant Secretary Coerr recommended approval of a Peruvian request of November
24 that the Export-Import Bank authorize Peru to send soles set aside for payment of a
Peruvian submarine loan. Rubottom noted his approval on condition that the money went
gram 449 to Lima, December 23, the Department of State informed the U.S. Embassy that
the Export-Import Bank delivered to Ambassador Berckemeyer on that day a letter dated
December 22, which upon the Ambassador’s endorsement authorized the requested expen-
diture, provided that it was not for military purposes and that Peru continued to make
quarterly deposits of soles in a special account with the Banco de Fomento Agropecuario as
3 Malcom H. Bryan, Special Adviser to the Government of Peru, Central Bank of Peru.

Peru  1105
He agreed. Housing and land reform were the two keys. He hoped
that our early participation in the Savings & Loan Association, either
through P. L. 480 or DLF funds, would begin to get housing off the ground.4
The Government had no funds yet for land reform and grandiose projects
such as Tinajones must be avoided but the problem was clearly urgent. I
suggested that the most important single step toward land reform might
be simplification and decentralization of the process of acquiring title to
land and that this should cost the Government little if anything. He said
the housing legislation already covered this for urban areas and the land
reform legislation next year would cover it for rural areas.
The above is a condensed summary of a leisurely two-­hour talk.
During it Beltrán referred at least 20 times to the fundamental neces-
sity of balancing the budget. Each time I agreed fully but reverted to
the importance of the social problem as well. Each time he agreed but
reverted to the budget.
see U.S. Agency for International Development, Status of Loan Agreements as of December 31,
PE–36.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in
Peru (Achilles)1
Lima, January 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
Farewell Call on President.
PARTICIPANTS
President Manuel Prado
Theodore C. Achilles
During my farewell call on the President,2 I expressed the pleasure
I had had in serving in Peru and my optimism as to its future. I had
had the satisfaction of seeing democracy fully restored under his
memorandum of ­conversation was sent to the Department of State under cover of des-
patch 435 from Lima, January 21.
2 Ambassador Achilles left Peru and Jack D. Neal assumed charge of the Embassy
on January 27.

leadership and had every confidence that he and Beltrán would suc-
ceed in restoring the economy to a sound basis. I had only one preoc-
cupation for the future, that unless the Government and the wealthy
classes would quickly take much more action than had ever been
taken in the past to reduce the excessive difference between great
wealth and great poverty there would be a social revolution.
The President said that this was the basis of his policy. (I have seen
no signs of it.) He was satisfied that democracy was now on a firm
basis in Peru. The armed forces were completely loyal and democrat-
ically inclined and would protect the constitutional government from
any attempts to establish other forms. I agreed and congratulated him.
He was confident that the economic battle would be won. Congress
was proving very difficult but this was part of the democratic pro-
cess. I agreed and said that neither he nor the country could afford
to lose this battle. With respect to the social problem he maintained,
as does Beltrán, that a sound economy must be established first and
that thereafter housing and land reform were the two most important
steps. I agreed but maintained that the problem had great urgency.
Every time I traveled in Southern Peru I became more convinced of
the acute danger unless action were taken quickly. I very much hoped
that a great deal of such action would be taken during the remainder
of his time in office.
He said that Communism was another problem. I said it was one
aspect of the social problem and could be combated successfully only
as the basic economic and social problems were solved. I remarked
that it was highly unfortunate that the leading crypto Communist
of Arequipa should be appointed President of the Relief and
Rehabilitation Junta.3 President Prado denied at length that Humberto
NUNEZ Borja was a Communist, but I expressed the conviction that
he was working clandestinely and effectively against the President
and the Government of Peru.
On leaving, the President thanked me for my efforts toward
improving Peruvian-United States relations.
3 President Prado appointed Humberto Nuñez Borja to head relief efforts after an
earthquake struck southern Peru, particularly the Department of Arequipa, on January

Peru  1107
PE–37.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1
Washington, January 23, 1960.
SUBJECT
Peruvian-U.S. Relations: U.S. Commercial Policy;
U.S. Role in Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute; President
Eisenhower’s Visit to Latin America.
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Guillermo HOYOS Osores,
Adviser, Peruvian Ministry of Foreign Relations.
Ambassador Juan Bautista DE LAVALLE,
Peruvian Ambassador to the OAS and Delegate to the UN.
Miguel GRAU, Chargé d’Affaires, Peruvian Embassy.
Rear Admiral Luis Edgardo LLOSA, Naval Attaché, Peruvian Embassy
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST
(*Ambassador Hoyos Osores is carried as third man on the
Peruvian Foreign Office list, immediately after the Secretary General,2
although the Peruvian Embassy has explained that he is, in effect, sec-
ond in command to Foreign Minister Porras. The Embassy also explains
he is traveling as “Ambassador-­at-Large”.)
Ambassador Hoyos Osores—I am not here to recite affronts
(“agravios”) but to explain certain realities of inter-American relation-
ships. The responsible element in Peru believes the destinies of Peru
and of the United States are conjoint. This element desires friendly
Peruvian-U.S. relations not only in general terms but also as an essen-
tial to its own security within Peru. But, in Latin America there is wide-
spread resentment and suspicion of the U.S., whether or not justified,
that stems from many and complex causes of which the following are
the most important in Peru:
(1) In recent years U.S. commercial policy has dealt Peru repeated
blows, damaging Peru’s major exports—lead and zinc, cotton and
sugar—and aggravating Peru’s economic problems so that Peruvians
feel they can count on U.S. friendship only “relatively”.
(2) As a guarantor of the Rio Protocol, the U.S. has not collaborated
to produce a guarantors’ statement that would disauthorize the absurd
position Ecuador has taken (in its boundary dispute with Peru).
2 Javier Delgado Yrigoyen.

(3) In President Eisenhower’s visit to Latin America the President
proposes to reach the very doors of Peru and then about-­face and return
home the way he came.3 In so doing he will unintentionally reinforce
the old idea of the importance of the “ABC bloc”4 in Latin America,
and appear to slight Peru. The President was able to visit Kabul;5 it is
hard to understand that he cannot find time to visit Lima. Peru’s disap-
pointment is the keener for Peru’s record as foremost among the United
States’ friends of World War II.
The Peruvian people’s sense of injury in these matters poses the
Peruvian Government with serious political problems which it hopes
the United States Government will help dispel.
(At this point Ambassador Hoyos Osores launched into a lengthy
polemic on the Peru-Ecuador boundary dispute, terming it “the most
serious of these matters” and accusing the United States of obstruct-
ing action which Peru justly desired—see separate memorandum of
conversation.)6
Mr. Rubottom—Thank you for having spoken of these mutual prob-
lems with the same frankness that has always characterized my talks
with Peru’s representatives, Mr. Grau as Chargé d’Affaires, Ambassador
de Lavalle, Admiral Llosa and—last December 15 Ambassador Belaunde
in New York.7 I shall answer with the same frankness.
I, of course, regret, deeply the existence among Peruvians of any
feeling of resentment against the United States. It is understandable
that Peruvians might interpret some U.S. actions, particularly in the
field of trade, as directed against Peru itself, but such an interpretation
obviously is wrong and I hope the Peruvian Government would make
the facts known. The extremes to which popular misconceptions can
go are shown today in Cuba, which is becoming a problem for all the
American states. I remember the pitch that popular opinion in Peru had
reached—when Under Secretary Dillon and I passed through Lima in
August of 19578—in reaction to a bill pending in the U.S. Congress cov-
ering lead and zinc imports. The Peruvian people had not been told that
this was merely a bill proposed by certain individual Congressmen rep-
resenting their own constituents, as a national deputy from Arequipa
3 For documentation on President Eisenhower’s trip to South America, February
4 Reference is to Argentina, Brazil, and Chile.
5 President Eisenhower visited Kabul, December 9, during his eleven-­nation world
8 Messrs. Dillon and Rubottom passed through Lima en route to the OAS Economic

Peru  1109
might do in Lima, and that the Congress as a whole had not spoken. I
understand that the efforts of Peruvian leaders to improve Peru’s stan-
dard of living through encouraging the investment of local and foreign
capital may suffer in an atmosphere of popular resentment against the
United States. Peruvian leaders might more effectively point out that
the United States has long advocated a multi-­lateral approach to the
problem of excess lead and zinc production, as it has in the current cof-
fee arrangement; that the United States Executive and many groups in
the United States work constantly on behalf of free trade; and that the
lead-­zinc market has strengthened considerably. You can be certain that
my Government is very conscious of Peru’s interests in the products
you have mentioned, and also in fishmeal exports that are becoming so
important in Peru’s economy.
President Eisenhower has been most disappointed at not being
able to visit Peru, as he has told President Prado in a personal mes-
sage.9 Your Ambassador has presented your attitude on this matter
most effectively, and I can only emphasize that President Eisenhower’s
decision was based on the limitations of time available for his trip.
(Mr. Rubottom then discussed the inter-American Conference and
arms limitation, and replied to Ambassador Hoyos Osores on the bor-
der question—see separate memoranda of conversations.)10
10 Only the memorandum of conversation, cited in footnote 5, concerning the Peru-
Ecuador boundary dispute was found in Department of State files.
PE–38.
Editorial Note
in Peru to negotiate with the Peruvian Government for the sale of
$12 million (including one half the cost of transportation) worth of
United States surplus agricultural commodities under Title I of Public
Law 480, the Agricultural Trade development and Assistance Act of
proposed agreement was signed at Lima on February 12, 1960. Of the
total value of approximately $12 million, 45 percent was to be loaned to
Peru for economic development; 25 percent to finance loans to private
enterprises in Peru under Section 104(e), the Cooley Amendment to the
Act; and 30 percent was to be retained for United States Government

which provided that up to 25 percent of local currency from Title I sales
he made available for loans to U.S. and to private investors through the
Export-Import Bank, see 71 Stat. 345.
PE–39.
Despatch from the Chargé in Peru (Neal) to the
Department of State1
Lima, February 18, 1960.
No. 491
Ref: AmEmbassy Tel. No. 7362
SUBJECT
Conversation with President of Chamber of Deputies
Re La Brea y Pariñas Problem
I told Sr. Javier ORTIZ de ZEVALLOS that I was worried about the
trend the La Brea y Pariñas Award matter3 had taken and that my con-
cern was shared by the Department of State in Washington.
He shook his head and said, “This is a very complicated prob-
lem.” I agreed with this and said I was disturbed about the feeling in
Congress during the last days of the session and sensed a feeling of
expropriation.” He said, “No, you don’t have to worry about that.”4
He stated Peru had never broken an international obligation and was
not going to do so in this instance.
I then asked him how the matter was to be resolved and didn’t
he think there could be a compromise solution such as “adapting” or
3 Reference is to a controversy over the status of the International Petroleum
Company’s ownership of petroleum deposits in the La Brea y Pariñas property on the
northern coast of Peru. A 1922 arbitral award granted the rights to the surface and subsoil
of the area to IPC’s predecessor in perpetuity. In the summer of 1959 opponents of the
Peruvian Government sought to have the award canceled in the Peruvian Congress. In
4 At least two opposition deputies spoke in favor of expropriation during the recent
debate. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Peru  1111
bringing the International Petroleum Company’s La Brea y Pariñas
concessions under the Petroleum Code.5 I said I felt IPC would be
willing to give up certain privileges in order to adapt its operations
to the Code.6
He said this solution would never be acceptable to the opposition.
He stated Pedro BELTRAN had suggested this but it was not acceptable
and such a move had no chance at all for approval. I asked why he was
so certain of this.
Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said (IPC’s) La Brea y Pariñas concession ter-
minated in 1972.7 On that date, “Talara (the Company’s refinery and
installations) will belong to Peru.” The opposition realizes this and if a
bill is presented “adapting” IPC to the Petroleum Code it would call for
an extension of IPC’s concessions for an additional 20 or 30 years. He
said “IPC does not have a friend in Congress, not one, therefore they
are not going to be allowed to extend their concessions.”
I then asked him whether Peru intended to operate its own oil
industry. I said if IPC realized it was not going to obtain an extension
of its concession rights then I could imagine the company would cease
its investments, terminate its exploration and development operations,
and that by 1972 the industry would be in such condition that it would
be very difficult for the Government (if it failed to renew the concession
before that date) to assume responsibility for operating the industry. I
said if the Government did have to take over the industry one of the
first necessary moves would be to increase the price of products—a
step which would be most unpopular with the people.
Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said, “The company will have to keep the
industry going during this time—why shouldn’t it, it has made so much
money in the past and with its latest price increase, why shouldn’t it?”
The President of the Chamber of Deputies spoke again and again
about the unpopularity of IPC. He said the company had no friends
anywhere in the country. He said not a Member of Congress or a Cabinet
“since 1957, the company has sought, unsuccessfully, to bring its operations under the
Petroleum Law [of 1952], which would permit it to renounce its title to the subsoil of
the property and to carry on its exploration, development and production activities as a
concessionnaire.”
General Manager of the company, had made an offer in writing to Prime Minister Beltrán
for 50 percent Peruvian Government participation in the company’s net earnings.
7 The concession presumably would end in accordance with a provision in the
British-Peruvian Agreement of Settlement of March 2, 1922, providing that on January
under Peruvian laws then in effect or enacted thereafter. (Enclosure 8 to despatch 546 of
March 11)

Minister could stand up and make a favorable remark in IPC’s behalf.
If anyone did so, he would be charged with taking a pay-­off from IPC.
He said IPC has always had poor public relations: “They don’t know
how to handle this situation.” He said they expect that paying 40,000
soles for an advertisement in El Comercio, which is one of IPC’s big crit-
ics, helps, but it does not. He criticized IPC officials, saying they are
difficult to deal with. He said he sent one of his representatives to IPC
only a few weeks ago but his man received a “brush-­off.” He stated IPC
had sent him copies of its position on La Brea y Pariñas for distribution
to each member of the Chamber of Deputies. He said, “I returned all
of them to the company and then telephoned to see whether they had
been received. This was not the way to handle the matter.”
He said if I would think about it a minute I would realize that
IPC is unique in the hate it has generated in Peru. He said companies
producing lead and zinc, cotton, sugar, fish, and copper are popular
with the people, and these companies can be defended, but not IPC and
petroleum.
According to Ortiz de Zevallos, IPC has always been unpopular
because it inherited a “dirty business.” He said the original Award was
brought about by graft to certain persons in France and to the Peruvians
who put over the deal. He said he and his father (former Ambassador)8
were talking only this morning about the Award and that his father was
in Paris when the Award was made and remembered the talk of the
“pay-­offs” at that time. He said his father warned him about the matter
and had convinced him that it was an illegal thing from the start.
I told him I knew the stockholders of IPC would like to know just
what could be done to place this in the proper light. He said he didn’t
know but that “building a few houses in Talara” (the IPC housing proj-
ect in Talara was one of the first in Peru and was quite well done) and
putting advertisements in El Comercio was not going to win friends.
(Comment: Ortiz de Zevallos is quite right about Talara housing, it was
never received as it should have been.)
I kept pressing the President for his idea of a solution. He said,
“Pedro Beltrán is a good friend of the United States. I am certain he
will have some formula.” At the same time, he stated that when the
President returns from Paris he is going to concentrate on La Brea y
Pariñas matter.9
8 Reference is to Emilio Ortiz de Zevallos who was Second Secretary of the Peruvian
Embassy in France at the time of the La Brea y Pariñas Award in 1922.
France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, and
the Netherlands. In despatch 575 from Lima, March 29, the Embassy reported on a March

Peru  1113
Several times, he told me “the opposition” was going to delay the
problem as long as possible because it will make a great “banders”
(issue) in the 1962 election. He said with all the opposition to IPC this is
something which will appeal to the people.
I told the President that 1972 was going to roll around quicker
than he thought and that no large concern was going to wait until the
last minute to attempt to negotiate a contract on an oil concession or
monopoly with a nation. I said I felt certain it would be necessary to
start negotiation on a settlement before 1972 and this would not only be
in the interest of the company, but also beneficial to the people of Peru.
He admitted this.
I stated that if IPC is as unpopular as he feels it is (I personally
believe he has the correct feel on this because it has become a real
popular subject with no IPC backers), I was certain the sharehold-
ers would want to do something to correct the situation, therefore
what was the answer? He said that expropriation was not the solution
because Peru knew better than to try to buck the big international
oil concerns. He realized that Peru would need foreign markets and
that it could not compete with the big companies if Peru tried to take
over alone. He said he saw a partnership deal as now exists in other
countries.
I stated that as he already knew IPC was owned almost wholly by
ESSO and that ESSO is acquiring sole ownership; and that maybe the
solution would be to take the name of IPC entirely out of the picture
and make it ESSO of Peru. He said, “something like that.”
I told the President that our concern over La Brea y Pariñas did
not center altogether around IPC, but that we were worried about the
adverse effects an unfavorable decision would have on the climate
for foreign investment in Peru. Any discriminatory action here would
make us start worrying about other United States investments such as
Toquepala, Cerro de Pasco, Marcona, etc., etc.
Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said I need not worry because IPC was a case
within itself—“an isolated case.” He stated several times that this mat-
ter had nothing to do with anti-American sentiment. He said, “if you
will think back on all the discussions and debates in Congress you will
note that not once was the name of the United States mentioned—no
U.S. imperialist talk—no anti-American sentiments.” He said he was
afraid the Eisenhower visit to Chile was going to be mentioned and
touch off remarks of ill feeling but this did not happen.
Jack D. Neal

PE–40.
Telegram from the Chargé in Peru (Neal) to the
Department of State1
798. In conversation at airport with Prime Minister Beltran this
a.m. re La Brea y Parinas found he unaware Department had called
in Berckemeyer.2 I stated we concerned about recommendation of
Consultative Committee.3 He said our concern justified because it did
not look good but this is IPC’s problem and they will have to settle it. I
told him they would need his help.
Beltran then went into a tirade saying he was not going to help
them at all. Said he had his lesson with IPC and from here on out “they
can go to hell” as far as he is concerned. Stated IPC failed to come to his
assistance when he needed only the slightest help on his bond issue;
they reluctantly agreed to take 25 million instead of 50. He said IPC has
been playing a one-­way street so he is through.
I told him an adverse La Brea decision would affect Peru’s invest-
ment climate and jeopardize his own economic program. He said he
could not help that but he was not going to assist IPC; they got them-
selves into this situation so they can get out of it themselves.
I told him IPC could not win it alone or without him but he said
again he had his lesson, et cetera, et cetera.
I asked him what assistance could be expected from the President.
He said he did not know.
Neal
expressed to Ambassador Berckemeyer its “deep concern . . . over demands for annul-
ment La Brea y Pariñas award, stating such action would doubtless have very adverse
effect climate for U.S. investment in Peru. Explained our position based on opposition to
unilateral annulment international award and agreement and in no sense implied unwill-
ingness to see change brought about by negotiation as we understood from conversations
here and in Lima that company more than anxious negotiate conversion to concession
21, the Peruvian Chamber of Deputies approved a Government-­sponsored resolution
requesting the Consultative Commission of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, an advisory
body consisting of prominent Peruvians, to render its opinion on the validity of the La
the Embassy stated that the Commission’s report, released on July 8, recommended that
the Executive branch submit a bill to the Congress to establish new arrangements for
the development of petroleum in the La Brea y Pariñas area. The Commission rejected
nationalization as a solution to the problem on the ground that it was unnecessary and

Peru  1115
PE–41.
Editorial Note
In a note of April 6, 1960, to Ambassador Berckemeyer, the
Department of State replied to a Peruvian request for an increase of
Peru’s sugar import quota to 250,000 tons. The Department informed
the Ambassador that it had received many requests for sugar import
quota changes which would entail major revision of the Sugar Act of
time was not appropriate to request such a revision, the Department
concluded regretfully that it could not recommend an increase in Peru’s
to reassign the Cuban sugar quota. (74 Stat. 330) The Department of
was from the Cuban quota. For further information, see Congressional
PE–42.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Peruvian Affairs (Poole)1
Washington, May 3, 1960.
SUBJECT
Corro de Pasco Corporation vs.
American Smelting & Refining Company.
PARTICIPANTS
Fernando Berckemeyer, Ambassador of Peru
Mr. Rubottom, ARA
Mr. Coerr, WST
Mr. Poole, WST/P
Ambassador Berckemeyer stated that President Prado and Prime
Minister Beltran were very concerned about the possible consequences
of the suit brought by Cerro de Pasco Corporation against American
Smelting & Refining Company (AS&R), and that Beltran had asked him
to call on Mr. Rubottom to express this concern, as well as the hope
that this matter might be settled quietly. The Ambassador said that the
Distribution.

suit concerned something that had happened some years ago and that
publicity could result in the most terrible scandal, in addition to the
fact that it would have grave consequences for both companies as well
as American business in general, both in Peru and elsewhere in Latin
America. Opposition elements would doubtless play on the theme
that if these two American companies are capable of doing this to each
other, what might they do to the Peruvians? Matters are made worse by
the coincidence in timing with the present difficulties the International
Petroleum Company is having over the La Brea y Pariñas Award. The
Ambassador said that the danger of a publicity break was increasingly
great. He referred to the recent articles in the American Metal Market and
said that a good reporter could easily dig out the facts. Also, stockhold-
ers might demand information.
The Ambassador stated that he had talked both with the lawyer of
AS&R and with Mr. Koenig, President of Cerro de Pasco, and that he
had the impression that both companies were willing to negotiate, but
that talks were stymied over AS&R’s demand that Cerro drop the suit
and Cerro’s refusal to do so. He himself did not think dropping the suit
was so vital since Cerro could simply continue to hold it in abeyance.
He thought, perhaps that “outside” directors from each company (i.e.
directors who are not company executives) might undertake the nego-
tiation or preside over it.
Reverting to President Prado’s and Prime Minister Beltran’s con-
cern, Ambassador Berckemeyer said he knew the Department had been
talking to both parties, but asked whether the Department could again
call them in to impress on them even more urgently the need for a set-
tlement without publicity.
Mr. Rubottom replied that the Department was also very con-
cerned about the potential consequences of this case and that it had
by no means been idle in the matter. He mentioned that Mr. Dillon,
Mr. Achilles, Mr. Hager, himself and certain others in the Department
and Mr. Waugh had spoken to both parties on several occasions in
order to point out the dangers and urge the avoidance of publicity.2
He added that Ambassador Chapin was fully conversant with the
matter. He said, however, that the Department had to be careful not to
give the appearance of taking sides or prejudging the case. In the last
talks he had had last week, he stated, he had been told that the parties
were at least talking, which he thought represented some progress. Mr.
Rubottom then asked whether the Ambassador had any confirmation
that Henry Holland had been engaged as attorney for Cerro de Pasco.
2 Memoranda of conversations on this subject are in Department of State files

Peru  1117
Ambassador Berckemeyer (who had earlier reported to the
Department that he had heard this was the case) said he could con-
firm the report. He said his original report came from a director of
the company and that he had confirmation from an executive of the
company.
Mr. Rubottom felt that Mr. Holland would be especially aware
of the potential serious consequences of this case. He mentioned Mr.
Holland’s present interests in promoting American investment in Latin
America.
Ambassador Berckemeyer agreed.
Mr. Rubottom said he would explore the possibility of a renewed
approach on the subject.3
3 Ambassador Berckemeyer had mentioned to a Department officer in a previous
conversation that he had some shares in Cerro. On that occasion he said that, while he
had not heard from his Government about the dispute, Robert Koenig, President of
Cerro, had given him a full rundown. [Footnote is in the source text]
PE–43.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, June 9, 1960.
SUBJECT
Call of Prime Minister Beltran of Peru on the President
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Prime Minister Pedro Beltran2
Counselor Theodore Achilles
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
2 Prime Minister Beltrán departed from Lima on June 7 to visit the United States
for the ostensible purpose of receiving an honorary degree from Yale University, June
13. While in the United States he met with President Eisenhower, Vice President Nixon,
Secretary Herter, and numerous other U.S. officials, bankers, and businessman. He
returned to Lima on July 6 after a two-­day visit to Colombia, en route.

After an exchange of greetings, the President, saying that he had
been disappointed with the turn of events in Paris,3 expressed hope
that events since then, like the announcement of the Khrushchev visit
to Cuba, would bring the American Republics closer together than
ever—if so, this would be a constructive result.
Prime Minister Beltran said that he wanted to bring greetings
from President Prado and to say how much the latter had regretted
that President Eisenhower had been unable to visit Peru. He turned
quickly from this point to comment on the deteriorating situation in
Latin America, stressing the aggressiveness of the communists who
were falling in line behind the Castro mystique. The latter’s slogans
calling for “economic freedom” and “non-­intervention in their internal
affairs” attracted wide public support. Whereas the communists might
have once hoped to get a foothold in Bolivia, now they were well estab-
lished in Cuba.
The President raised two questions: 1. Would Latin America toler-
ate a Moscow-­dominated government in the region? and 2. What does
Latin America expect the United States to do? Are we supposed “to sit
and do nothing?”. Mikoyan4 went to Cuba and signed a trade agree-
ment; now Khrushchev5 is reported to be going.
The Prime Minister said that William Randolph Hearst, Jr.6 and
Bob Considine7 had asked him similar questions a few weeks ago and
he had honestly replied “I don’t know”. Now he is deeply concerned
because the communists are acting aggressively everywhere, as in
Peru where he recently had to deal with the crisis provoked by a mass
demonstration in favor of a few students who were mistakenly placed
with confirmed criminals in the prison.8 The demonstration was actu-
ally intended to bring down the government and the responsible
3 Documentation on the meeting of the Heads of Government (Summit Conference)
of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union at Paris in May
1960 is presented in volume VIII.
4 Anastas Ivanovich Mikoyan, First Deputy Chairman, Soviet Council of Ministers,
and Cuban Premier Castro signed an agreement in Habána on February 13 for Soviet pur-
chase of Cuban sugar and extension of $100 million credit to Cuba. For documentation,
see volume V.
5 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, First Secretary of the Central Committee,
Communist Party of the Soviet Union; and Chairman of the Soviet Council of
Ministers.
6 Editor-­in-Chief and Chairman, Editorial Policy Board of the Hearst Newspapers.
7 Syndicated columnist.
Government and Police Carlos Carrillo Smith resigned on May 25 after a mass demon-
stration protesting confinement of three students, arrested on May 19, in cells with
hardened criminals and sexual perverts. Minister of Education José Rubio Rolando also

Peru  1119
cabinet minister did resign. In Ecuador an unpredictable man has just
been elected President (Velasco Ibarra). The Prime Minister said that
the communists complained about Berlin, but Cuba is much worse
from the standpoint of the free world.
The President stated that the combination of government assis-
tance and private investment in Latin America from the United States
had been substantial, yet that message seems not to get across. The
Prime Minister reflected for a moment, and said that perhaps we had
concentrated too much on major capital investments and that we
should now devote our assistance to projects going directly to the peo-
ple so as to capture public opinion. The Prime Minister recalled the
great western immigration in the United States. The Latin American
people must now move to their unused land for the new opportunity
they seek.
The President said that the communists seem to concentrate their
efforts in the cities. He said that it was not an easy matter to settle new
residents on land and that careful training was required. The Prime
Minister referred to the great opportunity for Peru east of the Andes,
a region which could offer a new life to their illiterate indigenous
population.
The Prime Minister said that he understood from the press that
the Bolivian President (Siles) had said, following the Khrushchev press
conference in Paris, that Bolivia would be glad to have Khrushchev
visit that country. He had been shocked by this.
The President stressed the need to get the best possible represen-
tatives assigned to the Council of the OAS, to give them additional
work and opportunity, and to try to mold opinion throughout Latin
America. He compared the OAS unfavorably with NATO, saying that
perhaps we don’t take the OAS as seriously as we should. Our effort
is designed to save a continent. We are not Latins, perhaps we don’t
understand Latins as well as we should, but we are trying and we are
willing to do more. Still there must be a joint determination to be free
and to remain free.
The Prime Minister recalled his visit to Puerto Rico in 1958 at the
time of Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s visit there9 and the sharp contrast
which he noted as compared to the earlier visits he had made to Puerto
Rico. The improvement was due largely to Mufioz Marfn’s having
helped the lowest social levels. The Prime Minister returned to his line
that “A showdown has to come with Cuba”.
footnote 4.

The President referred to his recent discussion with Prime Minister
Diefenbaker of Canada regarding that country’s joining the OAS.10
Diefenbaker is somewhat cooler to the idea than the Canadian Foreign
Minister but said that Canada should have an observer at the OAS now.
Prime Minister Beltran confirmed that the Canadian Foreign Minister
had told him recently in Lima that he favored Canada’s joining the
OAS.11 The Prime Minister said that “time is not on our side”. “We must
move faster in the OAS”, he added.
The President agreed saying that each country’s President should
insist that the OAS take strong, imaginative and energetic action. It
should be a “bastion of freedom”.
The Prime Minister, averting to the need to help the lower classes,
questioned the Brazilian investment in its new capital. The President
said it was one of the great experiments of the time—­it could be a
fine thing or a dismal failure. The Prime Minister had doubts but the
President said that if the “carrot” attracted enough people to the rich
inner land of Brazil, then Brasilia would succeed.
The Prime Minister reiterated his belief that the lower classes have
to be assisted—­fast. Mr. Achilles said that the lower classes need to
have a stake in private property. The President said that man must be
given an opportunity for both spiritual and material development. The
Prime Minister said that his newspapers preached that line constantly.
The President declared that we are all together and that no country
could remain an island of freedom surrounded by tyranny. He referred
to the Christian attitude which motivates the Americas and the Prime
Minister said that Cuba was giving the lie to freedom. He finished by
saying that “Time is of the essence”. The President urged him to state
his views with the same frankness to the officials in the Department
with whom he spoke, mentioning Mr. Dillon specifically because of his
responsibilities in the economic field.
At the conclusion of the discussion the photographers came into
the President’s office.
10 Prime Minister John G. Diefenbaker of Canada made an official visit to Washington,
June 3–4; for documentation on U.S. relations with Canada, see volume VI.
Howard Charles Green, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs, visited Lima,

Peru  1121
PE–44.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge
of Peruvian Affairs (Poole)1
Washington, June 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
Assistance for Prime Minister Beltran’s Program
PARTICIPANTS
Pedro Beltran, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of Peru
Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary of State
Theodore C. Achilles, Counselor of the Department of State
Edwin M. Martin, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs
Richard A. Poole, Officer-­in-Charge of Peruvian Affairs, WST
Summary. Prime Minister Beltran explained that, having concen-
trated his first year in office on the re-­establishment of financial stabil-
ity, he was now turning to the urgent problem of developing programs
which would bring direct benefit to the underprivileged people, espe-
cially in the fields of land and housing. In the former his principal
emphasis was on the resettlement of new lands, which he described
in some detail, although he was not opposed to breaking up unused
or under-used large landholdings. He emphasized the urgency of the
problem in the face of Castro and Communist agitation of discontent.
He explained that his problem was to find financing for roads to reset-
tlement areas, resettlement costs and housing, including the establish-
ment of new savings and loan associations. Beltran said that the IBRD
seemed very interested in studying ways of assisting, but that immedi-
ate financing was needed from U.S. sources, over the next six months—
perhaps $20 million—with more during the next two years. Mr. Dillon
replied that the atmosphere in Washington was receptive to more assis-
tance in Latin America, including the fields of agrarian reform and
housing, and he indicated that roads and savings and loan associations
would seem to be particularly susceptible of U.S. assistance. He said
that extra priority would be given to countries such as Peru which had
done a conscientious job of helping themselves. He stated that our cur-
rent thinking is along the lines of projects in which the DLF would meet
local currency costs in conjunction with the Eximbank (rather than the
IBRD) to meet dollar costs, with the IBRD operating independently. He
memoranda on this meeting for Under Secretary Dillon from Theodore C. Achilles,
Counselor of the Department of State, June 17, and from Assistant Secretary Rubottom,

emphasized the need for adequate planning and suggested that ICA
could provide technical assistance in this regard. End Summary.
Prime Minister Beltran stated that, since becoming Prime Minister
nearly a year ago, he had proceeded to set Peru’s financial house in
order by attacking the problems of balancing the budget, foreign
exchange, stabilization of the currency, and so forth. Now the question
is, what next? The Government is expected to do something, as the peo-
ple need help and want results. The principal sectors the Government
must now attack are those of land and housing.
The land problem is one entailing the people’s desire to work their
own lands. It is, however, not simply a matter of dividing existing large
holdings in settled areas, as much of the settled land is the poorest—
that is, the land in the high Sierras, at an average altitude of 12,000
feet, which has extremely poor soil. Much of this land, moreover, has
been subdivided by the Indians into uneconomical, small holdings.
The result is the Indians have begun to migrate to urban areas, forming
squatters slums around the cities. Around Lima, for example, there are
from 200 to 500 thousand squatters.
There is, however, marvelous land to the East of the Andes, in the
Amazon basin. There are two types of jungle here, the low swamps and
the upper jungle. In the latter, at between 2,000 and 3,500 feet, one can
grow practically everything. One can, for instance, grow several crops
of corn and cocoa a year. The soil is good, there are no seasons, there is
adequate rain, it is not hot, and the climate is healthy. Some Indians have
already migrated to this region and established their own farms. Clearing
is no problem, as they can grow crops among the fallen logs. They build
simple houses of natural materials. They find they need additional labor,
so bring down other Indians from the highlands who eventually estab-
lish their own farms. The Indians who have migrated thus far, however,
live at a very low economic level since they cannot market their crops.
What is needed to settle this region properly are penetration roads
and feeder roads, which would facilitate settlement and provide access
to markets. Also needed are community centers and experiment sta-
tions. This would then attract new generations of settlers and would
satisfy large scale demands for land.
Mr. Dillon asked whether the Indians were willing to settle these
regions.
Sr. Beltran replied in the affirmative, stating that many have already
migrated. For example, from 20 to 25 thousand Indians from the Lake
Titicaca region have migrated to the neighboring lowlands, perhaps 10
thousand of whom are permanent settlers. These settlers are making
profits from their produce even though they have to carry it out on their
own backs. With new highways a great many more people would be
attracted to these new regions from both the mountains and the coast.
Such an approach to the land problem would be different from the

Peru  1123
subdivision of large landholdings, since the land in these new regions
does not belong to anyone.
Mr. Dillon asked whether it would not be quicker and easier to
break up some of the large landholdings so as to settle people in that
immediate vicinity, since the opening of new regions required new
roads, new communities, new everything.
Sr. Beltran replied that, in his view, it would be easier to start on
new lands since these are better and more productive lands. He said
he is not opposed, however, to subdivision of large estates, particularly
unworked or underworked landholdings. He recognized, additionally,
the political and social need to deal with this aspect of the land problem.
Turning to urban problems, Sr. Beltran referred to the new Savings
and Loan Association which would encourage both savings and low-­
cost, private housing on a long term loan basis. With the help of the
DLF loan to the Association a start can now be made in housing in the
Lima area, but new home loan banks are needed in other departments.
Other approaches must also be developed.
With these programs, Sr. Beltran stated, he hoped to win over the
vast majority of the common people from the appeal and influence of
Communism. He emphasized the very real danger of Communist agi-
tation amongst the masses, such as the recent riots in Tokyo2 and the
terrible riots (“Bogotazo”) in Bogotá twelve years ago.3 He mentioned
that Fidel Castro had been involved in those riots and alluded to the fact
that, when an American plane evacuated wives and children of Cuban
officials, Castro and another agitator made their escape as stowaways.
Castro is now intensifying his agitation throughout Latin America.
There is less and less outwardly Communist agitation and more and
more Fidel, with his claims of being the standard-­bearer of economic
independence, non-­intervention and the welfare of the masses. In fact,
however, he is serving the purpose of Communism and it matters lit-
tle whether or not he himself is an actual Communist. Che Guevara’s
recent speech is additional evidence that the Cuban Government’s phi-
losophy is Communist.4 The Communists are ready for new Bogotazos
and we therefore must act fast.
2 Documentation on anti-U.S. demonstrations and the decision to cancel the pro-
jected visit of President Eisenhower to Japan in June 1960 is presented in Volume XV.
3 Reference is to the uprising after the assassination of Liberal Party leader Jorge E.
The Western Hemisphere.
4 Reference presumably is to a speech by Ernesto Che’ Guevara Serna, Chief of
the Industrial Department, National Institute of Agrarian Reform and President of the
National Bank of Cuba, before an assembly of workers in Habána, June 18, 1960; for an
English translation of the text, see John Gerassi, ed., Venceremos! The Speeches and Writings
of Ernesto Che Guevara (New York, 1968), p. 92.

Sr. Beltran said he had talked to Mr. Black,5 (IBRD), who was very
interested in his program—in fact, he had never seen him so sincere. Mr.
Black said he would be prepared to send a delegation to Lima to study
ways of helping, but that this could probably not be organized before
January of next year. Sr. Beltran said he was delighted at the prospect,
but that, because of the urgency of making a start on both resettlement
and housing in order to rally the hopes of the under-­privileged, some-
thing had to be done during the intervening six months. A great deal
more financing would be needed for these programs. Addressing Mr.
Dillon, Sr. Beltran asked “Can you help us tide over this period?”—
adding that a further problem was IBRD’s restriction confining its loans
to foreign exchange needs.
Mr. Dillon replied that the Bank could get over this restriction if it
wished.
Sr. Beltran agreed that Mr. Black should find a way of getting
around this restriction. He then said that during his stay in New York
he had explored the possibility of obtaining loans from various private
banks, mentioning in particular Morgan Stanley. The bankers he spoke
to, however, had not been optimistic over floating a loan at this early
stage in Beltran’s program. This avenue did not therefore appear very
hopeful unless Peru had the good fortune of landing the counterpart
of the $100 million Prudential loan to Mexico! When Mr. Achilles asked
whether there had been any talk of a mixed IBRD-­private bank loan,
Sr. Beltran replied that he had discussed this with Morgan Stanley, who
had not been encouraging except for the possibility of small amounts
from private banks.
Mr. Dillon asked what chances there were of more effort, particu-
larly more taxes, on the Peruvian side, as there is an impression that the
few very wealthy in Peru don’t contribute enough. Mr. Achilles men-
tioned that Beltran had done a good deal in the field of tax collection,
which he asked Beltran to explain more fully.
Sr. Beltran then explained that through Mr. Black he had engaged
a Dutch tax expert by the name of Lieftinck and two assistants to reor-
ganize the tax collection system. Among other measures the banks are
now required to report interest paid. All foreign banks and one Peruvian
bank have so far complied, but Beltran is insisting under threat of fine,
which he thinks will now make it easier for local banks to comply in
the face of their clients’ displeasure. Beltran had also launched a local
bond issue as a new experiment which, despite pessimistic forecasts by
many, was a great success. The issue raised 250 million soles and was
63% oversubscribed. Additionally, taxes have been increased.
5 Eugene R. Black, President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development.

Peru  1125
Mr. Dillon then emphasized the need for adequate planning.
He asked what specific plans had been made for Beltran’s program,
whether goals had been set on resettlement, whether roads had been
planned, and so forth.
Sr. Beltran replied that a start must be made gradually. He has engaged
an Italian firm, Italconsult, to take charge of planning and directing the
resettlement program and which would work closely with the World
Bank. This firm can draw on its considerable experience in land reform
in Italy as well as abroad. He was also making arrangements on other
aspects of his program with the firm Arthur B. Little of New Haven and
with a Canadian firm, which would start next week. Beltran explained
that the planning of roads was not so difficult and that he already had two
principal areas in mind where roads had been started but had stalled—
that is, in the North and South where the best colonization areas were to
be found. In answer to a further question from Mr. Dillon, Sr. Beltran said
these roads were distinct from the Aguaytia-Pucallpa road for which a
DLF loan had been approved and which his predecessors had promoted
primarily as the only road connection to an Amazon port, although it did
pass through some areas suitable for colonization.
Mr. Dillon then remarked that the discussion seemed to point to
roads as the main field in which the United States might be of assis-
tance in resettlement.
Sr. Beltran replied that although Peruvian companies could build
the roads, Peru needs local currency for this purpose which is not
available locally and hence must seek foreign currency for conversion.
Funds are also needed for foreign exchange costs of road construction,
particularly machinery. In addition to roads, the Government will need
funds to finance actual resettlement, including payment for land. It is
contemplated that the settlers will eventually repay the Government
for the land, following a period of grace of from one to three years, at a
rate set by the value of crops, e.g. 20%, which would thus gear payment
to good and bad yields. Nevertheless, the Government does not really
expect to get all its money back for resettlement costs.
Mr. Dillon remarked that the big problem seemed to be time. We had
already approved loans for the Savings and Loan Association and for one
road, and we could find other projects. We could possibly help in land
reform, which is a necessary thing and which would seem to be easier in
some ways than the opening of new lands. However, this is a complex prob-
lem which we have not gotten into before and which is largely for the coun-
try itself to handle. Hence, we don’t know yet what we can do in this field.
However, Mr. Dillon continued, Mr. Brand6 and the DLF are ready
to look into new ways of assisting. We plan to be more active in Latin
6 Managing Director, Development Loan Fund.

America next year and we must mobilize various different approaches.
ICA can provide technical study. We are thinking of requesting addi-
tional funds for Latin America for this sort of thing, although it is too late
for the coming fiscal year since requests must be made by November
or December for the following fiscal year. Mr. Dillon thought Congress
would be receptive if we could show ways the funds would be used.
We must therefore show specific needs, e.g. land reform in Peru and
Colombia and reconstruction in Chile. Mr. Dillon said the immediate
problem in Peru seemed to be one of finding funds in the next three
or four months, and that the DLF and the Export Import Bank to be
the only sources for these funds. He referred again to the IBRD’s inter-
est, adding that study should be made of the possibility that it supply
funds for both local currency as well as foreign exchange needs.
Mr. Dillon then said there was a general feeling in U.S. Government
circles that we should use DLF funds for local currency needs in con-
junction with the Export-Import Bank, rather than with the IBRD, for
foreign exchange requirements, as we had our own foreign exchange
problem and preferred to finance our own exports. Other foreign
exporters should provide their own financing. Mr. Dillon suggested
that Prime Minister Beltran bear in mind in his talks with Mr. Brand and
others that our preference in financing given projects is thus for the DLF
to do the whole thing or in conjunction with the Export-Import Bank.
Mr. Dillon felt that Sr. Beltran would find a receptive attitude in the
DLF toward an increased flow of funds to Latin America for such fields
as land reform and housing, and that this reflected not only the attitude
of Mr. Brand and his staff but also of those agencies which make up
its Board of Directors, including Treasury, State, ICA and the Export-
Import Bank. Mr. Dillon also pointed up the problem of worldwide pri-
orities, saying that we took great satisfaction in helping Governments
which do a conscientious job of helping themselves. He pointed to
Peru’s record, which is hard to equal anywhere in the world, and stated
that this gave Peru extra priority.
Reverting to the question of housing, Mr. Dillon said we wanted to
help in this field, for example, through savings and loan associations.
These seem to provide the right pattern, as we could of course pro-
vide only partial financing. We are giving study to further assistance
through home loan agencies in different parts of the world, particularly
in Latin America. For example, we are trying to work out some way
of creating a joint agency to encourage and channel the investment of
private capital in home loan agencies abroad. Mr. Dillon suggested that
Sr. Beltran talk to Mr. Brand about this.
Sr. Beltran said he had seen Mr. Brand this morning and that the
latter was planning to come to Lima. He had also seen Mr. Anderson of
the Treasury, who called in Mr. Upton. He said Mr. Anderson and Mr.

Peru  1127
Upton had been very helpful and had indicated DLF as the principal
source of the needed funds for local costs. Mr. Brand had also been
most receptive and helpful, saying it was possible to start right away in
housing and resettlement if ways could be found to provide such assis-
tance. He had earlier seen Mr. Waugh of the Export-Import Bank, who
was very sympathetic, and would be seeing him again.
Mr. Dillon said he was delighted that these talks had gone so well.
He reverted to the need to work out a pattern for Beltran’s programs,
since the law requires adequate plans in order for the DLF to make
loans. He suggested that the ICA could provide technical assistance in
working out such plans and in drawing up applications to the DLF. In
addition to technical assistance, it is possible that ICA special funds
could be used next year.
Sr. Beltran replied that this type of assistance would be most help-
ful and important. He mentioned, however, the livestock development
program in which ICA had assisted in drawing up the program and the
loan application, which had just been turned down by the DLF.
Sr. Beltran then reverted to his need for financing over the next six
months. He said he had been mentioning $25 million for this period,
although he actually thought that about $20 million would meet his
needs. With this he could start on some projects right away, while oth-
ers would take time to develop. He stressed again the need for speed
in face of the threat of Castroism and Communism to aggravate an
already unstable political and social situation.
PE–45.
Editorial Note
A study mission, consisting of Vance Brand, Managing Director,
Development Loan Fund; Hawthorne Arey, Director, Export-Import
Bank of Washington; John W. Johnston, Jr., Deputy Regional Director for
Latin America, International Cooperation Administration; and Theodore
C. Achilles, Counselor of the Department of State, visited Peru in mid-July
to consider Peruvian loan applications for jungle colonization and low-­
cost housing. They met with President Prado, Prime Minister Beltrán,
Cabinet Ministers, and other Peruvian officials. In telegram 41 from Lima,
July 16, they recommended $50 million credit for Peru divided equally
between the Development Loan Fund and the Export-Import Bank.
million credit by the Development Loan Fund to Peru for settlement of

the upper selva region east of the Andes. According to the White House
statement, these credits along with the credit agreement of July 13 for
$2 million from the Development Loan Fund for the Peruvian Mutual
Savings and Loan Association, brought the total recent United States
credits for Peruvian Land settlement and housing to the equivalent of
more than 1.5 billion Peruvian soles. For the text of a statement issued at
Denver by President Eisenhower, July 28, on the development program
for Peru, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D.
PE–46.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
July 15, 1960
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 3 pages not declassified.
PE–47.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Chapin) to the
Department of State1
49. In no way desiring to detract from Beltran program and request
for DLF and Export Import loan applications (EMBTEL 41), it is consensus
of Embassy, three service attaches with reference to EMBTEL 422 that fol-
lowing qualifying considerations should be made known to Department
and at request other agencies passed to their Washington principals.
Since statement “Fidelismo has infected armed forces” does not
agree with Embassy information or Army Attache’s reporting,3 lat-
ter requested make new survey. He conferred with Minister War,4
3 Referenced reports by Colonel John J. Davis, Army Attaché, Embassy in Peru, were
not found in Department of State files.
4 General Victor Tenorio Hurtado.

Peru  1129
Commanding General Armed Forces and Chief of Staff.5 Was informed
Army, aware Cubans attempting disaffect non-­commissioned personnel,
was therefore watching their activities and has Cuban Embassy under
surveillance. There has been no known infiltration among the troops by
Fidelistas. Army solid against Castro and has standing order there be no
Naval and air attaches report these branches also strongly anti-­
Castro and no known infiltrations.7
Embassy aware and has reported attempts Cuban Ambassador
foment trouble in student, sugar, mining and other labor matters but
his effectiveness has been limited and recently rebounded in that
National Committee for Defence of Democracy publicly denounced
Ambassador July 14 for meddling in local politics and requested
President and Foreign Minister to put him in his place”. Frigid official
reception President Dorticos received during visit here last month is
also indication of GOP annoyance over Cuban policies and over Cuban
Ambassador’s activities. Particularly noted was absence Peruvian mil-
itary officers at functions related to visit.
Local Communists and other Leftist, pro-Cuban extremists includ-
ing APRA Rebelde8 have become more vigorous in fomenting trouble in
last few months and in uniting with other opposition parties and groups
to attempt bring about downfall of Beltran Cabinet. Funds disbursed by
Cuban Ambassador to such groups have undoubtedly facilitated these
activities. At same time, however, these activities have in recent weeks
brought government and certain other influential public and private sec-
tors to realization of extent of Communist influence, particularly in labor
and student fields, and have contributed to feeling that something should
be done to curb this influence. According to [text not declassified] (WEEKA
Without wishing unduly to minimize extent of Cuban role in
assisting Communists and other extremists to foment trouble in Peru,
Embassy does not believe their influence played any significant part in
5 General Alejandro Cuadra Rabines.
newspaper Tribuna contained unfriendly accounts of the visit by Cuban President
June 6, reported that President Dorticós had received a “cool, correct official reception
7 The reports by Commander Jay W. Land, Naval Attaché and Naval Attaché for Air,
and by Lieutenant Colonel Vernon J. Lyle, Air Attaché, Embassy in Peru, were not found
in Department of State files.
8 Reference is to a splinter party which broke away from APRA and supported the
revolutionary regime of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
Secretary-General Ramiro Prialé had suggested that special legislation was required to

lack of publicity given to Peru’s initiative in OAS10 or in limited reception
to President Eisenhower’s declaration on Latin American aid program.11
Embassy fully concurs that urgency of implementation of Beltran
program is essential and trusts Department will assist in every possible
way GOP’s loan applications.
Chapin
10 In a note of July 13 to OAS Council Chairman Vicente Sánchez Gavito, Juan
Bautista de Lavalle, the Peruvain Representative on the OAS Council, requested a
Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs for the purpose of considering the
exigencies of hemisphere solidarity, the defense of the regional system, and the defense
of American democratic principles in the face of threats that might affect them. For text,
see American Efforts to Relieve International Tensions in the Western Hemisphere, 1959–1960,
p. 221. Documentation on the Seventh Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign
11 Reference is to a statement read by President Eisenhower at a news conference
at Newport, Rhode Island, July 11; for text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
PE–48.
Memorandum of Conversation, by Donald F. Barnes of
the Division of Language Services1
San José, August 20, 1960.
US/MC/162
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D
199. Confidential. Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took
place in the Chancery building at 10:00 a.m.
the U.S. Delegation to the Sixth and Seventh Meetings of Consultation of Minister of
United States
The Secretary
Mr. Rubottom
Mr. Mann
Ambassador Dreier
Mr. Barnes
Peru
Foreign Minister Porras
SUBJECT
Meetings of Consultation

Peru  1131
Mr. [illegible in the original]: [illegible in the original] must be [illegi-
ble in the original] of [illegible in the original] aspects of the United States
proposal concerning [illegible in the original] the Dominican Republic
[illegible in the original] be considered during the [illegible in the original].3
Minister Porras said that there was [illegible in the original] civil
[illegible in the original] Latin America, and that all of the [illegible in
the original].
Minister Porras said that the [illegible in the original] received by
the masses in Latin America [illegible in the original] from the [illegible
in the original] that even among [illegible in the original] circles, that is,
the Catholics, there were firm supporters of Castro. He said that he had
received a telegram from students of the Catholic University demand-
ing that he not participate in any anti-Cuban actions.
Minister Porras said that, however, the upper hierarchy of the armed
forces, financial circles, the government, and a majority in both houses of
the Peruvian Congress were in favor of acts of repression of Communist
influence in Cuba. He said that he would have to proceed with great cau-
tion in the Seventh Meeting, for fear of touching off a revolution in Peru
similar to the ones that had taken place in Bolivia or Cuba.
Minister Porras said that he believed sincerely in a policy of coop-
eration with the United States and in the defence of Western princi-
ples, but that he would have to be careful not to support any measures
that might incite the Cuban people to break Latin American unity. He
said that Cuba had broken its ties with the United States by its violent
attacks on the latter country, but that Cuba had no reason to break its
ties with the other Latin American republics. He said that he hoped that
Cuba would remain in the OAS for the sake of Latin American unity,
and that Cuba would realize that the OAS represented the best safe-
guard of the Latin American countries.
Minister Porras said that the world was divided into regional sys-
tem, and that Cuba belonged in the inter-American system for histor-
ical, geographic, and cultural reasons. He said that Cuba, although it
had insulted a number of Latin American countries, including his own,
would not, in his opinion, dare to abandon the OAS.
Minister Porras said that Peru had been accused by Cuba of accept-
ing a large sum of money from the Unites States as a price for propos-
ing the Seventh Meeting. He explained that Prime Minister [illegible in
the original] been consulted by him about requesting the Meeting; he
had decided to request the meeting after he had received United States
Ambassador Chaplin and had [illegible in the original] not presented to
him by the Ambassador.4
3 The referenced proposal was made by Secretary Herter in a statement at the Sixth
Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of American States at San José,
4 The referenced note was not found in Department of State files.

Minister Porras said that he had told Cuban Foreign Minister
[illegible in the original] last year that [illegible in the original] were
mention of [illegible in the original], Fidel Castro himself [illegible in
the original] at the Buenos Aires economic conference5 that the United
States offer a bribe amounting to 35 billion dollars to Latin America.
Minister Porras said that the United States, aside from economic
matters, should pay attention to cultural relations with Latin America.
He said that Latin American students were ignorant of the United States,
and that the students were a factor of importance, due to the influence
they exercised over the workers. In Peruvian universities, the students
now were sons of carpenters, chauffeurs, and cooks, and that they felt a
strong social resentment of the wealthy, the powerful, and the oligarchs.
In spite of this, the students were malleable, and could be influenced
by scholarships for study in the United States and by the presence of
American students in Peruvian universities. He said that American stu-
dents in Peruvian universities had always been welcomed by the local
students, and had never had to listen to anti-American attacks. A cultural
policy of this kind would, in his opinion, bring good results. Minister
Porras said that many students thought of the United States only in
terms of American oil companies and other American concerns that they
believed were exploiting Peru’s resources, and that they were not aware
of the technical and cultural progress achieved in the United States.
Minister Porras said that with regard to Cuba, he would like to use
a metaphor dealing with bulls. There was a custom in the bullring that
if a bull refused to cooperate by fighting, and was too difficult to herd
out of the ring, a group of cows would be sent into the ring, and the
bull would then docilely follow them into the pen. He said that Latin
America was expected to play the part of these cows.
Minister Porras said that he believed that the best way to handle the
problem was to have informal corridor meetings between four or five
Latin American countries and Cuba. (He mentioned Mexico, Colombia
and Venezuela, as countries which, presumably with Peru, should
participate.) In these meetings the latter country would be asked if it
really meant to break with the OAS and therefore with the other Latin
American countries. Cuba should be asked to state what it would be
willing to accept. He said that he was aware that Cuba was probably
going to say some monstrous things during the Seventh Meeting, but
that he felt that it was imperative to keep [illegible in the original] the
OAS, or run the risk of serious social consequences in Latin America.
5 Reference is to the Meeting of the Special Committee of the Council of the
Organization of American States To Study Formulation of New Measures of Economic

Peru  1133
Minister Porras said that Peru rejected the interference of extra-­
continental powers in the hemisphere, not to serve the interests of the
United States but to defend itself. He said that although he believed
that the Monroe Doctrine had failed on occasion, there was a perma-
nent time of events in history that showed its efficacy.
[illegible in the original] almost all of the political parties in Latin
America, and was warmly accepted by the masses. He said that there-
fore the measures taken by Castro should be viewed not as to their
effect in Cuba but as a part of the international picture.
Minister Porras said that he was convinced that the impact of Fidel
Castro on world and Latin American public opinion was the result of
the work of American newsmen. He said that what would otherwise be
a case of a cardillo of a small Caribbean island with a ridiculous beard
had been made into an idol by American correspondents exploiting the
Cuban revolution.
PE–49.
Telegram from the Chargé in Peru (Neal) to the
Department of State1
163. Prime Minister Beltran called me in yesterday to discuss his pos-
sible resignation and the question of his attending Bogotá conference.2
He was at very low ebb mainly, I feel, because of overwork on
interpellation and was hurt by coldness with which Senate personally
treated him. Said he was reluctant to continue in Cabinet and wanted
my opinion.
I told him our polls indicated assurance final vote favorable and
that APRA leader had only last night predicted his victory after per-
sonal abuse. I said opposition playing politics with him and his friends
were hesitant to publicly indicate their feeling but vote would tell.3
2 Reference is to the third meeting of the Committee of 21 at Bogotá, September
NI–11.
Beltrán received a confidence vote of 78 to 29 in the Chamber of Deputies on September
4 following in interpellation, (formal questioning of [illegible in the original] policy in
the legislature) begun on September 2, during which he answered 41 questions by the

I gave him assurance which I expect he was looking for that
if he and other members of his Cabinet (I had in mind Minister of
Development Grieve and Minister of Agriculture Zarak) are forced out
all good will and loans he generated for Peru on recent U.S. visit will
be nullified.4 Informed him I had made this clear to other responsible
leaders in government.
As for Bogotá, told him it essential he attend because this will be
opportunity for him recoup Peruvian prestige lost by lack of leadership
in Peruvian delegation at MFM San Jose.5
Am certain he feels better this morning after Senate victory
reported following EMBTEL 164.6
thy with the Embassy’s efforts to encourage Prime Minister Beltrán, but added that “were
he to resign, there would be no question of nullifying credit authorizations to Peruvian
Government except under extraordinary circumstances fundamentally altering U.S.-
Minister Porras resigned effective September 16, stating in his letter of resignation pub-
lished that day that his position of conciliation toward Cuba, which he assumed at the
Seventh Meeting of Consultation of American Foreign Ministers at San José, diverged
from instructions he received from his Government ordering the Peruvian delegation to
tion, begun on August 31, during which he answered 39 opposition questions on his
PE–50.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Peru1
225.
As result call by Jamieson2 and Brisco3 of IPC and Martin Jones of
Standard N.J., Department has agreed representations should be made
by Poole and signed by Mann.
2 Milo M. Brisco, Executive Vice President and Director, International Petroleum
Company.
3 John K. Jamieson, President and Director, International Petroleum Company.

Peru  1135
to President Prado concerning bills on La Brea y Pariñas oil fields.
IPC gravely concerned over nationalist and leftist campaign against
Government bill4 and worsened climate for passage as result introduc-
tion six expropriation bills; believes Beltran and Grieve will be effec-
tive in defending bills when called for interpellation October 11 but
that only Prado has sufficient political influence to master congressio-
nal majority;5 also believes now best time make representations before
opposition campaign makes further headway and since attitude suc-
cessor Government unpredictable. This view seems coincide generally
your reports.
In your discretion seek audience Prado, taking following gen-
eral line: USG concerned over bitter campaign against Government
bill seemingly directed as much against USG and U.S. investment in
general as against IPS and bill itself. Expropriation would of course be
very detrimental to climate for U.S. and other investments and cred-
its in Peru. To substantial albeit lesser extent, continued irresolution
and controversy over La Brea y pariñas, even without actual expropri-
ation, harming investment climate. While not appropriate USG express
opinion on details Government bill, it presumably meets GOP require-
ments, is acceptable to company and appears best hope for settlement
this long standing issue. View uncertainty congressional support for
bill in face heavy attacks by opposition, we hope Prado will make every
effort mister support by pro-Government majority.6
Dillon
translation of the draft Peruvian Petroleum Law submitted to the Congress on August 30.
It provided for immediate cession of the La Brea y Pariñas property to the Government
and a 30-­year concession to the company which would pay taxes in dollars assuring the
Government receipt of 60 percent of its profits. After 30 years the Government would
Beltrán and Development Minister Grieve received a 74 to 33 vote of confidence in the
Chamber of Deputies on October 12, after an interpellation on the La Brea y Pariñas
was confident of congressional approval of the Government’s bill and asked Neal on
760) At the conclusion of the period under review, the draft legislation remained under
study by special committees appointed by each house of the Peruvian Congress.

PE–51.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Robert M.
Phillips of the Office of West Coast Affairs1
Washington, December 23, 1960.
SUBJECT
Proposed Purchase of Military Aircraft by Peru
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Jorge Nicholson, First Secretary, Peruvian Embassy
Col. Enrique Fuller, Assistant Air Attaché, Peruvian Embassy
Robert M. Phillips, WST
Following inquiries from the Peruvian Embassy to the
Departments of Defense and State, and after consulting with Mr. Lane2
of WST and Mr. McLean of RPA/S, I telephoned Mr. Nicholson and
informed him that the United States Government had decided that
it could not at this time authorize the sale of the B–26 and B–57 air-
craft requested by the Peruvian Government.3 We were sure that the
Peruvian Government was fully aware of the delicate circumstances
which prompted us to withhold the requested authorization4 and we
trusted that the Peruvian Government would agree as to the unde-
sirability of taking any action which might upset the recent relative
improvement in this situation. I said I would also call Col. Fuller,
who had telephoned while I was out, in order to give him the same
information.
Mr. Nicholson thanked me for this information and said he under-
stood the Department’s position. He gave no indication that the U.S.
decision might be disagreeable to his Government.
I then telephoned Col. Fuller and gave him the same informa-
tion. He betrayed no surprise at the news but merely requested that
the Department send a written reply to the Peruvian Embassy’s notes
Phillips, the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs, presumably acted for Richard A. Poole,
the Officer in Charge of Peruvian Affairs, in this case.
2 Samuel O. Lane, Deputy Director, Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-
American Affairs.
3 Allan F. McLean, Jr., Assistant Officer in Charge of Inter-American Military
Assistance, Office of Inter-American Regional Political Department of State.

Peru  1137
requesting authorization to purchase these aircraft. I promised that we
would send a written reply as requested.5
tary aircraft, particularly bombers, because it would intensify Ecuadoran reaction against
In a note of January 23, 1961, to the Peruvian Ambassador, the Departmental of
State expressed its regret that it could not approve sale of the eight B-26s and two P-57s.
PE–52.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Peru1
431. Exchange of notes completed December 28 (Dept’s note of
December 27 and Peruvian Embassy’s note of December 28) agreeing
to loan to Peru of 1 Lavalette (ex-Fletcher) class destroyer under same
which this destroyer is added to annex, but with rehabilitation etc. as
requested by GOP to be at latter’s expense.2
Dept. has requested Peruvian Embassy urge GOP refrain from
publicity in order avoid if possible further adverse Ecuadorean reaction
at this time. Embassy Lima requested make similar informal represen-
tations appropriate officials Lima.
Dept planning inform Chiriboga3 of above agreement, with fol-
lowing further explanation: (1) above agreement represents fulfillment
of long-­standing commitment made under Ship Loan Act4 which U.S.
obligated to honor; (2) timing of agreement necessitated by expiration
made for as much as 2 years as vessel will be turned over from active
fleet; (4) we have urged Peru refrain from publicity as above in interest
avoid public reaction in Ecuador. Dept will also ask Chiriboga avoid
publicity to maximum extent possible.5
Priority. Drafted by Poole and signed by Lane. This message was repeated to Quito.
2 For citations to the referenced notes, see Document PE–14.
3 José R. Chiriboga Villogómeg, Ecuadorean Minister of Foreign Affairs.
5 No record of whether this information was conveyed to Chiriboga was found in
Department of State files.

Uruguay: U.S. Relations with Uruguay
UR–1.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, March 12, 1958.
SUBJECT
Uruguay; Proposed Approach to Economic Cooperation.
It is paradoxical but true that with no country in the Hemisphere
do we have more difficulty in our relations than with Uruguay –
­traditionally the most stable and democratically-­oriented nation in Latin
America. For a variety of reasons, detailed below, the adverse drift in
our relations in the past few years has now reached a critical stage, and
the time has come when Uruguay, politically in a state of near-­paralysis
(Tab A)2, and economically in a state of increasing deterioration (Tab B)3,
needs help from us. Help, which can most fruitfully be accorded in the
economic sphere, will have a resultingly beneficent effort in the political
sphere. If, on the other hand, no tangible form of assistance is forthcom-
ing, we can look forward with assurance to worsened economic con-
ditions and correspondingly more difficult political relations. Already
the Uruguayan Government – tolerant of native Communism to the
point where infiltration is a serious problem – is looking to the Soviet
bloc for markets, and no one can say with certainty that, in the event of
further economic deterioration, Uruguay could withstand more serious
economic and financial penetration. The purpose of this paper is to set
forth some of our salient problems in connection with Uruguay and to
suggest certain steps which I believe must be taken.
Confidential. Drafted by Livingston S. Watrous, Officer in Charge of River [illegible in the
original] Affairs in the Office of South American Affairs, and concurred in by Alexander
M. [illegible in the original], Officer in Charge of Economic Development in the Office of
Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
2 Not printed.
3 Not printed.

Uruguay  1139
Among these problems the following specific irritants have ren-
dered our relations most difficult.
Our countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool tops, imposed in
1953, when it was determined that Uruguayan exchange afforded
a subsidy to tops exporters, has still to be removed, not necessarily
because the subsidy still exists, but because the Uruguayans have failed
to maintain a relatively stationary set of rates under which they could
establish statistically that the duty is no longer justified.
Another source of irritation to Uruguay has been our P.L. 480
Program, which, whether in actual practice it has harmed Uruguay’s
experts or not, has provided a convenient whipping boy. Uruguayan
leaders have thus been reluctant to accept a program for their country,
but in the past year somewhat hesitantly sought Congressional author-
ity to enter an agreement. The bill remains in Congress, with prospects
for immediate passage poor.
What the Uruguayan economy clearly needs is a series of domestic
reforms coupled with a regime of austerity internationally, the whole
to be accompanied by a stabilization program. Recognizing the eco-
nomic need for these steps, but unwilling to face the political price,
Uruguayan officials have several times expressed their guarded desire
for a sizable United States loan, and have not hidden their pique that
one has somehow not been forthcoming. They have never, however,
defined their desires in terms of specific projects. The fact that Uruguay
has been unable to unwilling to complete its membership in the IMF,
and that, even if it did, Congressional ratification of a Government-­to-
Government loan would be most difficult to obtain, seem insufficient
to relieve us, in some Uruguayan eyes, of our imagined responsibility
in this field.
Uruguayans have also been critical of our failure to implement
three tariff concessions (canned meat, pickled meat, and meat extract)
negotiated under GATT in 1949. While Uruguay delayed several years
in ratifying these negotiations, and while Uruguay has subsequently
violated some of its own commitments, the fact nevertheless remains
that Uruguayans believe that we have legal and moral obligations
either to proclaim the items or to proceed to re-­negotiation.
To counteract this unhappy combination of circumstances, ARA
has recently been holding discussions with Uruguayan Ambassador
Lacarte with the object of exploring what could be done to increase
economic cooperation between the two countries. The Ambassador has
followed up these talks with full discussions of potential assistance at
the Eximbank, the IBRD, the DLF, and ICA. He now has an excellent
idea of just what, from the point of view not only of legal restrictions
but also of policy, these institutions can and cannot do in relation to the
present Uruguayan situation. This he is reporting to his Government.
Equally important, perhaps, will be his report to the effect that not only

the Department but also the other organizations involved are desirous
of helping Uruguay at this time in those fields in which help is possible.
This impression I should hope to have reinforced in Montevideo upon
the forthcoming arrival of newly-­appointed Ambassador Woodward.
Having gone this far, then, and having for the first time in recent
years arrived at a point where we can actually come to grips with the
Uruguayans over their problems, I believe it to be of the utmost impor-
tance that we be in a position to move ahead on one or more specific
projects, as noted below, upon receiving some evidence of receptivity
from the Uruguayan Government.
Wool Tops.
When the Uruguayan Embassy presents its figures justifying sta-
tistically the removal of the countervailing duty, and when it appears
that the Uruguayan exchange is reasonably stable, I would propose
preliminary talks between officers of AFA and appropriate Treasury
officials. These would pave the way for me to approach Treasury on
a higher level to emphasize the utmost importance we attach to the
duty’s removal, not only on economic grounds, but as a major factor in
the totality of our relations. I would hope for your approval and sup-
port in this approach.
P.L. 480 Program.
A P.L. 480 Program with Uruguay would have the doubly bene-
ficial effect of bolstering the Uruguayan economy and dampening the
ardor with which the Uruguayans are accustomed to attack our sur-
plus disposal program. Given the slowness with which the Uruguayan
Government moves, however, it may be necessary to do some actual
encouraging to move the required legislation through the Uruguayan
Congress. If such an effort is successful, I would hope that [illegible in
the original] would support my request for a prompt and ample pro-
gram in Uruguay.
Eximbank Credits.
In his conversations with Mr. Waugh, Ambassador Lacarte was
given some reason to believe that the Bank would look sympathetically
upon an arrangement whereby the Bank would announce a line of credit,
to be used for exporter credits, with a specific ceiling and for specified
purposes. The Ambassador has reported this to his Government, and
ARA has alerted the Bank to this, with the request that it be prepared to
consider a scheme of this nature. The Bank is disturbed at the present
size of Uruguay’s commercial debt, but it is probable that this can be
cut sharply when the present Uruguayan wool clip moves to market.
If, as seems likely, the Uruguayans follow up the line of credit idea, I
should appreciate your support in a recommendation to the Bank that
it look expeditiously and with favor on the plan.

Uruguay  1141
GATT Meat Items.
Our failure to put into effect the concessions granted Uruguay
during the 1949 GATT negotiations is clearly a breach of faith. Whether
or not the Department will be able to overcome the opposition of the
Department of Agriculture to honoring our commitment I do not know,
but I believe we are morally obligated to try. I am, therefore, prepar-
ing a letter for your signature to the appropriate official of Agriculture
which will set forth our case as forcefully as possible.
Ambassador Lacarte has talked informally at the D.L.F. about
two possible projects, one to expand the port of Montevideo and one
to drain a section of coastal swamps. Technicians of the IBRD and the
ICA, who are familiar with these projects, feel that these projects are not
of first priority. The IBRD, however, is preparing to move ahead with
a loan of $8–10 million for livestock and pasturage improvement, and
Bank officers have indicated informally to ARA that, since the Bank
loan would be largely for imported equipment, it might be possible
for the D.L.F. to participate in the operation by making a loan to cover
local currency costs. In the negotiations for this loan it was contem-
plated that the Government of Uruguay would meet the local currency
costs of this project, and at the moment it is not established that the
Government itself cannot do so. We are continuing to look into this,
and if it appears to be a practical possibility I would appreciate your
support of it in the D.L.F.
UR–2.
Letter from the Chargé in Uruguay (Espy) to the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Montevideo, April 1, 1958.
Dear Dick:
I wanted to write you earlier but I thought I had best wait until
we received the memoranda of the follow up conversations on March
6 and 12 which Ambassador Lacarte held with you subsequent to your
meeting of February 21 with him. As I wrote you in my letter of March
25, copies of them were inadvertently delayed in reaching us. Now
Confidential; Official-Informal.

they have been received and I and other officers in the Embassy have
studied them carefully and are very happy to note that progress appar-
ently has been made in Washington with respect to the assistance, or at
least offer of assistance, we might be able to grant Uruguay economi-
cally and financially. I think that the possibilities offered by the Ex-Im
Bank, the DLF and possibly PL 480 are most constructive. May I say
here that we also understand and in fact reported as our concurrent
view that a stabilization loan to Uruguay would be imprudent if not
harmful at the moment without this country at the same time defi-
nitely and precisely committing itself to certain actions on its part. The
likelihood is that it won’t do so, or at least not until after the national
elections of November of this year. May I return to this subject a little
later in this letter.
As you will see from our telegram 374 of April 1,2 the Government
here through the Foreign Minister, Oscar Secco Ellauri, has expressed
hope that both the President and the Foreign Minister will be here, at
least long enough in the morning of April 28 to receive Mr. Nixon, but
if not, the Acting President and the acting Foreign Minister will do so
on their behalf.
In my telegram 373 of March 31 I set forth some ideas which I have
been thinking over for some weeks time.4 I would like to take the lib-
erty to explain them to you more fully, hoping in doing so I am add-
ing something constructive and helpful. I mentioned Bob Woodward’s
mission here and I meant it personally for him but at the same time I
think that the same criterion would apply to any other new and experi-
enced ambassador arriving at this post.
You know the situation here very well and so what I may be saying
might not, in its entirety, be necessary. Yet I do believe I should write it
down as best I can. As you will have observed from our Despatch 683 of
January 30,5 on the crisis in Uruguay and again from our conversations
with officials of the First National City Bank of New York who visited
Uruguay about 10 days ago and which were reported in our Despatch
844 of March 28,6 the situation here is rather perilous and there has been
little or no improvement in the two months interval of time. If anything,
indeed, it has worsened because Uruguay has only been able to move half
of its wool crop. Where the money will come to pay for essential petro-
leum supplies and other necessary imports still remains to be seen. What
2 Not printed.
3 See Document UR–3.
4 Not printed.
5 Not printed.
6 Not printed.

Uruguay  1143
the economy of this country obviously needs as we here in the Embassy
recognize, is the same as that which the Department also appreciates. In
summary, it is a definite and possibly drastic program for Uruguay to
come to grips itself with its economic plight for which it almost entirely
is solely responsible. The adoption of a free exchange rate for exports,
the sale of its products at realistic world prices, the improvement of its
production, the devotion of more of its efforts to the land rather than
merely trying to build up more industry and create more uneconomic
urban occupations, the restriction of its imports and the balancing of its
budget are obviously the ways it ought to take to cure its economic ills.
It still looks as though none of these will be done, at least immediately.
Now the Government wants one or both of two things: The United States
purchase at a high price of the remainder of Uruguay’s wool clip and/or
a stabilization loan. We realize that our Government cannot in all proba-
bility do either and even if it did so, without drastic conditions attached
we would only be postponing the inevitable day of reckoning.
However, the three possibilities that seem to have come out of the
conversations in Washington are something concrete and seem to be
along the lines of the suggestion made in our Despatch 683 that we at
least express to Uruguay our willingness to help. We have heard that
Ambassador Lacarte will be coming here next week or the week after
and I certainly hope that he will be prepared to explain fully to his
Government the whole situation.
By several communications, particularly our telegram 369 of
March 31, we reported that Uruguay through its newly designated
Ambassador to Venezuela, is going to attempt to persuade Venezuela
to supply Uruguay with petroleum on a credit basis in the amount of
approximately $40 million. If that does work out of course it will help
to tide this country over its immediate difficulties. Naturally, we have
no idea here what the reaction of the Venezuelan authorities would be
to any such approach.
Should all go well, with assistance from ourselves and from
Venezuela to Uruguay, the picture here will certainly greatly brighten;
but, of course, this is all still very “ify”.
Now may I refer back to Vice President Nixon’s visit and my tele-
gram 373 of March 31. I mentioned therein that Battle’s newspaper
“Acción” reported as a rumor that Batlle would take a leave of absence
immediately after Holy Week which would mean he would be away
from the official score here both over the Frondizi and Nixon visits. As
I see his strategy, perhaps in the first instance he does not wish to play
second fiddle to President Fischer when the president elect of Argentina
comes here. In part there may be the same motive inducing him to be
away when Vice President Nixon comes to Uruguay. On the other hand,
however, I have a strong feeling that as regards to Vice President Nixon,

Batlle would be thinking of keeping himself free to jump either way as
may suit his political purposes here. If the Nixon visit is a great success,
particularly if it generates or is accompanied by economic and financial
assistance from the United States, then he can jump on that band wagon.
If, however, no assistance is forthcoming and it suits his political pur-
poses to renew his attacks against the United States, he will be free to
do so since he will not have been associated personally with the Nixon
visit. You will recall your visit here last August and particularly the stand
taken by Uruguayans at the Buenos Aires conference thereafter which
put Secretary of the Treasury Anderson in a rather difficult spot.
It is too early to say what Battle will do; except we should keep
constantly in mind that in all likelihood he wants to be president of
Uruguay beginning next year. Should Ambassador Lacarte’s report
here convince Batlle that he, Batlle, has something to gain out of the
Nixon visit and that it would be to his advantage to be around when
the Vice President arrives, he may not take his leave of absence or cut it
short following Frondizi’s visit. Interestingly enough, since I have been
here he has twice threatened to take leave of absence saying he was
going to Europe. Neither time did he do so. So we cannot tell which
way he is going to jump on this occasion.
In view of the foregoing, I think what we would want particularly
to try to do and to lay our plans for in the best long term interests of
our relations with Uruguay is to set the stage as well as we can for a
successful mission of our new Ambassador. In this light I should like
to pose the following three alternatives: (a) that we make known to the
Uruguayans in one way or another the straight news before Bob arrives
here or through Vice President Nixon’s visit that there are concrete
proposals for assistance to Uruguay. I think we may rest assured that
the Uruguayans are bound to expect something tangible from the Vice
President’s visit, their lack of reasonableness to the contrary notwith-
standing. Perhaps even before he comes here the news can be gotten
out so that Bob Woodward can get a large measure of the credit and
the Vice President merely reaffirms such news. After all it will be Bob
or any other Ambassador who will have to stay here to carry on the job
and take the blame or the approval. (b) If there is nothing we can do for
the Uruguayans the straight news be gotten out on this score before Bob
Woodward arrives here so that none of the unpleasantness be attached
to him for the same reasons as above; and (c) what may be a combination
of the foregoing two alternatives, to avoid if at all possible to raise in the
minds of the Uruguayans any false hopes which would later be dashed
after Bob gets here and makes his already difficult task that much more
so. In other words, if he comes here without any hopes or expectations
on the part of the Uruguayans and if the Vice President merely gener-
ates a broader atmosphere of public good will but without pledging the

Uruguay  1145
United States either by implication or outright commitments that may
not be fulfilled, then our relations being pretty much at the bottom, Bob
can weather them for this year without any stigma having fallen on him
through no fault of his own and with the hope that later the skies will
brighten so as to enable him to accomplish his mission eventually with
success. In the meantime, we can quietly be working on the problems,
trying to develop a sound basis for their eventual resolution.
Sincerely yours,
James Espy
P.S. Enclosed is a copy of a letter I wrote to Chuck Burrows on the
subject of the mission of the newly designated Uruguayan Ambassador
to Venezuela.7
7 Not printed.
UR–3.
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the
Office of South American Affairs (Bernbaum)1
Montevideo, April 28, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Luis Batlle Berres, Member of the National Council of Government
Richard Nixon, Vice President of the United States
Maurice M. Bernbaum (Interpreter)2
SUBJECT
Disposition of Swift and Armour Packing Plants.
Batlle Berres brought to the Vice President’s attention during din-
ner the recent action of the Uruguayan Government in taking over
the Swift and Armour Meat packing plants.3 He stated vehemently
Confidential.
2 Bernbaum accompanied Nixon on the Vice President’s good-­will tour to Latin
America.
3 The financially hard-­pressed meatpackers, who had determined to close out
in Uruguay, made an offer to sell their plants to the Government of Uruguay, but on
April 24, 1958, the Government issued a decree temporarily expropriating the plants.
Documentation concerning the matter is contained in Department of State decimal file

that this action had been required to avert a dangerous social situa-
tion and to prevent prolonged unemployment. He stated that he had
received a visit last November from Edward G. Miller, ex-Assistant
Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs, then representing the
interests of the packing plants. Mr. Miller informed him confiden-
tially of a decision taken by the Swift and Armour managements to
close the plants the following month, December 14. Mr. Miller then
stated that this decision had been taken without the knowledge of the
Department of State—­that the companies operated freely and made
their own decisions without the need of consulting the Department of
State. Dr. Batlle stated that he had inquired of Mr. Miller whether this
was an irrevocable decision or whether it might be possible to work
out a mutually satisfactory solution. Mr. Miller’s response was that
the decision was irrevocable. Dr. Batlle Berres felt very strongly that
the decision had been taken without consultation with the local repre-
sentatives of the companies concerned and without any awareness of
its significance in Uruguay. He then told the Vice President that in his
opinion it would be a grave error for the U.S. Government to become
involved in this problem. He pointed out that the company itself had
emphasized the lack of consultation with the Department of State and
that it correspondingly had no reason to request the intervention of the
Department of State.
The Vice President stated that the U.S. Government had no
intention of becoming involved in this problem. What did concern
him, however, was the unfavorable impression already created in
the U.S. tending to jeopardize the confidence of American investors
in Uruguay’s traditional respect for private enterprise with equity
and justice. He stated that he had a few hours earlier received a tele-
phone call from Senator Dirksen of Illinois, protesting against the
action taken by the Uruguayan Government. The Senator proposed
to make a formal protest to the U.S. Government against this act of
“expropriation”. The Vice President was also aware of the great con-
cern of the meat packing companies involved and of the discourag-
ing effect of their experience in other financial and investing circles
in the U.S.
Dr. Batlle responded that there were many Dirksens in Uruguay—­
that those were at least six Dirksens in the Chamber of Deputies and
at least three of them in the Senate. These Dirksens spoke Just a vehe-
mently against the U.S. policies as did our Senator Dirksen against
Uruguayan policies. He felt that we should not pay too much attention
to them.
The Vice President smilingly remarked that the situation in the U.S.
was somewhat more complicated than would appear. Senator’s alti-
tude did carry a considerable amount of weight in U.S. public opinion

Uruguay  1147
as did the attitudes of responsible and important American firms. What
concerned him was that their attitude was based on the apparent facts
involved which did not permit as much stress on the political factors
as was the case in Uruguay and which he, the Vice President, under-
stood as a man in public life himself. He emphasized that it would be
most unfortunate for the impression to become current in the U.S. that
Uruguay had changed its policy and friendly attitude toward private
enterprise. He hoped that this could be averted by a prompt and equi-
table solution to the problem.
Dr. Batlle Berres assured the Vice President repeatedly that there
was no basis for such concern—­that Uruguay’s tradition and repu-
tation for fair dealing themselves represented a guarantee against
such unjustified fears. He stated that he personally guaranteed to
the Vice President that the companies would be fairly treated and
that he was always ready to speak to them. He just hoped that they
would not convey a misleading impression in the U.S. since they
themselves understood the necessity for the action taken and the
certainty of fair treatment.
The conversation continued in this vein until terminated by the
commencement of after-­dinner toasts.
Dr. Batlle Berres and Ambassador Lacarte later continued the con-
versation with Mr. Bernbaum. Dr. Batlle asked for confirmation that the
Vice President has assured him that the U.S. Government would not
intervene in the matter. Mr. Bernbaum stated that this was his under-
standing. He added, however, that the Vice President’s assurances had
been accompanied by Dr. Batlle Berres’ assurances of fair treatment for
the companies. It was his impression that the Vice President considered
that Dr. Batlle Berres’ assurances represented a guarantee of fair treat-
ment to the American firms. Dr. Batlle stated that this was a justified
assumption. The companies were going to receive fair treatment, and
he was ready to discuss the problem with them. He confirmed, when
asked, that the Government’s proposal in Congress for authorization to
pay the companies for their properties, would remain in Congress with
the expectation of passage and eventual payment. He was most cate-
gorical on this point. The conversation terminated with Mr. Bernbaum’s
request for Dr. Batlle’s authorization to convey his assurances to the
companies. Dr. Battle gave that authorization with the statement that
he had already conveyed such assurances directly and would continue
to do so.

UR–4.
Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State1
Washington, May 27, 1958.
SUBJECT
U.S.-Uruguayun Relations
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
Ambassador Lacarte
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
OSA—Mr. Watrous
The Ambassador opened the conversation by referring to Vice
President Nixon’s recent visit to Uruguay, and noted that he, the
Ambassador, had been there during the visit. He said that he was con-
vinced that the visit had been a “smash success”, and that he felt that it
set the stage for increased U.S.-Uruguayan cooperation.
He explained that the visit coincided with a period of economic
difficulty for Uruguay, about which he had been holding discussions
in Washington with U.S. Government officials, and that Mr. Nixon and
members of his party had been able to discuss the same problems in
Montevideo. He pointed out that the basis of Uruguay’s difficulties was
its inability to sell to the U.S. as much as it bought from that country.
For example, he said, in 1957 Uruguay bought from the U.S. over four
and one half times as much as it was able to sell in the U.S. market. This
condition, he added, had produced a balance of payments problem
which had now become serious.
The Ambassador then outlined the manner in which he said the
Russians were attempting to take advantage of this situation. He
described the Russian procedure as that of purchasing Uruguayan
goods and of increasing Russian demands in return for these purchases.
He said that this trend was of course disturbing to Uruguay, which pre-
ferred to be oriented toward the U.S.
The Ambassador then said he would like to inform the Secretary
about the various conversations concerning economic cooperation
that, on instructions from his Government, he was undertaking in
Washington. The most important item under consideration, he went
on, was a forty million dollar balance of payments loan about which
Confidential. Drafted by Watrous on May [illegible in the original]. Information on the
source text indicates that the conversation took place at 11:00 a.m. The source text is an
unsigned carbon copy.

Uruguay  1149
he was talking with Mr. Waugh of the Eximbank. He noted that this
subject had been raised when Mr. Waugh was in Montevideo, at which
time it had been discussed in terms of loan with full gold collateral. The
Uruguayan Government now felt, however, that for political reasons
it would be impossible to offer this collateral, and he was exploring
the possibility of an unbacked loan such as he understood had been
granted other, including Latin American, countries. He pointed out that
Uruguay’s financial affairs were in the hands of responsible people, and
that Uruguay’s reputation for the payment of obligations was excellent.
Moreover, he said, he hoped that the present period of exchange strin-
gency would be resolved toward the end of this year, at which time
Uruguay would have for sale abroad a full year’s wool clip plus one
half of this year’s currently unsold clip.
The Ambassador mentioned also that he was holding discussions
on the possible financing of different proposals with the Development
Loan Fund, and indicated that he thought some of those discussions
might bear fruit. He added that Uruguay was also currently hoping for
some U.S. actions which would permit increased U.S. imports of cer-
tain Uruguayan products, such as wool tops, canned meat, and woolen
textiles. These items, he said, would in due course be the subject of
communications to the Department.
In conclusion, the Ambassador again stressed the friendly atmo-
sphere engendered by the Vice President’s visit to Uruguay, and said
that he believed that this atmosphere was an excellent one in which to
proceed to greater U.S.–Uruguayan cooperation.
The Secretary commented that he could not, of course, give imme-
diate answers to the questions raised by the Ambassador. If the answers
could come from the heart, he said, it would be simple enough, but
the questions raised had of course to be considered thoroughly from a
financial viewpoint by various U.S. Government agencies. He said that,
as he had mentioned in an OAS meeting recently, the U.S. Government
was aware of the marketing problems faced by countries produc-
ing a few basic commodities, and that he was also aware of the evi-
dent Communist intention of making capital out of these difficulties.
Moreover, he continued, this awareness ante-­dated some of the less
pleasant incidents which took place during Mr. Nixon’s tour of South
America. He mentioned that the free world had experienced cycles of
prosperity and depression for a long time, and commented that some
governmental attempts to counteract depression conditions, as in the
case of agriculture in the U.S., had raised additional problems. Now,
however, there was the added danger that the Communists, who could
implement their policies without regard to factors such as costs and
profits, were obviously endeavoring to take advantage of cycles of
depression to destroy both the economic and political structures of free
world countries. Finding a solution to this problem was not as easy as

diagnosing it, he said, but the U.S. Government is giving more thought
to it now than ever before.
The Secretary concluded by thanking the Ambassador for giving
him this personal account of the present situation, and assured him that
the efforts he was making to increase economic cooperation between
the two countries would have the sympathetic consideration of the
Department.
UR–5.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Washington, June 18, 1958.
SUBJECT
Export-Import Loans to Uruguay
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Samuel C. Waugh, President, Export-Import Bank
Mr. Walter C. Sauer, Executive Vice President, Export-Import Bank
Mr. Hawthore Arey, Director, Export-Import Bank
Mr. Vance Brand, Director, Export-Import Bank
Mr. George A. Blowers, Director, Export-Import Bank
Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
Mr. Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director for South American Affairs
Mr. Rubottom described in some detail the difficulties in our rela-
tions with Uruguay arising from the belief in that Government and in
that country that the United States is indifferent to its problems and is
not ready to be helpful in their solution. He thought that an import-
ant breach had been made in this attitude by the conversations which
had taken place in Montevideo during Vice President Nixon’s visit and
that it was important for us not to lose the momentum then created.
He thought that this would depend largely on the outcome of current
negotiations for a balance-­of-­payments loan. Mr. Rubottom said that he
had discussed this problem frequently and at length with Tom Taylor
of International Packers and that there was an important difference in
their approaches to the problem. Whereas Taylor was indignant over
the treatment accorded his firm by the Uruguayans and felt that a solu-
tion to his specific, as well as the overall problem, could be reached only
Confidential. Drafted by Bernbaum. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

Uruguay  1151
on a strong quid pro quo basis, Mr. Rubottom believed that the interests
of Mr. Taylor’s company and of the United States as a whole would best
be served by a solution of the political problem.2
Having said this, Mr. Rubottom said he had heard from Mr. Dillon
regarding the outcome of his conversations a few days earlier with Mr.
Waugh. This indicated an agreement between the two that the Bank
was ready to announce a $25 million line of exporters credits contin-
gent upon a settlement of the meatpackers problem. After a discus-
sion of the matter, Mr. Dillon had authorized Mr. Rubottom to let Mr.
Waugh know that he had misunderstood the primary importance of the
balance-­of-­payments loan, the granting of which would, in accordance
with conversations in the Vice President’s office, be made contingent
upon settlement of the meatpackers claim. Mr. Rubottom stressed that
the line of exporters credits represented normal business and should be
handled without any reference whatsoever to the meatpackers problem.
Mr. Rubottom then made the following specific proposed in
response to Mr. Waugh’s request:
1. That the Bank agree to announce a line of exporters credits.
2. That the Bank agree to consider a balance-­of-­payments loan on
the basis of partial gold coverage and commitments by the Uruguayan
Government to undertake necessary stabilization measures.
He added that the Department was, in the meanwhile, working
strenuously on other aspects of the Uruguayan problem, including
elimination of the countervailing duty on wool tops and compliance
with our agreement in GATT to make concessions on three canned neat
items.
Mr. Waugh stated that he agreed thoroughly with Mr. Rubottom’s
analysis of the political problem. The only area in which he differed
was the amount of reliance to be placed on Uruguayan promises. He
the Deputy Under Secretary’s meeting with Thomas Taylor that afternoon, Assistant
Secretary Rubottom stated the following: “The packers believe that there is no hope of
coming to a fair settlement with the Uruguayan unless the U.S. Government intervenes
energetically. As a first step, the packer propose that the U.S. freeze exiting Uruguayan
assets in the United States, as was done with Egyptian assets during the Suez crises.”
Rubottom further stated, however, that he doubted the wisdom of these tactics, and
noted that Uruguayan President battle Beres had already assured Vice President Nixon
in Montevideo that the matter would be equitably settled, that the issue between the
meatpackers and the Uruguayan Government was primarily a legal one, and that any
attempt to “Bludgeon Battle into meeting the packers’ terms would be the single most
effective way of assuring the failure of our efforts for better relations.” (Rubottom Files,
the following point: “The action proposed by the packers would also add fuel to the fires
of ‘review’ of our Latin Americas policies now going on on the Hill. Badly as they have
been treated, I doubt that the steps they want would get very much public or political

stated categorically that he had no confidence whatsoever in promises
made by the present Government. He felt that a loan at this time to that
Government would serve only to strengthen and perpetuate it, thereby
rendering less likely any of the remedial measures which must be taken
to extricate Uruguay from its difficulties. He conceded, however, that
this was a political problem and that he would, in deference to Mr.
Rubottom’s views, agree to the following, subject to the concurrence of
his Directors:
1. Prompt announcement, if desired, of a line of exporter credit in
the amount of $25 million, of which $15 million would be covered by
the Export-Import Bank.
2. The prompt negotiation of $20 million balance-­of-­payments loan
backed by the Uruguayan gold now in the United States.
3. Agreement by the Bank to consider, although without commit-
ment, further assistance to the Uruguayan Government on the basis of
stabilization measures to be taken by it.
Mr. Waugh added that since the foregoing would be done in def-
erence to the recommendations of the Department of State on the basis
of political considerations, he felt that it would be only right for the
Department to submit a letter requesting such action. He felt that such
a letter would be required by the Bank to meet the undoubtedly strong
pressure and criticism that would inevitably arise from the meatpack-
ers and other American interests.
Mr. Rubottom responded that he thought a request for a letter was
fair. He stated that he wanted to think about the whole matter, and that
we would get in touch promptly with the Bank.
It was suggested that the stabilization measures to be undertaken
by the Uruguayan Government might, if feasible, be worked out by
that Government infernally with the IMF, although the latter organiza-
tion would not enter into a formal agreement.
Mr. Bernbaum then clarified various points raised about the
Uruguayan attitude and the manner in which Ambassador Lacarte
was reporting the problem. He stated that he had yesterday brought
to Ambassador Lacarte’s attention the statement in Mr. Burgess’ letter
to Mr. Waugh quoting Mr. Fullgraff as having stated that he could not
understand why 100 percent gold backing was required by the Bank
since that matter had never come up. Bernbaum stated that Ambassador
Lacarte was amazed to hear this and stated that Fullgraff was a fool
and that we should not pay any attention to him. As regards Mr.
Waugh’s fears that Lacarte was not reporting accurately to Washington,
Bernbaum stated that Lacarte had let him know that he was refraining
from recording any negative news on the Bank’s attitude to Uruguay
until clarification of the Bank’s attitude toward the possibility of con-
sidering a loan on the basis of stabilization measures to be undertaken

Uruguay  1153
by the Uruguayan Government. Mr. Rubottom interjected that Lacarte
was one of the best Ambassadors Uruguay had ever sent to the United
States, that he had a great deal of confidence in Lacarte, and that one
of his fears regarding the present situation was that the failure of the
negotiations might lead to Lacarte’s recall. M. Waugh agreed with this
estimate of Ambassador Lacarte. Mr. Bernbaum stated that Lacarte was
to visit the Department on Friday June 20 and inquired whether Lacarte
should then be asked to resume his conversations with the Bank. Mr.
Waugh said that he certainly hoped that would be the case and that no
commitments would be made by the Department.
UR–6.
Letter from the Ambassador in Uruguay (Woodward)
to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Dillon)1
Montevideo, July 22, 1958.
Dear Mr. Dillon:
The Matter discussed in the attached despatch2 is of such impor-
tance in United States relations with Uruguay that I am taking the lib-
erty of calling it to your attention.
Such I know how busy you are, I suggest that you read the first
paragraph of the despatch which summarizes the reasons for which I
believe prompt action should be taken.
With the hope that you will agree that action3 should be taken
promptly in this matter, and with best wishes,
Sincerely yours,
Robert F. Woodward
Official-Informal. Robert F. Woodward presented his credentials on April 21, 1958.
2 Copies of the referenced despatch (see Document UR–6, Enclosure) were also
sent to Vice President Nixon; Robert B. Anderson, Secretary of the Treasury; Assistant
Secretary Rubottom; and Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs.
3 A handwritten note from Dillon to William P. Snow, Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs, attached to the source text, reads as follows: “Unless
you have strong objection of which I am not aware, would agree with Woodward. I am
prepared to help with Treasury if needed. Please keep me advised.”

[Enclosure]
Despatch from the Ambassador in Uruguay (Woodward) to the
Department of State4
Montevideo, July 21, 1958.
No. 49.
SUBJECT
Recommendation that Countervailing Duty on Uruguayan Tool Tops be removed5
It is respectfully recommended that steps be taken immediately
to remove the existing 6% countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool
tops without writing any longer for an official written request from
the Uruguayan Government that this be done. This recommendation is
made for the reasons which are summarized briefly in the following list
and are then explained in subsequent paragraphs:
(1) The Uruguayan “subsidy” on wool tops no longer exists.
(2) The United States is suffering a serious and unnecessary dis-
advantage in its relations with Uruguay because of the countervailing
duty and the United States can now gain disproportionate good-­will
by removal of the duty because the Uruguayan public has received an
exaggerated impression of its importance.
(3) The removal of the duty will serve temporarily as a public relations
substitute for more substantial economic assistance, and make it less costly
in terms of United States public relations to await reciprocally-­constructive
economic actions by the Uruguayan Government which would warrant
more substantial economic assistance from the United States.
(4) The removal of the countervailing duty will probably not sig-
nificantly affect the United States wool-­combing industry because
Uruguayan prices will still be non-­competitively high even with coun-
tervailing duty removed.
(5) There has evidently been reduction in the number and impor-
tance of the United States combing plants that could be affected if
Uruguayan wool tops were eventually able to compete again in the
United States market.
4 Limited Official Use.
inal] on [illegible in the original] tops imported from [illegible in the original] of [illegible
in the original] 361, the [illegible in the original] Act of 1930. [illegible in the original]autho-
rized the Secretary of the Treasury to impose additional [illegible in the original] to the
[illegible in the original] of any [illegible in the original] or [illegible in the original] paid
upon [illegible in the original] promotion, or export of the article [illegible in the original]
under the provisions of the Act. For text of the Act, [illegible in the original] 45 Stat. 590.

Uruguay  1155
(6) The original application of the countervailing duty appears, in
any event, to have been not entirely consistent with the spirit of United
States fundamental laws.
(7) The United States can now gain an additional good-­will benefit
by taking the initiative and not awaiting a formal Uruguayan request
for the countervailing duty to be removed.
(1) Careful calculation reveals that the average weighted exchange
rate for all Uruguayan imports and exports is at present and for some time
has been substantially above the officially established exchange rate for
exports of Uruguayan wool tops. Therefore it is clear that the basis no
longer exists, under the provisions of United States law, for considering
that the officially established export rate for Uruguayan wool tops con-
stituted a “subsidy” against which a countervailing duty is applicable.
It appears that no basis has existed for the countervailing duty at least
since November 11, 1957 whom the overall exchange rate structure was
sharply depreciated; and, although no calculations have been made to
prove it, any basis for the duty may have been eliminated even earlier.
In other words, the U.S. Government appears at present to be in a dubi-
ous situation in applying this countervailing duty. Not only should our
Government properly take initiative in complying with United States law
but further delay in corrective action may create additional problems.
There is enclosed, as Enclosure 1, a calculation by this Embassy
of the average weighed Uruguayan exchange rate for all Uruguayan
exports and imports together with an indication of the comparison
between this average rate and the existing officially established
exchange rate for exports of Uruguayan wool tops. The calculation
above that the current official tops rate is roughly below the weighted
average rate for all Uruguayan exports and imports.
(2) It has become increasingly apparent that the U.S. Government
has been permitting itself to suffer unnecessarily a serious disadvan-
tage in its relations with Uruguay by awaiting an official request from
the Uruguayan Government for removal of this countervailing duty.
The Uruguayan Government has, for several years, apparently encour-
aged the widespread impression throughout Uruguay and in other
countries that Uruguayan export trade and the Uruguayan economy
have been suffering a more serious disadvantage than has really been
the case, from the countervailing duty on wool tops applied by the
U.S. Government. This impression has now gained such widespread
currency within Uruguay that the removal of the countervailing duty
would result commensurately in much more favorable publicity for the
United States then the practical effect on Uruguayan trade would jus-
tify. The removal of the countervailing duty would, in fact, probably not
work any appreciable benefit at this time to Uruguayan exports or the
Uruguayan country. The Uruguayan Government and wool merchants
know this but the Uruguayan public have an unclear understanding

of the situation. Therefore, it now appears that the Uruguayan author-
ities may recently have been deliberately dilatory in making a formal
request, and in preparing statistical justification for the removal of
the countervailing duty, realizing that removal of the duty would be
of little immediate benefit to the Uruguayan economic situation and
hoping that the criticism emerged by continuation of this propaganda
factor may increase the possibility of Uruguay’s obtaining other eco-
nomic concessions from the United States, such as liberal credits, which
would be of much greater practical use and greater political use to the
Uruguayan Government at this time. While the Uruguayan Government
would benefit from the favorable publicity resulting from removal of
the countervailing duty, the Government appears astutely to wish at
present to make even greater use of the deep concern in the United States
about United States– Uruguayan relations in order to obtain conces-
sions that will provide both favorable publicity and important economic
assistance. I suspect that the Government now fears that the public
reaction to removal of the countervailing duty would be so favorable
(because of the Government’s own past exaggeration) that the feeling
in Washington that other economic assistance is needed would be sub-
stantially dissipated. This in turn, would make it more necessary for the
Uruguayan Government to take constructive measures to put its eco-
nomic house in order—­sacrificing some of the current subsidy devices
which are of short-­term political value—­in order to convince the United
States Government that more liberal economic assistance would be put
to good use. Officers of the Department may think that this ascribes
exaggeratedly subtle motives to Uruguayan officials, but it should be
remembered that we are dealing with an extremely able politician in the
person of Councilor Luis BATLLE Berres who is “master-­minding” the
Uruguayan strategy.
(3) The United States Government may now find it very difficult
to extend to Uruguay in the foreseeable future the kind of economic
concessions which the Uruguayan Government more ardently desires,
such as liberal credits, since it will be extremely difficult for the United
States Government to make this kind of concession until the Uruguayan
Government either releases or purchases the Swift packing [illegible in
the original] which was “intervened temporarily” by a decree fo April
25, 1958. There may be a substantial delay in the solution of this pack-
ing house problem, but in the meanwhile, it is becoming increasingly
important that the United States Government give at least a substan-
tial public impression of having extended friendly economic coopera-
tion to Uruguay. This would accomplish the double purpose of giving
a significant good-­will gesture to the country and the Government of
Uruguay, which, while no real concession on our part, would largely
quiet Government-­encouraged criticism of United States economic poli-
cies during a very vocal election-­campaign period. In other words, while

Uruguay  1157
we await the time when the Uruguayan Government may finally take
constructive economic measures that are increasingly needed, includ-
ing solution of the packing house problem, we can reduce the extent to
which our relations suffer by taking advantage of the very fact that the
Uruguayan Government has, for several years, been encouraging the
public impression that the countervailing duty on wool tops has had a
more deleterious effect than has been the case. The U.S. Government now
has an opportunity to gain disproportionately from public opinion from
removal of the countervailing duty.
(4) There appears to be very little possibility that any significant
quantity of Uruguayan wool tops would be exported to the United
States in the predictable future if the countervailing duty were now
removed. In the absence of the duty, according to competent experts,
the price of Uruguayan wool tops would still be above the world price.
Furthermore, viewed in terms of relative importance, even in the peak
year of 1958, when imports of Uruguayan tops into the United States
amounted to home 14 million pounds (valued at slightly over 16 mil-
lion dollars) quantitatively these imports amounted for only about 3
percent of total U.S. wool consumption. Since 1958, Uruguayan tops
exports to the United States have dwindled to only a few hundred
thousand pounds annually, and it is very unlikely that the relatively
high 1952 volume could ever be repeated.
(5) The number of U.S. companies which are dependent to an
important extent upon the combing of raw wool into wool tops as a
large part of their manufacturing operations has evidently diminished
since the countervailing duty went into effect in 1953. The number
of U.S. plants in which this is now a large part of total operations is
probably less than ten. The possibility of complaints or criticism from
there plants is further reduced by the fact that there would probably
be no increased imports of Uruguayan wool tops into the U.S. in the
predictable future if the countervailing duty were removed. Moreover,
the convincing indication that the officially established exchange rate
for Uruguayan exports of wool tops can no longer be continued as a
“subsidy” as compared with the average exchange rate for all other
Uruguayan exports and imports, oil [illegible in the original] the basis
for complaint from those factories that imports of Uruguayan wool tops
should legally be subjected to a countervailing duty.
The large number of complaints received by the U.S. Government
prior to the application of the countervailing duty against wool tops in
1958 suggests that a preponderant majority of those complaints came
from wool manufacturers and wool producers in the United States who
may not have been directly affected by the importation of Uruguayan
wool tops, but whose organized associations were acting in sympathy
with the small group of manufacturers who were dependent upon wool
combing operations.

(4) The countervailing duty against Uruguayan wool tops, ever since
its application in 1953, appears “in spirit” to have been discriminatory
against Uruguay and against Uruguayan and United States companies
and persons interested in the [illegible in the original] in Uruguayan wool
tops. This discrimination “in spirit” arises from the fact that the U.S. is
not applying a countervailing duty on any other product from any other
country because of a subsidy resulting from the fixing of an exchange rate
[illegible in the original] encourage and assist the exportation of a product.
There are many governments and countries that maintain systems of mul-
tiple exchange rates which have the effect of encouraging or assisting in
the exportation of certain products as commerce with other. In fact, it can
be fairly stated that there are dozens or even hundreds of products being
imported into the United States today which are [illegible in the original]
in this way by officially established exchange rates of foreign countries.
The singling out of Uruguayan wool tops for application of a countervail-
ing duty [illegible in the original], in this sense, [illegible in the original]
contrary to the spirit of the recognized principle in United States law that
no person shall be denied “equal protection of the laws” as stated in the
Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. This principle has been inter-
preted by the Supreme Court of the United States (Case of [illegible in the
original] vs. Hoskins, see Enclosure [illegible in the original])6 to include
“protection against unequal application of the [illegible in the original]
practically to make unjust and illegal, discrimination between persons in
similar circumstances.”
This is a superfluous consideration if the countervailing duty
should be removed for the reason that the “subsidy” which prompted
it no longer exists; but this is a factor of significance in considering
the understandable if legally illogical mental hazard that has deterred
action to remove the countervailing duty. This hazard has [illegible in
the original] apprehension we have felt that the Uruguayans may make
further unpredictable changes in exchange rates that would again cre-
ate a situation in which the exchange rate for exports of wool tops could
be construed to be a “subsidy”.
There is an ever-present possibility that the Uruguayans may make
such changes in officially established exchange rates, and the Embassy
frequently hears rumors that such changes will be made just as it heard
rumors of many other possible economic measures. However, it is
equally possible that—in the event of changes in officially established
exchange rates—the relative situation of the exchange rate for exports
of wool tops will not be sufficiently different from the average of other
new rates to make the wool top rates a “subsidy” rate.
(7) The United States Government has heretofore given the dis-
tinct impression to the Uruguayan Government that the United States
6 The enclosed memorandum, which described the case, is not printed.

Uruguay  1159
Government would require a formal request from the Uruguayan
Government for removal of the countervailing duty, supported by a
thorough Uruguayan official calculation of the average weighted
exchange rates for Uruguayan exports and imports over a represen-
tative period, to enable the United States Government to give official
consideration to the possibility of actually removing the countervail-
ing duty. The fact that this [illegible in the original] has been given
now provides the United States Government with the opportunity to
gain additional good-will by taking the initiative without awaiting a
formal request from the Uruguayan Government. Moreover, it would
seem entirely logical and proper for the United States Government to
take action under a United States law if the United States Government
perceives on its own initiative, or received a convincing indication
from any reliable sources, that such action should be taken in order
to bring about [illegible in the original] with the law or eliminate pos-
itive action that the United States Government has not into effect and
which is no longer required by the law. Also, since it is conceivable that
the Uruguayan Government would actually present a formal request
for the removal of the countervailing duty in the future, I believe we
should now seize the opportunity to take action before it is requested.
In this respect, there is opportunity, in publicity or comments to the
press concerning action removing the countervailing duty, to relate this
action to the special determination of the United States Government at
this time to demonstrate its intention to do everything possible to coop-
erate with the Latin American Government including the Government of
Uruguay in the promotion of mutually advantageous international trade
and economic development, with particular reference to the reappraisal
of inter-American relations which has followed upon the visit to South
America of Vice President Nixon.
For all the reasons set forth in this despatch, I earnestly hope that
action will be taken as soon as possible to remove the countervailing
duty on Uruguayan wool tops.
Robert F. Woodward
UR–7.
Editorial Note
On October 20, 1958, two contracts of sale were signed transferring
all of the assets and liabilities of the two U.S. meatpacking plants, Swift
and Armour, to a workers’ cooperative known as Establecimientos

Frigorificos del Cerro S.A., Uruguayan Army troops, who had been
guarding the plants, were withdrawn on October 27, 1958.
[illegible in the original]
UR–8.
Letter from the Director of the Office of South American
Affairs (Bernbaum) to the Ambassador in Uruguay
(Woodward)1
Washington, November 21, 1958.
Dear Bob,
You will by the time this letter is received have heard from us
by telephone and telegram regarding the latest developments on the
Uruguayan front. I’ll describe them now just to make certain that you
have the flavor of what has been going on.
The Export-Import Bank’s response to Lacarte’s letter of September
25 regarding a balance of payments loan was delivered to Lacarte only
a few days ago.2 It had been held up by differences of opinion in the
Bank as to how to respond to the unorthodox Uruguayan initiative
and by our insistence that a positive attitude be reflected in the letter.
We did get that positive attitude included in the sense of keeping the
negotiations open but we did not succeed in getting the bank to define
exactly what commitments it wanted from the Uruguayans. A copy of
the letter is enclosed.3
Dick and I have spoken with Lacarte a few times during the last
few days about this letter. He was of course gratified over confirma-
tion of the Bank’s continued interest in the negotiations. Lacarte was,
however, unhappy over the failure of the Bank to define in just what
respects his own letter was deficient. As you know, he had wanted the
Bank to state exactly what it wanted so that he could then pressure his
own government into committing itself to the necessary measures. As
he sees it now the big problem is to get the Uruguayan Government
to make the necessary commitments without confirmation that such
Limited Official Use; Official-Informal. The source text is a carbon copy bearing
Bernbaum’s typed signature.
2 Neither Ambassador Lacarta’s letter of September 25 nor the Export-Import Bank’s
response of November 18, 1958, were found in Department of State files.
3 No enclosure was found with the source text.

Uruguay  1161
commitments would do the job. We explained to Lacarte that the Bank
was reluctant to define its requirements in the manner desired for
two reasons, (1) it did not want to become involved in an essentially
Uruguayan-IMF problems; (2) many of the Directors were fearful of
the effect on the overall policy of close collaboration with the IMF of
a deviation from that policy in the case of Uruguay. Given the general
desire to do something for Uruguay, the consensus in the Bank was that
they could not go beyond receiving commitments voluntarily entered
into by the Uruguayans without in any way participating in the formu-
lation of such commitments. For this reason they didn’t even want to let
Lacarte know informally what they would expect to find in a letter of
commitment from the Uruguayan Government. While unhappy over
this turn of events, Lacarte appeared to understand the Bank’s position.
Our various efforts to obtain formal cancellation of the countervail-
ing duty this much appear to have failed. After speaking with Secretary
Anderson early this week, Dick wrote him a letter explaining why it
would be important for the Department of the Treasury to waive some
of its requirements and cancel the countervailing duty promptly. A copy
of the letter is enclosed.4 This letter produced a meeting in the Treasury
Department which I attended and at which time we made all of the
points we could in favor of prompt action.5 We found the Treasury
people sympathetic but not ready to take action without the complete
elimination of the differential. The reasons given were legal and polit-
ical. They felt that the law very specifically prohibited the Treasury
Department from eliminating the countervailing duty as long as there
was a differential between wool tops and the general average as defined
in the Treasury Department’s formula. They could not see their way
clear to get around this provision of the law. They also felt that vio-
lation of the law, even if feasible, would entail unacceptable political
risks. They felt that cancellation would inevitably be followed by the
prompt demand of the wool industry for an explanation of the basis on
which cancellation was made. Since the formula and the facts involved
were already known to the wool industry it would be easy for them to
verify the violation. The net result could easily be renewed pressure
from protectionist groups to put teeth into the countervailing duty leg-
islation and enforce it all across the board. As it is today, the Treasury
Department has adopted a passive attitude toward reported violations
and takes action only when forced to do so by the industries concerned.
Until now the only action has been the one against Uruguay. They
shudder to think of anything forcing them to take further action of this
nature. We then went through the exercise of recalculating the formula
on the basis of giving the Uruguayans the benefit of the doubt in all
4 Not printed.
5 No record of the meeting has been found.

An attempt to reduce it further by including the various import taxes in
the calculation failed on the ground that the Treasury Department had
already made its formula known and that this formula did not include
any provisions for taxes as an element in exchange rates. Inclusion of
this factor would have brought the differential down to 1%.
After having discussed with Lacarte the bad news of the Export-
Import Bank’s letter, I let him know about our unsuccessful attempts to
get action this month on the countervailing duty. I inquired whether it
would be possible for the Uruguayan Government to change the rates
on a sufficient number of import items to eliminate the differential.
Lacarte stated that it would not be possible since the government could
not see its way clear to raise import rates until after the elections. He
confirmed, in response to my inquiry, that his government would pre-
fer to wait for the complete elimination of the countervailing duty than
to go along with a reduction at this time to 3 or 1%. The net result of the
conversation was to leave his feeling that we really wanted to do some-
thing but could not because of our laws and their inability to act. That
was all to the good as I assume he will report this to his government.
We have been working overtime to get action this month on the
three meat items. We have succeeded thus far to the extent that the
Trade Agreements Committee voted last Friday to promulgate the con-
cessions on the three items. Only Agriculture voted against such action.
The atmosphere at the TAG meeting which I attended to present the
political problem involved was most sympathetic. The matter is being
considered today by the Trade Policy Committee. Our representative
will be Tom Mann who is sympathetic to our position and who can be
counted on to make a good fight to hold the line against Agriculture’s
opposition. Although formal promulgation may not be feasible because
of red tape prior to the end of this month, we expect to get the informa-
tion informally to the Uruguayans for the psychological effect.
We had hoped for completion of the PL-480 negotiations by this
time. Unfortunately the dispute over the exchange rates has prevented
that. We have discussed this matter with all of the other agencies con-
cerned as well as with E and find that the issue is too fundamental in
our over-­all PL-480 program for us to yield. A yielding on this point
would, according to our E advisers, result in the necessity to make
similar concessions to other countries and perhaps even to renegotiate
agreements already made. In this day of depreciating currencies that
would just be too costly. I am hoping that the phone call which Clare
Boonstra will make to you today will clarify this point sufficiently for a
meeting of the minds with the Uruguayans.
I can only repeat that the general atmosphere in Washington
toward Uruguay, thanks to Dick Rubottom’s unremitting efforts, is
most sympathetic. In these cases where it is not sympathetic there is

Uruguay  1163
now an effective realization of the political importance of stabilizing
and improving our relations with Uruguay. Given this situation, our
failure to get positive action this month before the elections should not
be taken as indicating failure in the future.6 I hope and expect that most
of our problems will be settled during the next few months.
With best Regards,
Sincerely,
Maurice H. Bernbaum
Nationalist Party defeated its traditional opponents, the Colorado Party.
UR–9.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Uruguay (Woodward)
to the Department of State1
Montevideo, December 5, 1958.
No. 438.
SUBJECT
Comments Concerning Uruguayan Relations with the United States Under New
Herrerista Administration
There is still a slight possibility that the final count of votes may
change the narrow margin of some 6,000 or 7,000 votes by which the
Herreristas have the majority within the Nationalist Party. But it now
appears that the Government will almost certainly be led during the
four years after March 1, 1959, by the Herreristas.
We are not certain in our predictions of any attitudes of this polit-
ical group (which has been essentially in opposition for approximately
93 years) except that it is strongly representative of rural interests and
will undoubtedly do everything possible to promote agricultural pros-
perity. The outgoing Administration obviously harmed agricultural
productivity by over-­zealous efforts to industrialize and to increase the
prosperity of city workers. Since agricultural productivity and exporta-
tion is the only way in which exchange can be created to permit normal

Uruguayan imports, it can be hoped that Herrerista measures may help
promote economic recovery.
The Herrerista segment of the Nationalist Party, which has been
under the leadership of Luis Alberto HERRERA for over a generation,
was essentially friendly toward the United States and very pro-Brit-
ish up until the Terra revolution2 in Uruguay in 1933. At that time,
the Herreristas supported this Uruguayan version of strong-­man
government and showed similar enthusiasm for the dictatorships
which existed in Italy and Germany. This led to an orientation toward
Germany during World War II, and subsequently led to some enthusi-
asm for Peron’s type of demagogic dictatorship. Now that all of these
dictatorships have been thoroughly discredited, there is no current
indication of enthusiasm for totalitarian ideas in the Herrerista group.
Up until about ten months ago, the Herrerista newspaper, El Debate,
had frequent editorial criticisms and sneering innuendos concerning
U.S. policy in a large variety of matters. However, during the last six
months of that period, from 18 months ago to 10 months ago, when the
Colorado List 153 newspaper Acción was notably critical of the United
States and inclined to accuse the United States of much of the respon-
sibility of Uruguay’s economic ills, particularly the loss of Uruguayan
markets for wool, this Colorado criticism was matched by a trend in El
Debate toward gradually increasing tolerance of United States policies.
In other words, it appears that a large factor in the critical Herrerista
attitude toward United States’ policies had been one of opposition to
the attitude of the Colorado List 15 Government.
So far as the general orientation of the Herreristas is concerned, a
large proportion of their support is probably found among the smaller
ranchers and farmers than any other single group; a majority of the
largest ranchers and farmers could fairly be said to be supporters
of the UBD, and a majority of the industrialists were probably also
UBD supporters. Since UBD collaboration will, in essence, be essen-
tial to the Herreristas, the combination of Nationalist factors in the
new Administration will, therefore, be conservative. On the other
hand, it should be remembered that the concentration of property in
Uruguay is decidedly limited as compared with most other countries
and that extreme conservatism in this country is a minor element.
The new Administration may, therefore, not be notably reactionary.
both the National Council of Administration and the legislature in 1933, and called for
a constitutional convention. The new constitution concentrated executive power in the
President.
1911–1915, and the latter by his nephew, Luís Battle Berres.

Uruguay  1165
It is more likely, by its nature, to be anti-Communist than the List 15
Government, although several Nationalists, while in the opposition,
have been notably friendly with the Soviet Legation. However, it is not
likely that the Communists will be dealt with sufficiently drastically to
give them a phoney “aura of persecution” which would actually help
to strengthen them. In general, the broad middle-­class element that has
been revealed in this election will be a very important bulwark against
drastic change in policies in Uruguay—­and the unusual governmental
system which gives the opposition unique opportunity to influence
policies will help this.
Leaders of the Nationalist Party have shown, individually, a cour-
teous and friendly personal attitude in conversations with officers of
the U.S. Embassy and U.S. citizens. The 85-­year old leader, Herrera,
has been very cordial. He made a distinct effort to be friendly in greet-
ing Vice President Nixon during the Vice President’s visit to Uruguay
reception for the Vice President. I made it a point to invite him to sit
down on the sofa in the National Palace beside Vice President Nixon,
as the Vice President was saying goodbye to the National Council, so
that he and the Vice President could have their picture taken together,
and this obviously greatly pleased the old gentleman. When I made a
courtesy call on Herrera a few weeks later, he went out of his way to
be exceptionally cordial even though it was obvious that he is almost
totally deaf. He gave considerable publicity to this visit in his newspa-
per. (Amusingly, when I called on another Nationalist Councillor, Viña,
the next day, he told me that the Herreristas didn’t have a “ghost of a
chance“ in the coming elections under “the old man“.)
The man who will be President of the Council during the first
year is Dr. Martin R. ECHEGOYEN. He is quite widely respected in
Montevideo as a decent, intelligent and honest lawyer. He is consid-
ered to be so loyal to Herrera as probably to be almost subservient to
him. While he opposed ratification of the ICA Industrial Productivity
Agreement during the discussion on this subject in the Senate, I expect
this was more symptomatic of opposition to List 15 than any real indi-
cation of feeling with respect to the United States or with respect to the
substance of the matter. If he had any motivation other than “politics“,
it may have been more a manifestation of nationalistic resistance against
taking advice rather than any feeling with respect to the United States.
The man who would be President of the Council during the second
year is Señor Benito NARDONE. [text not declassified] it was his dema-
gogic appeal through radio programs over several years which appar-
ently helped greatly to glean a large number of votes from small farmers
whom he promised to help. It seems probable that he has no convic-
tions on international matters and will continue to be an opportunist;

it can be hoped that he will see the greater “opportunity” of adopting
a “statesmanlike attitude” when he is a National Councillor. (A glos-
sary of his views on economic matters is contained in Emodes 436 of
The man who will be President of the Council during the third
year, Señor Eduardo Victor HAEDO [text not declassified] has been ven-
omous at times in his criticism of the United States, and it can only be
hoped that his attitude will change when he is no longer in opposition
and in a position of public responsibility as a Councillor.
The man who will be President during the fourth year is Señor
Faustino HARRISON. He has always appeared to be friendly toward
the United States, and has a fairly good reputation in Montevideo as a
competent escribano.
One of the other two Herrerista members of the Council will be
Dr. Justo M. ALONSO, a respected physician who is a member of the
Rotary Club of Montevideo where I have talked with him occasionally
and have found him very cordial.
Given the unpredictable nature of Herrerista policies and mea-
sures, the Council system of government has certain safeguards—­in
that the two Colorado List 15 Councillors and the one List 14 Councillor
will have the same leavening effect that the Nationalist Councillors
have had during the present Administration.
The Herrerista and UBD factions together will control a bare
majority in both the Senate and the Chamber of Representation in the
Legislative Branch of the Government. It is too early to surmise concern-
ing the extent of formal cooperation that may be developed between
the two factions, but it is obvious that the Herrerista faction will not be
able to pass any legislation unless it has the cooperation of some other
segment of the legislative bodies which is as large as the UBD segment
or the Colorado List 15 segment. Obviously the possibilities of cooper-
ation with the UBD are greater than with the List 15. Therefore, there
may be considerable moderation of ideas and policies in the Herrerista
leadership when they are in power, if for no other reason than because
of the necessity of getting things done.
The only existing program of the United States Government in
Uruguay (since we do not have a real ICA program in operation at
present) concerning which the Herrerista Government might develop a
negative attitude is the Air Force Mission. The principal interest of the
Colorado Government in having the Air Force Mission in Uruguay was,
first, to obtain the military assistance equipment which we have been
giving to Uruguay for “Hemispheric defense”, and probably, second, to

Uruguay  1167
have both this equipment and the Mission for the purpose of giving the
Governmental leaders a feeling of security with respect to unpredict-
able developments in Argentina. This latter feeling was, of course, par-
ticularly strong during the Peron era, but developments in Argentina
continue to inspire a feeling of uncertainty, and it seems likely that the
Herrerista Government will have similar motivations. This reassur-
ing defense tie has no doubt been, tacitly, in the minds of leaders of
the Uruguayan Government, as powerful a political factor as exists in
Uruguayan relations with the United States. We can no doubt thank
our defense relationship as well as our fundamental ideological rela-
tionship for the Uruguayan measures of cooperation with the United
States in international matters, particularly at the United Nations. It can
be hoped that this relationship will continue. While the Herreristas, in
the opposition, have been unenthusiastic about this “defense cooper-
ation”, their attitude twenty years ago toward the militaristic regimes
in Italy and Germany and their subsequent attitude toward the Peron
regime in Argentina would not indicate any fundamental antipathy to
“militarism” per se.
All indications we have received so far from the Herreristas are to
the effect that they intend to adopt a clear policy of cooperation with
the United States and the Western world and that they hope to have our
friendly assistance.
There would seem to be no reason why we should adopt any
change of attitude whatever in our relations with Uruguay, as we wait
to see what concrete measures the new Administration will undertake
and what general attitudes it will adopt. I believe that we should con-
tinue the efforts we have been making to resolve the old grievances and
work toward new, modest measures of economic and financial coopera-
tion. We should assume that the new Administration will have as much
interest as (or more than) the present Administration in such measures
as possible Eximbank assistance and possible DLF loans, both for the
UTE telephone equipment and possibly to supplement the prospective
IBRD loan for rehabilitation. The need is so great for the surplus tobacco
and cotton which would be delivered under the PL 4805 agreement, that
is being negotiated that there can be little question but that this negotia-
tion would receive the unqualified approval of the new Administration.6
In any event, the sales transaction should be completed long before the
new Administration comes in on March 1, 1959.
5 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of
6 Reference is to the Surplus Agricultural Commodities Agreement effected by an
exchange of notes, signed at Montevideo, February 20, 1959, and entered into force the
same day. For the text of the agreement, see United States Treaties and Other International
Agreements (UST), vol. 10, p. 161.

The general feeling among businessmen in Montevideo is that it
was a great misfortune that the UBD did not quite obtain a majority
within the Nationalist Party. At the same time, there is very general
relief that the List 15 people are going to be out of the Government.
The List 15 leaders, particularly Luis BATLLE Berres, have been widely
disliked and feared by responsible citizens because their motivations
had become so exclusively those of wardpoliticians who have decided
any and every issue on the basis of how many votes the decision would
bring in. This narrow, parochial attitude has now been proven to have
been mistaken. It seems, in fact, that the Uruguayan people have had a
greater and more responsible concern for their long-­term interests than
their governmental leaders have shown.
[text not declassified]
To my mind, there are a number of very reassuring conclusions to be
drawn from the recent elections. First, it has been revealed that the rigid-
ity of party affiliation in Uruguay was not as ossified as had been gener-
ally believed, and it has been proved that people will change parties (for
the first time in 93 years, for any large majority) when sufficiently dissat-
isfied; this is reassuring for the future of Uruguayan democracy. Second,
it has been revealed that the size of the vote that has been susceptible to
the cheap, demagogic, short-­term appeal of the present leaders of List
15—even with the help of thousands of Government employees—has
not been as large as we had feared; this is a very wholesome indication
of the strength of middle-­class opinion which has some solid stake in the
economy and social system of Uruguay. Third, the former Opposition
won the elections by a sufficiently large majority so there is literally no
chance of any attempt at a coup or “palace revolution” on the part of
List 15 to retain power, even if there had been any such chance with a
narrower majority; it is good for the permanency, growth and reputation
of Uruguayan democracy that this temptation does not exist. Fourth, it
is reassuring to note that, despite the powerful attitude of “protest” that
motivated the voting during these elections, the Communist Party—
which has had complete freedom of operation in this country and tried
emphatically to round up every vote it could—was able to obtain only
about 24,000 votes, not enough to increase its present Congressional rep-
resentation of two Deputies out of 99; this, to my mind, is a very signifi-
cant revelation of the strength of the democratic convictions of the some
940,000 Uruguayan voters who showed no interest in communism.
Fifth, the very close division in the Nationalist vote between Herteristas
and UBD—­now within about 6,000 of each other—­should promote a
cooperative working relationship between these two wings with whole-
some effects for the country, particularly when combined with the vivid
example of the disastrous political results of Sr. Luis BATLLE Berres’
having harbored and nurtured personal animosity between List 15 and
List 14 of the Colorado party; this situation offers real hope of further

Uruguay  1169
constructive and interesting development of the unique Uruguayan sys-
tem of elections and Government.
This Embassy, like most other political prognosticators and pundits
in Uruguay, was resigned to a continuation of a List 15 Government by
a small and unworkable margin, and the Embassy was as surprised as
were the Herreristas themselves at their victory. After a few days or
reorientation, however, the Embassy is inclined to be optimistic and to
believe, for all the reasons outlined in the preceding paragraph, that the
elections offer much more promising possibilities for Uruguay and for
Uruguayan-United States relations than we had expected.
Robert F Woodward
UR–10.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
Washington, February 3, 1959.
SUBJECT
Removal of Countervailing Duty on Uruguayan Wool Tops
According to the latest Treasury calculation, recently imposed sur-
charges on certain categories of Uruguayan imports have raised the
weighted average Uruguayan exchange rate to 4.25 pesos per dollar, as
compared with a wool tops rate of 4.11 pesos per dollar. Applying the
formula used in imposing the countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool
tops in 1953, Treasury concluded that no subsidy of Uruguayan wool
tops now exists and that the countervailing duty should be removed.
Last week it informed interested members of Congress and key persons
in the U.S. wool trade that an order to this effect would be issued in ten
days, that is, on February 5.2
Jackson W. Wilson, Officer in Charge of Uruguayan Affairs in the Bureau of inter-American
Affairs.
2 A handwritten covering note from Rubottom to Dillon reads: “This is for your use
in case Treasury gets faint-hearted. So far, they are standing firm.”
A second handwritten covering note from John M. Leddy, Special Assistant to
the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, to Charles S. Whitehouse, Special
Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, dated February 4, 1959,
reads: “Treasury tells me they have no intention of backing down on this and will go
ahead tomorrow with the action rescinding the duty. I am informing ARA.”

It is my understanding that the head of the National Wool
Manufacturers Association of this country has protested Treasury’s
proposed action, informing the Treasury that the protest would also
be lodged with members of Congress and with the White House. It is
the contention of those protesting that Treasury should use a different
formula, comparing the wool tops rate, not with the general average
rate, but with the greasy wool rate, now 3.46. Use of this formula, they
maintain, would show wool tops still to enjoy a subsidy of 19 per cent.
At the time of imposition of the countervailing duty in 1953, the for-
mula proposed now by the National Wool Manufacturers Association
was considered by the Treasury. It was, however, not adopted for two
main reasons: (1) That it was not believed economically justifiable. In the
absence of an income tax, the exchange rate system in Uruguay (as in vari-
ous other countries) had become an instrument of taxation. Consequently
it could be logically argued that only the difference between the general
weighted average exchange rate and the tops rate constituted a sub-
sidy to the latter. The difference between the average rate and the lower
greasy wool rate could be looked upon as an export tax. (The validity
of this argument is supported by the fact the countervailing duty under
Treasury’s formula has been sufficient to halt shipments of Uruguayan
tops to the U.S.). (2) That it was not administratively practical, since it
would open up the possibility of countervailing duties for a vast array of
products, for example, on exports from Brazil of finished timber which
receives a substantially higher exchange rate than crude timber.
The formula selected by Treasury for imposition of the countervail-
ing duty in 1953 was sanctioned by use again in 1954 when the duty
was lowered from 18 percent to 6 percent, and it is the basis on which
the possible removal of the duty has been discussed by the two govern-
ments in subsequent years.
You are well aware, I know, of the harmful effect which the coun-
tervailing duty has had in our relations with Uruguay in recent years.
That its removal is a matter of great interest to the newly elected gov-
ernment of that country has already been indicated to us by one of the
leading figures in the new group. Serious repercussions would inevita-
bly ensue from our failure to proceed with removal of the countervail-
ing duty on the basis of the Treasury formula.
I therefore believe it is of paramount importance that we do every-
thing we can to encourage Treasury to issue the order removing the
countervailing duty on the scheduled date.3
3 The countervailing duty was actually removed effective February 27 in order to
allow the Senate Finance Committee time for further deliberation on the proposed mea-
of a White House press release dated Feburary 27 and Presidential Proclamation 3273

Uruguay  1171
UR–11.
Telegram From the Embassy in Uruguay to the
Department of State1
Montevideo, October 6, 1959.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 5 pages not declassified.
UR–12.
Editorial Note
Secretary Herter, Assistant Secretary Rubottom, and others, visited
Uruguay as part a larger goodwill tour of Latin America. Documentation
concerning the President’s visit to Uruguay is in Conference Files, Lot
While in Uruguay, President Eisenhower met on March 2 with
Senator Luis Batlle Bares and his two sons, and latter that day he met
with Benito Nardene, President of the National Council of Government
and the other Councillors. Secretary Herter met with Lietenant Hemora
Martimes Montare, Uruguayan Minister of Foreign Affairs, on the
event of March 2. Their conversation covered four different subjects,
and separate manor were prepared for each subject. The memoran-
dum of President Eisenhower’s conversations were designated US/
MC/32–33; they are printed herein. Secretary Herter’s conversations
were recorded in memoranda designated MS/MD/21–M; those not
printed herein cover the following subjects; “Law of the San Mattars
(US/MG/22), “General World Situation” (US/MG/23), and “Exchange
of Gifts” (US/MS/24).
For documentation relating the President’s trip to Latin America,

UR–13.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Montevideo, March 2, 1960.
US/MC/32
PARTICIPANTS
United States

Uruguay
The President

Senator Luis BATLLE Berres
Ambassador Robert F. Woodward
Deputy Jorge BATLLE Ibañez
Major John Eisenhower

Sr. Luis BATLLE Ibañez
Colonel Vernon Walters
SUBJECT
Conversation During Courtesy Call of Senator (former President) Luis BATLLE Berres
Senator Luis BATLLE Berres, accompanied by his two sons, Jorge
Batlle Ibañez (who is now a Deputy in the Uruguayan Chamber of
Deputies and the principal administrative manager of the Colorado List
15 newspaper ACCION) and Luis Batlle Ibañez (who is a concert pia-
nist just beginning his career) called on President Eisenhower on March
20 minutes, in the company of Ambassador Robert F. Woodward; Major
John Eisenhower; and Colonel Vernon Walters, the President’s inter-
preter. Senator Batlle inquired about the health of Mrs. Eisenhower and
expressed regret that she had not been able to make the visit to Uruguay
and the other countries of South America. President Eisenhower inquired
about Sra. de Batlle and recalled the pleasant visit that he had received
from former President Batlle and his wife and two sons at the White House
in 1955. The President and Senator Batlle reminisced briefly about Senator
Batlle’s visit to the United States.2 President Eisenhower remarked on the
very warm reception that he had received from the Uruguayan people
during the afternoon, and then Senator Batlle commented apologetically
about the irresponsible actions of a very small number of university stu-
dents. President Eisenhower replied that it was apparent that the great
majority of the Uruguayans who greeted him were very friendly and that
he was very appreciative of this warm welcome. He said that he did not
consider the student demonstrations of any significance and that he was
not worried about the kind of bombs (tar bombs) which the students were
rumored to be preparing. He alluded, good-­humoredly, to the fact that he
had been exposed to more dangerous bombs than these without ill effects.
Only. Drafted by Ambassador Woodward, and approved in the White House on March
22. Information on the source text indicates that the conversation took place in the U.S.
Embassy residence at 9:00 a.m.

Uruguay  1173
President Eisenhower commented that those minor criticisms were
nothing as compared with the ones that he has been receiving from Cuba,
and he said that this situation poses a serious problem for the United
States. Senator Batlle said that while Fidel CASTRO had great prestige
throughout Latin America as a revolutionist, he had lost that prestige as a
governor. He repeated this observation three times, wishing to emphasize
it. In the course of emphasizing this point, he said that the countries of
South America could not permit communism to gain control in Cuba. The
President commented that this is really a problem for the Organization
of American States, and the countries of the Western Hemisphere as a
whole. After restarting his views in various ways, which appeared to be
entirely critical of the Cuban Government, Senator Batlle departed.
UR–14.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Montevideo, March 2, 1960.
US/MC/33
SUBJECT
Various
PARTICIPANTS
United States
Uruguayan
The President
President of the National
Mr. Hagerty
  Council of Government,
Secretary Herter
  Sr. Benito Nardone
Major Eisenhower
Councillor Victor Haedo
Ambassador Woodward
Councillor Faustino Harrison
Lt. Col. Walters (Interpreter)
Councillor Martin R. Echegoyen

Councillor Justo M. Alonso

Councillor Pedro Zabalza

Councillor Ledo Arroyo Torres

Councillor Hector A. Grauert

Councillor Cesar Batlle Pacheco

Secretary Manuel Sanchez Morales

Minister of Foreign Relations,

  Homero Martinez Montero

Aide to President Eisenhower,

  General Enrique Magnani
Only. Drafted by Jackson W. Wilson, and approved in the White House on March 24.
Information on the source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Session
Room; Government House, at 4:30 p.m.

President Nardone opened the discussion with a short explanation
of the nature of the National Council of Government, stating that this
body, with the Minister of Foreign Relations present, constituted the
Government, which welcomed the President of the United States as a
representative of the cradle of democracy and as a defender of all the
democratic institutions of the world.
He called attention to the function of the minority in cross-­checking
the acts of the Government, to Uruguayans’ pride in their democratic
processes, and to the democratic transfer of authority when the previ-
ous Government was defeated at the polls after a long tenure in office.
Uruguayans are devoted to peace, he said, as a matter of national
conscience, believing that only in peace is it possible to make just solu-
tions of the problems of the people. Uruguay has economic and finan-
cial matters to work out but wishes to do this within the pattern of
continental collaboration and welcomes the discussions in the Americas
which have resulted in creation of the Inter-American Bank and other
institutions.
President Nardone, on behalf of the whole council, then invited
President Eisenhower to express his views on international political
problems.
President Eisenhower responded that he would be pleased to
speak from his experience both in the armed forces and as a statesman.
War is absurd and peace is imperative in the present circumstances, he
said, when a great city such as Montevideo could be converted to dust
in seconds. The Soviet Union on one side and the U.S., Great Britain
and France on the other have such destructive power that even a sur-
prise attacker would himself be destroyed. The President repeated that
with nuclear weapons a general war would be absurd. He went on to
say that there is reason for hope for the future but the cost of maintain-
ing deterrent power to prevent aggression is tremendous. It necessarily
involves difficulties for the maintenance of living standards, education
and well-­being of our people. While the smaller nations cannot partic-
ipate in this military activity, all the Western countries must be firmly
united spiritually. The President warned that the Soviets, recognizing
this situation, are going to try to lull the West into a false sense of secu-
rity and will resort to propaganda, subversion and infiltration to seduce
other peoples to deliver up their sovereignty and freedom. He pointed
out that the countries in the greatest danger are those on the Asian and
European periphery, mentioning specifically Laos, Cambodia, India,
Formosa, Viet-Nam, Korea and Iran. We must furnish a great deal of
assistance to prevent the development of movements of disintegration
in the western world and among free peoples.
The President said it is indispensable to give the peoples in Asia
and Africa, living in misery unknown in the Americas, the hope and

Uruguay  1175
the opportunity to improve their living conditions through the type
of assistance which will enable them to attain this objective. At pres-
ent the U.S. is spending 45 billion dollars a year, 60 per cent of its
budget, for military purposes to assure our protection and maintain
the shield behind which our people may work. This year, he said, we
are requesting our Congress to provide $4.2 billion for programs of
technical assistance, economic aid, and defense support. The capacity
to carry out this program depends upon the maintenance of fiscal sta-
bility and the value of our money, without resorting to inflation. The
U.S. has many internal problems but the most important is to maintain
a healthy economy and prove to the world that we are assuring finan-
cial responsibility. The U.S. will never refuse to aid, nor will abandon,
a friend who is sincerely working, making an effort to secure his live-
lihood and to improve the living conditions of the people. In such
cases, within the framework of its world responsibilities and within
the limitations of its resources, the U.S. will do everything possible to
assist that friend.
President Eisenhower reiterated his conviction that the free world
will have the necessary strength to assure its own security, and con-
cluded by saying he would be pleased to try to answer any specific
questions which the Councillors might wish to ask.
After President Nardone thanked President Eisenhower for his
remarks, the latter said it would be useful to him, on the eve of the new
conferences in Europe2, if he could know if the Councillors had any
objection concerning what the United States was trying to do, if the
U.S. is mistaken in its policies or should modify them. He said that one
of his purposes in visiting Latin America before going to Paris was to
obtain the opinions of these countries. He requested that such views be
expressed to the U.S. Government through official channels.
President Nardone’s statement that the Council shared and wished
to strengthen the policies that are being carried out by the U.S. to defend
democratic principles was seconded by Councillors Arroyo Torres and
Batlle Pacheco of the Opposition. Councillor Haedo commented that,
in this case, he agreed with the Opposition. He went on to say that the
reception given to President Eisenhower would have been duplicated
if he had come as a private citizen. Councillor Batlle Pacheco joined in
this sentiment, saying that the President interprets exactly the North
American nation and its glorious past.
President Nardone then expressed Uruguayan thanks for the col-
laboration of the United States which had restored optimism to their
2 Reference is to the forthcoming meeting of Chiefs of State and Heads of Government,
scheduled to be held in Paris during the week of May 16, 1960. Documentation on the sub-
Austria, Chapter 2.

spirits in the difficult period of the floods,3 and concluded the meeting
with the presentation to President Eisenhower, on behalf of the NCG,
of a medal as a memento of the occasion.
3 Reference is to severe floods that Uruguay experienced in mid-April 1959. The
Government of Uruguay declared a state of emergency on April 16, 1959, and the United
States provided some medicines, emergency rations, and water purification tablets, and
diverted the U.S., Edisto, an icebreaker carrying two helicopters, then returning from the
Antarctic, to assist the Uruguayans in rescue operations. At the end of May, the United
States sent a Bailey bridge to replace the vital railroad bridge over the Queguay River,
which had been washed out by the flood. The temporary installation reopened the only
rail line to the hardest hit northwestern area of Uruguay. Documentation concerning the
subject is contained in decimal file 833.49.
UR–15.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Montevideo, March 2, 1960.
US/MC/21
Participants
United States
Uruguay
Christian A. Herter,
Lieut. Hanero Martinéz Montero,
  Secretary of State
  Minister of Foreign Affairs
Roy R. Rubottom,
Juan F. Yriart,
  Assistant Secretary of State
  Director General of
  for Inter-American Affairs
  the Foreign Office
Henry A. Hoyt,
Carlos Clulow,
  Counselor of U.S. Embassy,
  Uruguayans Ambassador
  Montevideo
  to Washington2

Diego de Arteaga,

  Uruguay Rascher–civilian

  aide to Secretary Herter
SUBJECT
Official Call on Minister of Foreign Affairs; Cuban Problems - (Separate Memoran-
dum of Conversation have been prepared on “Law of the Sea Hatiters”; “General
World Situation”; and “Exchange of Gifts,”)
Drafted by Henry A. Hoyt on March 3, and approved in the office of the Secretary of State
on March 17, 1960. Information on the source text indicates that the conversation took
place in the Uruguayan Foreign offices at 7:00 p.m.
2 Carlos A. Chelw presented his credentials as Ambassador to President Eisenhower
of February 16, 1960.

Uruguay  1177
There was an exchange of amenities during which the Foreign
Minister expressed the hope that the personal relationship which had
been developed with the Secretary beginning with the Santiago FM
Conference would be considered as evidence of the friendly and coop-
erative relationship which the Uruguayan Government wished to have
with the United States.
The Secretary then brought up the question of Cuba which he had
touched upon briefly with the Foreign Minister in the motorcade earlier
in the day. The Secretary pointed out that the Cuban situation poses
a very serious problem for the United States, but that it is not just a
problem for the United States but one for all of the American Republics.
The Secretary said he would appreciate having the Foreign Minister’s
views of the situation. The Secretary said that since the withdrawal of
our Ambassador from Cuba there had been a lessening of attacks on the
United States; on the Secretary; on Assistant Secretary Rubottom and
on Ambassador Bonsal. Nevertheless, the Cuban Government had con-
tinued to place in important positions within the Government persons
who were known to be of the extreme left, if not Communists. This is
of concern to the United States because it may indicate that the Cuban
Government is likely to follow on extremist course and take extremist
actions which will further complicate our relations, despite a reduction
in criticism of the United States. The Secretary said that it would be
hard to predict just where such a course might end.
The Secretary made it very plain that we are not concerned with
Cuba’s Agrarion Reform Law. He said that this is a domestic matter for
the Cubans to determine. All that we ask is that there be just, adequate
and prompt payment to any Americans whose property is taken. In
this convection, the Secretary pointed out that the Cubans have just
announced that all further foreign capital investment will be prohib-
ited. This might be a further indication of a trend which is developing
within the Cuban Government. Such a law would, of course, be of con-
cern not only to the United States but to all other foreign countries.
The Secretary also explained that the Cubans are desirous of nego-
tiating with us on certain matters, and had recently proposed such
negotiations but with conditions which were one-­sided and completely
unacceptable to the United States. We have replied to the Cubans that
we would not be able to negotiate on this basis. The Secretary pointed
out that the unrealistic and unilateral approach of the Cubans on the
question of negotiations might be a further indication of the trend of
events in Cuba, and certainly will have a hearing on our relations with
that country.
The Foreign Minister at this point, after indicating surprise at the
news of this new Cuban action of foreign investments, said he under-
stood completely that the Cuban situation presented a very difficult

problem for the United States, particularly because of the geographic
proximity of Cuba to the United States. He said he believed, however,
that it was not just a problem of Cuba but of the whole Caribbean area.
He referred particularly to the Dominican Republic (called it Santo
Domingo) as another part of the Caribbean problem. The Minister
said he believed that it would be necessary for the United States to
try and determine the causes of the trouble in the area. He suspected
that these causes were economic and that a settlement of the economic
situation might have important repercussion in the political field in
the Caribbean.
The Secretary then commented on the problems in our relations
with Cuba which are of immediate concern and are important because
of the effect they may have on our relations with that country. First, it
will soon be necessary to determine whether or not to send Ambassador
Bonsal back to Cuba. If the decision is made to send him back, and he
is then subjected once again to insults or is hindered in carrying out his
official mission, he would be withdrawn very very quickly. Obviously
this problem and its solution could have an important hearing on nor-
mal relations with Cuba. Secondly, there is the question of the Sugar
Act which expires this year. The Secretary emphasized that this is better
for Congress to decide and that the Executive Branch, therefore, cannot
predict the outcome. The Secretary outlined for the Foreign Minister
the advantages which Cuba obtains through its special position in our
market including the sale of three million tons of sugar at the United
States domestic price which is about 2 cents above world price. This
means about 150 million dollars to Cuba annually.
The Foreign Minister again expressed his understanding of the
very difficult problem. He said that Uruguay also had been studying
the problem very carefully as evidenced by the fact that Uruguay had
not as yet replied to the approach made by the Cuban Ambassadors
who were here last month and who had invited Cuba to attend the con-
ference on under-­developed countries. Martinez Montero did not state
categorically that Uruguay’s reply would be negative although he did
give that implication.
The Foreign Minister pointed out that Cuba is very active in
espousing its own cause, and that we can expect a continuance of
Cuban activity in this respect. He mentioned that Cuba had, after con-
siderable length of time, suddenly named diplomatic representatives to
vacant posts, including Uruguay. He also said that the 150th anniver-
sary of Argentina’s independence might furnish another propaganda
forum for the Cubans because Argentina is inviting the countries of
the hemisphere to attend celebrations of this anniversary. The Minister
concluded by expressing the hope that the United States, through its
“very able diplomacy” would be able to solve the Caribbean problem.

Uruguay  1179
SUMMARY:
Although the conversation offered a very good opportunity for the
Secretary to explain fully our positions vis-à-­vis Cuba, the Uruguayan
Foreign Minister did not respond with any assurances that Uruguay
understood it was a hemisphere problem nor did he give any indication
of any official Uruguayan position on the Cuban case. He did make the
point that, in the minds of the Uruguayans, the Cuban and Dominican
problems are linked, and should be considered together. This, of course,
was a reflection of the very strong anti-Dominican attitude in Uruguay.
The Minister soon wondered off the Cuban question and started talking
in generalities about the world of situation. Whether this was deliber-
ate or merely represented his lack of coordinated thinking on the prob-
lem is conjectural.
UR–16.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Uruguay (Woodward)
to the Department of State1
Montevideo, August 26, 1960.
No. 155.
SUBJECT
Current Political and Economic Situation in Uruguay
Summary
Relations between the Uruguayan Government and the United
States Government are at present very cooperative. This is important
to the United States because Uruguay still possesses special interna-
tional prestige. And Uruguayan governmental cooperation is well sup-
ported by Uruguayan public opinion. There is increasing awareness
in Uruguay of the danger of international communism; Uruguayans
consider Uruguay impregnable to communism; but communist and
Cuban propaganda is persistent, and communist influence in Uruguay
is strong among a minority of the labor movement and a minority of
the teachers.
The present Uruguayan Administration is definitely more conser-
vative than the preceding one. It is slowly stabilizing the economic and

monetary situation of the country, slowly restoring agricultural pro-
ductivity and slowly rectifying the imbalance in international trade.
Whether it will succeed in doing this sufficiently to win again in the
November 1962 elections is a moot point and may depend in part upon
economic development projects in which foreign credit assistance may
be an important factor. Also, economic progress in the next few years
depends in large part upon greater agricultural productivity (and luck
with world prices) and the agricultural potential in Uruguay appears
rather limited.
Uruguay has had an interesting and unusual economic and social
development in the past but has tended to stagnate somewhat because
of inefficient use of manpower, lack of leadership, and lack of pro-
ductivity to pay the bill for social services. Although “welfare-­state”
services and public ownership of utilities and industries have been
conspicuous, the economy is surprisingly capitalistic and ownership
fairly heavily concentrated. While economic stability will probably be
achieved and economic activity in the country substantially improved,
there is considerable question about the possibility of Uruguay’s being
able to equal the future progress of the larger South American countries
with more varied resources.
The domestic political prospects are largely conjectural, with no
clear indication of outstanding prospective leaders and as yet no basis
for predicting which parties may gain more public favor than others.
In this state of flux, however, the probabilities of continued orientation
of the Government toward the United States and the Western world
are good.
Political Relations with the United States
Relations between the Uruguayan Government and the United
States are very good to excellent. The present (Blanco) Administration
which came into power on March 1, 1959 is thoroughly convinced that
international cooperation with the United States and the Western world
is advantageous to Uruguay, and the only natural and consistent line
for Uruguay to take in view of its own long political and economic tra-
ditions. This is a notable improvement over the situation that existed
during the preceding (Colorado) Administration. The main segments
of both large Uruguayan political parties, as well as the Catholic (Union
Civica) party all have extremist fringes that are inclined to be national-
istic and to temporize with communism—in the sense that they tend,
in the Cuban style, to sympathize with efforts to improve the living
standards of the masses, even at the cost of dictatorship for the prole-
tariat, the subordination of civil liberties, and the ignoring of private
(particularly foreign) property rights. But the two main segments of the
Blanco party have far smaller such fringes than the List 15 Colorados,
the larger of the two main Colorado segments.

Uruguay  1181
The smaller of the two main segments of the Colorado party (List
14) is more moderate in its economic and social views and has been con-
sistently friendly toward the United States for years, as exemplified by
the utterances of its newspaper EL DIA. Even the List 15 segment of the
Colorado party has been at least as cooperative in its attitude toward
the United States since it left office on March 1, 1959 as it was during
its own Administration. Evidently, the main body of List 15—­except for
the extremist fringe—­appears as convinced as are the Blanco groups
that cooperation with the United States and the Western World is the
only natural and consistent line for Uruguay. And even the extremist
fringe of List 15 is inclined to admire many aspects of the United States
and its policies while likewise taking an interest in other methods of
bettering the lot of the masses.
Therefore, the majority of Uruguayan citizens clearly support the
attitude of the Uruguayan Administration toward the United States.
(Perhaps the most important effect of the visit to Uruguay of President
Eisenhower was to precipitate a display of attitudes which showed
all Uruguayans vividly that the great majority of themselves approve
of the United States and its policies. This, and the converse discovery
that militant critics were a small minority, has tended to give many
Uruguayans more courage and more conviction and more inclination
to align themselves openly with the democratic ideology as symbolized
by the United States.)
Successful United States efforts to clear away points of irritation
in Uruguayan-U.S. relations, and to develop cooperative programs
between the two countries have undoubtedly been a substantial factor
in the improvement of relations, although the advent of the Blanco
Administration on March 1, 1959 was undoubtedly the most import-
ant factor.
Importance to the United States of Good Relations with Uruguay
Although Uruguay does not stand out among other nations as
conspicuously as three or four decades ago, it is still especially use-
ful to have Uruguayan support for United States policies and actions.
Uruguay’s international reputation as a country of democratic, edu-
cated, and liberty-­loving people has given Uruguayan attitudes and
views more weight at international meetings or in international public
discussions than the attitudes and views of any other small country of
the Western Hemisphere. Uruguay continues to be the most outstand-
ing small country in the Western Hemisphere in many respects: It has
the most firmly-­entrenched democratic traditions and institutions,
including a permanent Electoral Court to supervise all national elec-
tions. It has the most democratic form of Government in the American
Republics in that there is the least opportunity for any one man to
attain conspicuous authority. It has a practically completely graft-­free

Government. It has the most complete religious freedom and the most
absolute separation of church and State. It has had professional armed
services, divorced from participation in politics, for longer than any
other Latin American country. It probably has a smaller percentage
of illiterates and a larger percentage of newspaper readers than any
other Latin American country—­with a deeper devotion to all forms of
civil liberties.
Uruguayan Attitudes toward Communism and the Soviet Bloc
Those Uruguayans who have been interested in the professed
advances of communist States in guaranteeing at least minimum
“social security” to their populations are now becoming aware of the
ruthless dictatorial and police methods that have been required to do
this and of the total immorality of communism whenever this serves
communist purposes in relations with countries outside of the Bloc.
These Uruguayans are confident that their country is basically impreg-
nable to the dictatorial or police-­state ideas of communism. But, since
such ideas have begun to take hold in Cuba, their confidence is begin-
ning to be shaken. Many Uruguayans, moreover, have seemed to have
an attitude bordering on irresponsibility about the threat of communist
infiltration and subversion in democratic and uncommitted countries
in other parts of the world. For example, some Uruguayans have not
seemed to realize that visits of curiosity to the Soviet Bloc have the effect
of subtly enhancing Soviet prestige and lulling gullible peoples in other
countries into less concern about the dangers of communist propa-
ganda, infiltration and agitation. It is to be hoped—­particularly in view
of the developments in Cuba—­that such Uruguayans are beginning to
understand that any act of theirs which shows intellectual benevolence
toward communist countries has the effect of raising communist pres-
tige and endangering other more vulnerable democratic peoples not
only on the periphery of the Bloc but even closer to Uruguay.
After completely free political activity since 1920, the Uruguayan
Communist Party won 27,000 votes out of one million votes cast in the
November 1958 national elections. The most the Communists have ever
won was 34,000 in 1946. Uruguayans have not seemed to realize that
other poorer and less-­educated peoples in other countries would be far
more susceptible to communist blandishments if this same degree of
freedom of activity were to be permitted.
The steady cumulative effect of news stories and other sources of
information has undoubtedly tended to make Uruguayans more realis-
tic, but Communist is persistent and communist influence continues to
be strong in Uruguay in a minority of the labor movement and among
a minority of the teachers.

Uruguay  1183
Uruguayan Economic Improvement
The present Uruguayan Administration has moved slowly to
improve the country’s economic situation. It has succeeded so far in
stabilizing the international value of the Uruguayan peso, in taking
a major step to eliminate the system of multiple exchange rates with
many beneficial results, in coming closer to balancing the budget, in
significantly restricting credit, in stopping the drain on the gold bal-
ances of the central bank, and in slowing down the increase in the cost
of living. A major benefit from the elimination of the system of multi-
ple exchange rates was to place international trade at the beginning of
1960 on a completely multilateral basis and eliminate bilateralism and
discrimination. Another benefit was to increase the effective returns
from important export products, creating new incentives for additional
production. Another benefit to the economy was the elimination of
costly subsidies of certain imports, both for consumption and for aid
to industry.
The Blanco Administration has shown an admirable steadfastness
of purpose in proceeding with steps toward economic stabilization,
over the obstacle of much clamor from the Opposition and particularly
the Communists and their Socialist allies. Moreover, slow governmen-
tal procedures had been made slower by many differences of opinion
within the Blanco ranks and by the exceedingly slim Blanco majority
in the Legislature—50 out of 99 members in the Chamber of Deputies.
Much of the credit for the progress which has been made is due to the
Minister of Finance, Contador Juan AZZINI, who has a clear concep-
tion of his course, and to the comparative political imperturbability
of the two main characters in the nine-­man Presidential Council (the
National Council of Government), Chairman Benito NARDONE and
next year’s Chairman, Victor HAEDO.
The steady inflation that had come about from years of overspend-
ing and subsidizing favored urban and industrial elements in the pop-
ulation has had the natural effect of raising living costs in comparison
with individual income. After having spent and subsidized for years to
perpetuate itself in office, the List 15 Colorado Administration became
discredited because the voters began to discover that they had to pay
the bill through reduced individual real income. And then, ironically,
the one period in which this trend was felt the most keenly was the part
of 1959 after the Blanco Administration took over on March 1.
In recent months, wage increases in many industries have been
greater than cost-­of-­living increases, tending partly to restore real
income. The Government’s four-­year budget is about to be passed by the
Legislature with substantial wage increases for Government employ-
ees, which anticipate to some extent the fact that increases cannot be

made again for four years. A law recently passed modestly increases a
large proportion of existing pensions to make income catch up at least
in part with increased prices. When these and various other pending
adjustments in salaries and wages are made, it is the Government’s
intention to adopt a wage policy, that, henceforth, wage increases shall
not be larger than increases in the cost-­of-­living index.
It will remain to be seen whether the Blanco Administration can
promote sufficient improvement in the economy of Uruguay before
the next national elections in November 1962 to be able to win. This
will depend partly upon the success of the Administration in develop-
ing sound economic development projects and obtaining the financing
for them.
The success of the Blanco Administration will also depend in
part upon World demand and prices for wool and beef and upon the
increased quantities of these and other products that can be produced
in Uruguay. Uruguayan agriculture—­particularly the wool indus-
try—was heavily taxed through low exchange rates and therefore low
receipts in the multiple exchange-­rate system. Agriculture was forced
to operate upon such a low-­cost basis that large farms became larger
with fewer workers, which brought about a decline in total agricultural
production and even in the number of individual farm operators. The
small farmers were badly squeezed and became the most neglected
identifiable segment of the population.
The present Uruguayan Administration represents, in part, a
reaction to this situation. The Herrerista Blancos, who now control
the Executive branch of the Government, have a preponderance of
their supporters in the rural areas and the small towns. And Sr. Benito
Nardone, whose Liga Federal or “Ruralists” joined forces with the
Herreristas in the last elections, is the spokesman and leader of the
small farmers who vigorously protested their lot.
Undoubtedly, considerable improvement can be made in
Uruguayan agricultural productivity without increasing costs more
than increasing productivity, and this possibility will be enhanced by
progress in the science. However, the additional effort and manage-
ment required on the part of ranchers who have been accustomed to
extensive rather than intensive techniques will retard such individuals
who do not see much prospect of individual profit—­even though the
nation as a whole may badly need increased productivity and export
trade. Moreover, Uruguay’s natural advantages for beef production are
not as great as those of Argentina, and the small size of the country and
modest quality of the soil place a natural limitation on the expansion of
Uruguay’s agricultural exports.

Uruguay  1185
Uruguay’s Unusual Economic and Social Situation; Future Prospects
Despite a degree of inflation which has increased prices more than
it has wages, Uruguay probably still possesses a larger percentage of
population who are fed, clothed and sheltered reasonably well than any
other Latin American country. An ECLA study showed that, in 1958,
about 78% of the Uruguayan population had a productivity of over 400
US$ per capita, which was the highest recorded in Latin America.
Uruguay has long had the international reputation of having the
largest proportion of pensioners, the largest variety of other social
security services, the largest proportion of Government employees, the
most public ownership of utilities and industries, and the most “wel-
fare state” institutions in general of any Latin American country. On a
comparative basis, this is probably true. For example, there are about
200,000 pensioners and about 100,000 others who are eligible but who
have not been able to obtain pensions as yet because of delays that are
fundamentally due to depleted pension funds that have made loans to
the Government. There is a system of small “family allowances” which
are funded like pensions and supplement wages, and there are unem-
ployment funds. For medical and hospital services, the population is
about equally divided between those whose income is low enough to
make them eligible for public health services and those who are mem-
bers of one of the many “mutual” health insurance societies; it is esti-
mated that only about 5% of Uruguayans now depend entirely upon the
private direct purchase of medical and hospital services. All of the utili-
ties in the country except the (British-­owned) Montevideo gas company
are now owned by the Government. And the Government monopolizes
petroleum refining, most liquor distilling, a large part of gasoline dis-
tribution, a large part of cement manufacturing, fertilizer and chemical
manufacturing, fishing and fish distribution, and insurance.
There is very little foreign ownership of industry in Uruguay and
the funded foreign debt is well under $100 million USCy.
Despite the reputation of Uruguay, however, the backbone of its
economy is private capitalism, ownership is concentrated in a sur-
prisingly small proportion of the population, and the economic and
social attitudes of these capitalists are, on the whole, not conspicuously
enlightened. About 35% of all the arable land in the country is con-
centrated in the hands of about 600 families, and the concentration of
the ownership of industry is probably about the same. Farm workers
average less than $20 USCy, a month plus room and board, and ordi-
nary industrial workers average from $60 to $80 USCy, a month, plus
about 20% more from the employer for pension funds and other social
security payments.
Also, some of the wealth that has built Montevideo into an impres-
sive city for such a small country has come from persons who have

found Uruguay a convenient financial “safe-­haven’’ and Uruguayan
tax laws have encouraged the establishment of holding companies
which have their investments elsewhere. There has also been a con-
siderable tourist business, mostly from Argentina, and a considerable
number of political refugees—Argentines and others—­have invested in
residential and business property in Uruguay.
Along with this situation, there has been an interesting but small-­
scale development of intellectual and artistic life in Uruguay—­which
has strangely seemed to parallel the “safe-­haven” spirit in a degree
of isolationism and an anachronistic clinging by small groups, to out-
moded political ideas such as anarchism and early Marxian socialism.
Uruguayan economic and social (and intellectual) development
seem largely to have stood still in the past 15 or 20 years, as neigh-
boring countries have developed. This has been partly due to the
inefficiency of government operations which have wasted manpower
egregiously, with the natural result that the public has had to pay the
bill one way or another. Stating this in another way, so much manpower
has been wasted that productivity has not been sufficient to pay the bill
for goods and services, with the result that they have been paid for by
credit expansion and a slow drain on the gold reserves and the result-
ing inflation which made the public pay.
The present Uruguayan Administration is definitely determined to
make the Government and the Government business operations more
efficient, and considerable progress will undoubtedly be made in this
direction. The amount of progress that will be made, however, is a moot
point, since the lack of stimuli to and checks on the Government utility
and industrial operations is much less than on private corporations.
There is some sentiment among leaders of the present Administration
actually favoring the sale to private owners of certain Government
business operations, but it is very unlikely that this will be done, even
with the least efficient such as the fishing industry. The most that can be
expected is that some increase in private enterprise may be encouraged.
The prospects for significant economic progress in Uruguay, once
Uruguayan agriculture is brought up to optimum productivity, do not
appear to be outstanding. There may, however, be many ways in which
Uruguay can profit from closer economic integration with Argentina,
and this may offer the promising possibility for real future economic
progress. Uruguay has suffered from a lack of products which the
Argentines are interested in buying. And the most obvious way in which
Uruguayans could profit from an increasingly prosperous Argentina
would be to devise every feasible means of attracting larger numbers
of Argentine tourists; Argentine tourists already spend a substantial
amount every year in Uruguay, and it might be possible for Uruguay
to attract large enough numbers in the future to create enough foreign

Uruguay  1187
exchange to purchase Uruguayan petroleum needs from Argentina.
This exchange of tourist services for petroleum would be greatly facil-
itated by the existence of a bridge or viaduct between Buenos Aires
and Colonia in Uruguay (or a bridge somewhat farther upstream), and
the financing of this construction project—­a viaduct with a petroleum
pipeline attached to it—­might therefore be one of the most interesting
objects of international financial cooperation to consider with a view
to the encouraging and hastening of an inevitable long-­term trend in
Uruguay an economic development.
This Embassy has hoped that it might be possible for Uruguay to
develop highly skilled industries, because there are many very capa-
ble Uruguayan craftsmen and mechanics. However, the Embassy is
inclined now to estimate that the prospects of the development of truly
outstanding industries are rather poor, and the principal hope in this
respect is that there may be greater development of the local indus-
tries which process Uruguayan raw materials, such as the woolen tex-
tile industry.
Attempting to project Uruguayan economic development in line
with a realistic estimate of the situation which will probably exist ten
years from now, it can be predicted that Uruguayans will be, on the
average, only moderately better off than they are at present, and that
any difference in their average situation will correlate quite closely with
a possibly improved wool market (which, in turn, may be dependent
upon new marketing opportunities that may develop in the United
States from the Australian-United States conversations which have
been recently initiated.)
Here follows a discussion of domestic political trends.
Regardless of domestic political trends in Uruguay, the prospects
of continuing cooperative attitudes in relations with the United States
and the Western World are good. These prospects could be reduced (1)
by our not giving reasonable economic cooperation to Uruguay (2) by
our falling behind, as a nation, in the worldwide economic, sociological,
ideological and defense contest, or (3) by our departing from the inter-
American machinery to take unilateral action in some situation such as
in the Cuban case. However, assuming that we will devise increasingly
effective means of economic cooperation, that we will continue to make
every effort to make inter-American machinery more effective, and that
our country will steadily gain in the worldwide contest, I believe we
can count on Uruguayan political and ideological support.
Robert F. Woodward

UR–17.
Memorandum of the Conversation1
Washington, September 20, 1960.
SUBJECT
Meeting Between Sr. Haedo, Member of the National Council of Uruguay and
Forthcoming President of that country2 and President Eisenhower, September
PARTICIPANTS
United States

Uruguay
President Dwight D. Eisenhower

National Councilor Haedo
Ambassador Robert F. Woodward
Ambassador Carlos A. Clulow
Mr. C. A. Boonstra, ARA
Mr. F. vanReigersburg, LS
The President at 11 a.m. welcomed Councilor Haedo and men-
tioned the painting, on a chair in the office, by Manuel Rosé entitled,
“Sunset in the Sierra de Minas” which the Councilor had sent as a gift
to the President.
After being seated, Councilor Haedo opened the conversation by
remarking jocularly about Uruguay’s reputation as a country in which
all sorts of radical movements flourished such as Castroism, Peronism,
and Communism. In fact, he said, this is not the case. Uruguay is a
small and stable country, but in common with other countries it has
a need for improved internal security. To enhance this, he suggested
that it may be a good idea to hold a meeting of police experts from
all of the Latin American countries in Montevideo, “something like an
Interpol meeting”. This could provide an opportunity for a discussion
of police measures needed to improve internal security. To the extent
possible such a meeting should be without publicity. At the same time
it is becoming necessary to consider in Uruguay the provision of small
arms for the police. In this connection he referred to the program of mil-
itary assistance and suggested that present regulations both for military
assistance and for the Uruguayan military forces should be interpreted
more broadly so that the necessary small arms could be provided to
the police. Even above these conditions, however, the Councilor said
that he wished to emphasize the basic importance of financial security.
by Clarence A. Boenstra, Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs, and Fernando A. Van
[illegible in the original] of the Division of language Services. Information on the [illegi-
ble in the original] was approved in the White House on September 23.
2 Councilor Haedo visited Washington before traveling to New York to head the
Uruguayan delegation to the U.N. General Assembly, scheduled to begin its fifteenth
regular session on September 29, 1960.

Uruguay  1189
Means must be found to provide the type of financial and economic
arrangements on which there could be established an internally secure
situation.
The President asked about the existing Uruguayan situation in
other respects. The Councilor replied that everything is fine and that
“with Bogotá, the arrangements with the International Monetary
Fund—that have been very helpful—­and financial assistance from the
United States” there will be no problems. He said that his reports from
the Uruguayan delegation to the Bogotá Conference were that the con-
ference was very successful. The President remarked that the success of
the Bogotá Conference was most pleasing to him.
The President the said that he would like to mention a situation
which is giving him a great deal of worry. He recognizes the need for
economic growth in Latin America and he is convinced that private
investment for this purpose is more useful than public investment.
During his trip earlier this year to South America, leaders in the var-
ious countries agreed that private investment is urgently needed. The
excesses of Castro in Cuba, however, are now establishing a situation
which deters investors from making investments in other countries of
Latin America. This has been brought to the President’s personal atten-
tion of late in conversations with individuals who would normally be
making such investments.
The President said that there may be a lack of realization in Latin
America of the extent to which Cuba now is an obstacle to private
investment. He said that he would like to see the American govern-
ments undertake the kind of programs needed to support a greater
flow of capital in spite of Castro. The ridiculous demand of Castro for
$30 billion dollars is illustrative of the wrong way to go about this. He
then invited the Councilor to make known his views on the problem.
The Councilor responded with lengthy remarks respecting Castro
and what he termed the United States problem with Castro. He said
that obviously much violence and misunderstanding has taken place
and that in his opinion it has become necessary to seek means for clar-
ifying the situation. He does not think that this can be done by the
United States or within the framework of the United Nations. Instead
it is a problem which must be taken up by countries in Latin America
which are less directly involved, particularly Uruguay which is a coun-
try above suspicion of domination by any foreign power. Direct or uni-
lateral action by the United States would be misunderstood and would
cause hostility among the American Republics.
The President responded by stating that violence would appear
to be unilateral on the part of the Castro Government, and that the
United States has been very patient. It is difficult to understand why
Castro behaves the way he does. Cuba’s prosperity depends on its

friendship with the United States and there is no quarrel at all between
the Cuban and the United States peoples. Castro has behaved as a wild
man, contrary to the interests of Cuba and of the hemisphere; and now
has become linked to the Soviet bloc. The irresponsible seizure of prop-
erty is having a direct impact upon investments in the other American
Republics and the latter should be gravely concerned. The President
recognized the appeal of the initial Castro revolutionary program
then as agrarian reform, particularly the students and related groups
throughout the hemisphere, but [illegible in the original] that [illegi-
ble in the original] groups should be [illegible in the original] equally
at least with the need for private investment as a means for economic
growth. Also the President said that the direct Cuban-United States
problem can be considered a small one, and although small problems
can be much more of a nuisance than big ones, his principal concern is
with the broader implications which originate from it.
The Councilor interrupted frequently during the course of the
President’s [illegible in the original] in order to present his views. In
essence, the Councilor [illegible in the original] must be found to push
Castro against the wall and [illegible in the original] him to state his
position, clearly once and for all, on his attitude toward the United
States and toward the other American Republics [illegible in the origi-
nal] what it is that he wants. This can be achieved, he said by [illegible
in the original] a committee of four or five nations, including Uruguay,
to discuss these matters directly with Castro. The Committee should
express the concern of all of the American Republics regarding U.S.-
Cuban relations and ask Castro where he stands, if he [illegible in the
original] a solution, what can be done, and [illegible in the original] to
solve the present crisis. A final objective would be to make him choose
between the American Republics and the Soviet bloc. In response to
the President’s remarks to the effect that Castro may already [illegible
in the original] quite clear where he stands, the Councilor insisted that
Castro’s [illegible in the original] may be clear to the United States and
perhaps to some other [illegible in the original] groups but that it is not
clear to the Latin American peoples. The Councilor continued to stress
the need for a committee of nations which could force Castro into a
final declaration, to be understood by everyone.
Toward the close of the conversation, the President referred to his
faith and confidence in the United Nations but indicated that he had
as much or more regard for the Organization of American States as a
regional entity of fundamental importance to the United States and to
all of the American Republics. The President said that he hoped, before
leaving office, that he would be able to take actions demonstrating
further the importance which he attaches to the OAS. He has made
plans to visit the United Nations and, during his visit there, he hopes

Uruguay  1191
to invite the Chiefs of Delegations of the other American Republics to
a luncheon, taking advantage of this opportunity to express his high
regard for the OAS countries. The Councilor applauded enthusiasti-
cally these remarks.
At this point, while photographers came in to take pictures, the
conversation turned to the 9-man National Council of Government in
Uruguay and Mr. Haedo jokingly suggested a similar system for the
United States so that all of the candidates could become President for a
year, as he himself would be doing next March 1.
Upon leaving at 11:30 a.m., the Councilor mentioned again his
hopes that the President would enjoy the painting which he presented
and he added that he would be most gratified if the President might
find it possible to send him an autographed photograph and one of his
own paintings. He reiterated his admiration for the President and his
satisfaction at having been received by him. The President thanked him
for making his friendly visit.
UR–18.
Editorial Note
On October 10, 1960, the International Monetary Fund announced
that an initial par value for the Uruguayan peso had been estab-
lished at 7.40 pesos per United States dollar, by agreement between
the Fund and the Government of Uruguay. The fund also announced
that it had entered into a stand-­by agreement enabling the Uruguayan
Government to draw the equivalent of United States $30,000,000 over a
12-­month period. Documentation concerning IMF activities in Uruguay

Venezuela: U.S. Relations with Venezuela
VE–1.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter– American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting
Secretary of State1
Washington, January 28, 1958
SUBJECT
Recognition of the new Venezuelan Government.2
Discussion:
Venezuela has undergone a revolutionary change of government.
The former President, General Marcos Pérez Jiménez, was forced by
the Armed Forces to resign on January 23. His downfall was preceded
by an unsuccessful uprising on January 1 and 2, in which the Air Force
and units of the Army sought to overthrow his government. After sev-
eral days of civilian riots and student demonstrations, followed by a
widely supported general strike on January 21 and 22, he was ousted by
Carl E. Bartch of the Office of South American Affairs; concurred in by Robert Murphy,
Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs; E. Allan Lightner, Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for International Information and Cultural Affairs; John S. Hoghland,
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations; Marjorie M. Whiteman,
Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs; and Clement E. Conger, Assistant Chief
of Protocol.
Secretary Rubottom stated the following with respect to the overthrow of Pérez Jiménez:
“14. Mr. Rubottom gave a full report on recent developments in Venezuela leading
to the overthrow of Perez Jimenez and the establishment of a military junta. He pointed
out that no Americans were involved in these events and that the wells and refineries of
the Standard Oil Company are in full production. He noted that a representative of the
junta called at the Embassy this morning and assued our Charge that the new regime is
friendly to the U.S. and seeks quick recognition.
“Mr. Murphy asked Mr. Rubottom to stay in close contact with the Navy Department
to furnish guidance with respect to the U.S. carrier and destroyers which are approxi-
mately 150 miles from the Venezuelan coast. The Acting Secretary asked Mr. Rubottom
to furnish General Goodpaster at the White House with a summary of the situation in
Venezuela for the information of the President.”
Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot 63 D 75)

Venezuela  1193
the Armed Forces. General Pérez Jiménez was a member of the original
three-­man Junta of Government that assumed power in 1948, following a
military coup d’etat that overthrew the legally constituted government of
President Gallegos, who had gained a majority of the popular vote in the
free elections conducted in Venezuela the preceding year. Installed by the
Armed Forces as Provisional President in 1952, following the dissolution
of the Junta, General Pérez Jiménez was named Constitutional President
the following year by the Constituent Assembly. He was “reelected” for
another five-­year term of office as a result of a plebiscite held on December
15, 1957, in which he was the only presidential candidate. Resentment
among the younger military officers and the civilian population over the
plebiscite is believed to have contributed to a great extent to his downfall.
In a note dated January 25, 1958,3 the new Venezuelan Government
informed our Embassy at Caracas that, in accordance with the univer-
sal desires of the nation, in defense of the supreme interests of the
Republic, and in order to move toward a legally constituted democratic
form of government, the National Armed Forces had assumed power
and had formed a five-man Junta of Government headed by Admiral
Wolfgang Larrazábal, as President of the Junta, and comprised of two
other military officers and two civilians. The note stated that the new
government would comply strictly with its international obligations
and expressed its desire to resume cordial relations with the U.S.
The Junta is in control of the machinery of government. It appears
to enjoy wide popular as well as united military support and there is
no substantial resistance to it. It has pledged by public announcement
to conduct free elections as soon as possible in order to constitute a
demo­cratic form of government. A member of the Junta has assured
our Embassy of the new government’s receptivity to foreign invest-
ment and of its willingness and ability to protect it. He has also given
assurances that the new government will be anti-­communist.
In the belief that early recognition on our part would contribute mate-
rially to the stability of the new regime, we propose that the U.S. recognize,
at 6.00 p.m. today, the Junta as the Provisional Government of Venezuela.
Recommendation:
That you sign the attached memorandum to the President4 recom-
mending recognition of the Junta as the Provisional Government of the
Republic of Venezuela.
3 Reference is to Venezuelan Foreign Office note 69, transmitted to the Department
Acting Secretary of State Herter’s memorandum, which is not printed, bears a
typewritten notation which reads: “President authorized Acting Secretary to do so. per
mately called Caracas.”

VE–2.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting
Secretary of State.1
Washington, January 28, 1958.
SUBJECT
Visa Applications for ‘General Marcos Pérez Jiménez, Former President of
­Venezuela, and his Family.2
Background:
The Embassy in Ciudad Trujillo, in telegram No. 326 of January 27,
(Tab B)3 reports that it is reliably informed that General Marcos Pérez
Jiménez, former President of Venezuela, plans to apply for United
States visas for himself, his wife and mother-­in-­law, four children, and
a servant.
It has been our practice in the absence of extraordinary circum-
stances to grant visas to those exiled political leaders from Latin
America who meet the general requirements of our visa laws and reg-
ulations. Many of the important Venezuelan political figures now re-­
emerging in the Venezuelan political scene enjoyed the hospitality of
the United States during the ten year period of General Pérez Jiménez’
Government. Ex-President Romulo Betancourt was actually admitted
in 1954 over the vehement protests of the Pérez Jiménez Government
on the basis of our established practice.
Although the authoritarian character and the antagonism of the
U.S. press toward the Government of General Pérez Jiménez make it
likely that his admission into the United States would produce con-
siderable press criticism, it is not believed that the circumstances
surrounding this case are such as to justify denial of a visa. He is the
bearer of the Legion of Merit, Degree of Chief Commander, which was
bestowed upon him on November 12, 1954 by President Eisenhower.
This decoration was bestowed upon him in recognition of his collabora-
tion with the United States both internationally and in the development
of Venezuela’s important and strategic petroleum resources through
by Andrew B. Wardlaw, Officer in Charge of North Coast Affairs in the Office of South
American Affairs, and initialled by Deputy Under Secretary Murphy.
2 Documentation concerning the admission of Pérez Jiménez in the United States,
and his eventual expulsion and extradition, is contained in Department of State deci-
“Pérez-Estrada Cases.”

Venezuela  1195
private United States and British enterprise. His policies of complete
support for private enterprise were frequently cited as an example in
countries addicted to Socialistic practices.
To lessen the possibility that General Pérez Jiménez may wish
to engage in subversive activity against the Venezuelan Government
while in the United States, the consular officer handling his visa appli-
cation will be instructed to require of General Pérez Jiménez verbal
assurances that he will not undertake such activities during his stay in
our country. A similar course of action was followed with ex-President
Betancourt of Venezuela and is being followed in connection with the
issuance of visas to other prominent Venezuela exiles who seek to enter
the United States at this time.
Recommendation:
That you approve the attached telegram authorizing the issuance
of visas General Pérez Jiménez and his family. (Tab A)4
VE–3.
Telegram from the Charge in Venezuela (Burrows) to the
Department of State1
On very confidential basis I was visited this morning (meeting
arranged through intermediary) [text not declassified] who said he has
been named by Larrazábal personally organize new secret political
investigative bureau. Emphasized interest in Communism and not, as
SN, in mere anti-­government sentiments.
Expressed hope Embassy would be able collaborate with advice
on organizational, other phases of work. Asked personal opinion re
U.S. reaction if Venezuela were to approve legal status Communist
Party and said Larrazábal would speak to me near future about this.
He explained further such action would be in response pressure rec-
ognize all parties and might be, as far as Communists concerned, for
temporary period.
Distribution 575.

I avoided [text not declassified] commitment any kind pending
formal clarification [text not declassified] status. Meanwhile I would
appreciate any guidance Department may be able furnish2 for reply
Larrazábal if he should approach me along lines suggested. After con-
versation3 [text not declassified] advised by other source Congressional
elections when held will probably be on basis 20 percent seats for each
of three major parties, 5 percent for Communists, 35 percent for junta.
Burrows
immediate categoric answer should be given other government official that U.S. believes
GOV would be making very serious mistake in granting legal status to Communists . . . .
Manner in which Communists already have begun participate local political and labor
activities is indicative efforts they will make to infiltrate all sectors government and gain
participation Venezuelan political scene. The rapidity with which Communist leaders
returned Venezuela and their intensive activities point up danger inherent granting legality
Communist Party.” With respect to assistance for a new secret investigative bureau, the tele-
gram instructed the Embassy to indicate willingness to discuss the matter with Larrazábal
and stated that while the Department would have interest in helping to establish technical
police methods along the lines of U.S. investigative agencies, “It would be necessary empha-
size Larrazábal that U.S. of course could not be associated in any way with police or investi-
the Chargé discussed the subject with him along the lines suggested in telegram 483.
VE–4.
Letter from the Attorney General (Rogers) to the Deputy
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1
Washington, February 13, 1958.
Dear Mr. Murphy:
This will confirm my telephone conversation with you in which
I expressed my concern regarding the issuance of a visa by the
Department of State to the ex-Dictator of Venezuela, Marcos Perez
Jimenez. As I told you, I learned of the issuance of this visa for the first
time in a newspaper account.
In view of the commitment made by the Department of State, the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, of course, will admit Perez
Jimenez if he applies for admission to the United States. However,
Jimenez—Estrada.” Confidential.

Venezuela  1197
the problems we have encountered in a similar case where a visa was
granted to a foreign political leader prompt me to express the reserva-
tions I mentioned to you in our telephone conversation. In the event
Perez Jimenez, as in the Prio case,2 should seek to use this country for
future power plotting and the Department of State should protest to this
Department, as was done in the Prio case, I want to make it clear that
it may be difficult to effect his deportation or even to prevent him from
engaging in activities detrimental to our foreign relations while here.
Furthermore, since we talked about this matter, I noticed a United
Press dispatch in this morning’s newspapers reporting that the Assistant
Attorney General of Venezuela has filed a formal petition for the extra-
dition to Venezuela of Pedro Estrada, former chief of the Security Police
under the Perez Jimenez regime. I am advised that Estrada is currently
in the United States on a diplomatic visitor’s visa.
Sincerely yours,
William P. Rogers
uge in the United States during the period 1952–1958, and was allegedly involved in
plotting against the government of Fulgencio Batista.
VE–5.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of
State.1
Washington, February 17, 1958.
SUBJECT
Consultation with Venezuela on Petroleum Imports Problem
Problem:
To obtain Venezuelan cooperation, or at least minimize Venezuelan
opposition to whatever steps are required by the U.S. Government to
solve the petroleum imports problem in view of mounting industry
and congressional pressure for restrictions which perhaps will have to
go beyond the present voluntary program.
Confidential. The source text is an initialed carbon copy.

Discussion:
While the voluntary restrictions of petroleum imports begun several
months ago has worked reasonably well, there are increasing signs that
the Congress may be inclined to give favorable consideration to more
severe restrictions in the form of tariffs and/or quotas which would seri-
ously damage our relations with Venezuela, Canada, and other oil produc-
ing countries, possibly as the price for extending the Trade Agreements
Act. The Venezuelan problem has been intensified by the coming into
production of new wells in concessions held by companies which have
just entered the Venezuelan picture. The pressure on the market of this
additional production at a time when demand for oil is slackening may
break the price structure at any time, according to informed observers.
Of the four alternatives ahead: (1) continued voluntary restric-
tions; (2) mandatory curbs imposed by Executive Act under Article 7 of
the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act; (3) import restrictions imposed
by the Congress; and (4) export controls by Venezuela, No. 1 would
obviously be the best from our viewpoint as well as that of Venezuela.
developing situation. Although No. 3 would be ruled out as distasteful
to the U.S. oil industry, the application of Venezuelan good offices to
facilitate the partition of the U.S. import market from Venezuela among
the major and new producers might save the voluntary program.
Venezuela can be expected to be especially interested in the price factor.
It is very much in the U.S. interest to obtain Venezuelan under-
standing and support, if possible, of whatever program we embark
upon. The Perez Jimenez Government was restive under the voluntary
plan and the Embassy has reported that the present Junta Government
may react strongly to making the import controls mandatory. However,
every effort should be made to explain to the Venezuelans the nature
of the U.S. problem and to make this consultation meaningful rather
than simply informative. The Venezuelan Chargé Dr. Carlos Pérez de la
Cova has responded favorably to frank talks by Mr. Mann and myself.
We all agreed that it is essential that someone from this Government go
to Caracas to discuss the problem frankly with the Junta, the Cabinet,
and key political leaders. Subject to your approval, I will undertake
such a trip since I have not yet visited Caracas in my tenure as Assistant
Secretary. My having been the head of the U.S. negotiating team for the
revised trade agreement with Venezuela in 19522 could be expected to
facilitate the task considerably. This agreement, under which we are
now exporting nearly $1 billion annually to Venezuela, would probably
not survive unless Venezuelan cooperation is obtained.
American Republics.

Venezuela  1199
Recommendation:3
That you approve my holding as soon as possible discussions with
the Venezuelan Government and key political leaders in Caracas to
obtain their views with respect to the problem caused by the over pro-
duction of oil.4
Approved by Secy.” Another notation on the source text indicates that Thomas C. Mann,
Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Loftus E. Becker, Legal Adviser of the
Department, and Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director of the Office of South American Affairs,
were notified on February 19, that the memorandum had been approved.
reporting on his visit at the Secretary’s staff meeting, March 4, Rubottom stated in part
the following:
“In Venezuela the principal subjects which Mr. Rubottom discussed were the oil
imports question and the future of the oil industry. He said the new Venezuelan Minister
of Fuel is friendly to the U.S. and wishes to work out some arrangements, possibly
within a Western hemisphere mutual effort, to prevent a disastrous drop in fuel prices.
Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot 63 D 75).
VE–6.
Telegram from the Chargé in Venezuela (Burrows) to the
Department of State1
636. Foreign Office delivered today note2 concerning petroleum restric-
tions,3 both present voluntary and possible future “obligatory adminis-
trative or legislative measures”. Summary 6 points raised:
2 The reference Venezuela Foreign Office note, numbered 790 (D) and dated March
decline in U.S petroleum consumption. During January and February, the President’s
Special Committee to Investigate Crude Oil Imports met to consider reassessing the vol-
untary oil import program of 1957, under which crude oil importers were asked to restrict
their imports into the United States on a voluntary basis. Documentation concerning the
program is printed in Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VII, American Republics: Central
and South America, and Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. X, Foreign Aid and Economic
Defense Policy.

(1) Although convinced present or future situation created by
restrictions can affect normal development trade under 1952 agree-
ment,4 Venezuela considers time inopportune raise this aspect problem.
(2) Venezuela considers indispensable any steps adopted be within
spirit complete understanding, harmony.
(3) Government believes measures taken will affect internal econ-
omy and fundamental aspects Venezuela life, petroleum being essential
factor. Without doubt measures will affect bilateral trade.
(4) From broader viewpoint observe that tendency towards restric-
tionist policy can unfavorably influence traditional principles coopera-
tion underlying hemispheric relations.
(5) Transcendence problem has caused impact on Venezuela public
opinion which showing concern over consequences that (restrictions)
have on “La Vida Nacional” notwithstanding confidence mutually sat-
isfactory solutions can be found.
(6) Government considers existing ties two countries require main-
tenance close permanent contact order achieve understanding between
parties respecting common problems and measures adopted solve
same. Therefore government views with special pleasure “idea sug-
gested by Rubottom that consultation between Venezuela and U.S. be
held” to study any measures affecting imports Venezuelan oil in U.S.
Comment: Note was written last week prior our approach tri-­
partite technical review.5 Although point 6 reference to idea suggested
aim is provide record considering we did not give Venezuelans note or
memorandum (as they suggested) of those conversations. Believe tri-­
partite talks may constitute sufficient consultation for the present.
Burrows
4 Reference is to the Supplementary Trade Agreement of 1952, which entered
into force October 11, 1952. For the text, see United States Treaties and Other International
5 Reference is to proposed informal discussions between U.S., Canadian, and Venezuelan
technical representatives aimed at establishing a hemispheric approach to oil policy.
6 When Rubottom visited Caracas in late February, he held consultations with
Venezuelan Government officials and corporation lenders concerning the hemispheric
petroleum situation. A summary of the talks and the recommendations Rubottom subse-
quently submitted to the Department is contained in a memorandum by Terry B. Sanders,
Jr., of the Office of South American Affairs, March 3, 1958. According to the memorandum,
Rubottom recommended: 1) that the Department should begin to study the necessary steps
to comply with Article 13 of the United States-Venezuelan Trade Agreement as revised in
1952, 2) encourage a responsible U.S. medium to publish an account of the oil problem,
“giving figures to show that the entire cut-back in Venezuela’s oil production since the
height of the Suez crisis has not been due to the voluntary import restrictions in the U.S., as
is commony believed in Venezuela”, and 3) consider an international conservation agree-
ment which would “provide a means for cutting back production in all affected countries
during periods of falling consumption.” (ARA Files, Lot 60 D 262, “Oil-U.S. Legislation”)

Venezuela  1201
VE–7.
Editorial Note
On March 24, 1958, in a Supplementary Report to the Report of the
President’s Special Committee to Investigate Crude Oil Imports, dated July
29, 1957, the Special Committee recommended additional restrictions
on crude oil imports quotas for Districts I–IV, the area east of the
Rocky Mountains. The President approved the Special Committee’s
report in a memorandum dated March 25, 1958, and in similar memo-
approved the Special Committee’s recommendations relating to
1) importation of petroleum products other than crude, 2) allocations
for District V, the Pacific West Coast, and 3) continuance of existing
crude oil allocations through February 28, 1959. See Public Papers of the
Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958 (Washington:
1958), p. 230. Documentation concerning U.S. oil policy is printed in
Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. IV, Foreign Economic Policy. Further
documentation is located in Department of State decimal files 411.006,
Policy” and “Oil U.S. Legislation”, and ARA/EST Files, Lot 62 D 8,
“Petroleum Policy” and “Oil Import Program.”
VE–8.
Letter from the Chargé in Venezuela (Burrows) to
the Director of the Office of South American Affairs
(Bernbaum)1
Caracas, April 18, 1958.
Dear Maurie:
With reference to your Telegram 6282 and our 742,3 I don’t believe
I can emphasize too much the strength of the feeling here on this par-
ticular issue.
Jimenez—Estrada.” Confidential; Official-Informal.
Patriotica, Vincente Lecuna, told Department officials that he feared demonstra-
tions during the Nixon visit if Pérez Jimenez and Pedro Estrada were still in the U.S.
tions with Venezuela caused by the presence in the United States of Pérez and Estrada and
stated, “Far from quieting down strength of feeling this issue being maintained and prob-

Unless something should happen prior to the Vice President’s
arrival in Caracas (and by “something” I mean the departure of Pérez
Jiménez and Pedro Estrada from the United States, temporarily if noth-
ing else), I am sure there will be demonstrations and perhaps other
unpleasant events. I don’t know quite how the Department would go
about this, but if there is some way to encourage these two to be out
of the United States while the Vice President is on this trip, I think it
might be one of the smartest things the Department could possibly do.
We read in the paper here yesterday that PJ was preparing to travel
to Switzerland and, as a matter of fact, that Mrs. Pérez Jiménez had
already undertaken negotiations to buy a house there. The Foreign
Minister in commenting on this yesterday said what a wonderful thing
it would be if the report were true. He, incidentally, expressed the hope
that there would not be any demonstrations while the Vice President
is here.4
Best regards,
Sincerely,
Charles R. Burrows
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, reads: “I believe we are stuck with
the presence of P.J. & Estrada. I say this after speaking with OSA officers & giving it
thought myself. If either of them should leave the U.S., the INS would probably deny
them readmission, and even if not, their return shortly after the Nixon party has visited
Caracas would look like a shabby device on our part.”
VE–9.
Editorial Note
Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Venezuela May 13–15,
1958, as part of a tour of several South American countries which he
severe violence which forced cancellation of all public events.

Venezuela  1203
VE–10.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,
Washington, May 20, 1958.
SUBJECT
Political and Economic Factors in U.S. Relations with Venezuela
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Hector Santaella, Venezuelan Ambassador
Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr. Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
Mr. C. E. Bartoh, Venezuelan Desk Officer
Dr. Santaella made a farewell call this afternoon on Mr. Rubottom,
who congratulated him on his important new position as Secretary
of the Junta of Government, but expressed regret that he was leaving
Washington. The Ambassador said he was sorry to leave, especially on
such short notice, but found comfort in the knowledge that he would
have an opportunity in his new position to continue to work for even
closer relations with the United States, which he said he understands
and admires very much. Although Dr. Santaella thought perhaps he
should call on President Eisenhower before leaving, he said he would
be guided by Mr. Rubottom’s advice. Mr. Rubottom told him he didn’t
think a call on the President would be necessary, especially since the
Ambassador was calling on the Vice President later today and on the
Secretary tomorrow. Moreover, on such short notice it would proba-
bly not be possible to arrange an appointment with the President. The
Ambassador said in that case he thought he might simply write a letter to
the President, and Mr. Rubottom agreed that that would be satisfactory.
Dr. Santaella said he had talked by telephone with President
Larrazábal and other members of the Junta of Government, as well
as with representatives of the Armed Forces and political leaders. He
had been assured of their confidence and support in his new position;
he would not have agreed to accept the appointment if such support
had not been forthcoming. He said he is not a member of any orga-
nized political party. Commenting briefly on the political situation, the
Ambassador expressed confidence that, despite temporary setbacks,
Venezuela would attain an orderly, democratic form of government. He
pointed out that an electoral law, drafted by the multi-­partisan Electoral
Law Commission, is to be promulgated on May 23, at which time sev-
eral cabinet changes will be announced. It looked to him as though
Confidential. Drafted by Bartch on May 29. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.

elections would be convened in November or December of this year,
or in January or February of 1959. He thought it likely that if elections
were held in 1958, the elected government might be installed in office
on January 23, 1959, the one-­year anniversary of the revolution which
ousted the Perez Jimenez Government, instead of on April 19, the tradi-
tional date in Venezuela for presidential inaugurations. He considered
it important, as a means of insuring stability and continuity, that the
new government take office as soon as possible after the elections. In
reply to a question from Mr. Bartch, he stated that he had forgotten to
inquire last week in Caracas whether the date for the elections would
be announced on May 23.
Mentioning the incidents that had occurred during the Vice
President’s visit to Venezuela on May 13 and 14, Dr. Santaella empha-
sized that they had taken place in a politically effervescent atmosphere
resulting from ten years of repressive dictatorship. He recognized that
freedom implies responsibility if complete chaos is to be avoided, and
thought it imperative that such responsibility be developed. At the same
time, however, the Ambassador and the leaders of the political parties
were opposed to outlawing the Communist Party; he felt Communist
activities would be best held in check by other means. The Government
had made a number of arrests as a result of the violence that occurred
during the Vice President’s visit, and had launched an investigation
of the activities of supporters of Perez Jimenez. Ambassador Santaella
expressed great admiration for the Vice President and Mrs. Nixon and
the manner in which they had conducted themselves in Caracas. Not
only had the Vice President exhibited real courage, he had demon-
strated inner qualities of greatness; he had calmly and objectively
appraised the situation, revealing a wisdom of judgment and a depth
of understanding found only in great men.
Ambassador Santaella characterized the anti-American demon-
strations that took place during the Vice President’s visit as the work
of a very small minority, not at all representative of the sentiments of
the Venezuelan people, whom he described as being unusually friendly
to the United States. He said relations between our two countries
remained very good, despite the incidents.
Dr. Santaella asked Mr. Rubottom’s opinion on the developments
that might be expected in Washington as a result of the Vice President’s
visit to South America. Mr. Rubottom told him that he was an eternal
optimist; he was gratified by indications that Congressional inquiries
into our policies might be constructive rather than in the nature of a
post mortem. Mr. Rubottom stated that it is only natural that tempo-
rary problems in our relations with Latin America will arise from time
to time, just as we as individuals have disagreements with our fami-
lies and neighbors. But as long as our mutual relations are based upon

Venezuela  1205
sound policies, he said, and as long as there is the will on both sides
to understand the other’s problems and to work together toward their
solution, there is no reason for pessimism.
Having expressed the opinion that nothing basically was wrong
with relations between Venezuela and the United States, Ambassador
Santaella turned to several outstanding problems that had arisen. He
repeated his statement that Venezuela was in a difficult period of transi-
tion, and would need the firm moral and political support of the United
States. He mentioned the problem that had resulted from the admission
into the United States of Perez Jimenez and Estrada. Stating that he did
not want to get involved in a discussion of the legal aspects of the case,
which he understood, he reiterated the depth of feeling in Venezuela
against the two men. He said that not even Beria nor the Gestapo had
committed greater atrocities than those perpetrated on the people of
Venezuela by Perez Jimenez and Estrada. Although the Ambassador
had been arrested three times during the Perez Jimenez regime, he did
not consider himself a particular victim of it. He recalled that his law
partner had been arrested and forced to witness the slow torture and
finally the murder of another prisoner by “Bachiller” Castro and other
notorious SN inquisitors. In view of these and other equally serious
crimes and atrocities, Dr. Santaella said, the Venezuelan people find
it hard to understand why the United States, with its democratic tra-
ditions, permits Perez Jimenez to live in luxury in Miami and openly
flaunt his wealth. He said it would not have been so bad if the two
men had gone quietly to live on ranches in North Dakota, but being
in Florida, so close to Central and South America, not only made their
residence in the United States more conspicuous but had caused many
rumors to circulate about their plotting to regain power, with the acqui-
escence or even the assistance of the United States. He said stories
continued to circulate of their connections in high places in the United
States Government, and it was known in Venezuela that Perez Jimenez
and Estrada had met with their supporters in New York during the Vice
President’s visit to Venezuela, ostensibly to engineer a revolt against
the Provisional Government.
Mr. Rubottom briefly outlined the reasons why visas were issued
to the two men, reiterating that they had both been required to execute
statements that while in the United States they would not engage in
activities directed against the Venezuelan Government. He emphasized
they had no entrée here at all; he said he had no personal sympathy
whatsoever for either man; as a matter of fact, he had not even met
them. He told the Ambassador that he and others who understood the
situation could perform a real service by explaining the facts of the case
to those who did not understand. Just as we are attempting to play
down in the United States the incidents that occurred during the Vice

President’s visit to Venezuela, so should responsible Venezuelans make
every effort to play down the fact that we had admitted Perez Jimenez
and Estrada. Dr. Santaella agreed that it might be worthwhile to do so,
but said it would be political suicide for him or any other prominent
person to attempt to explain publicly why Perez Jimenez and Estrada
had been admitted to the United States, since everything concerning
the two men had political dynamite. Mr. Rubottom recalled the state-
ments made by the Vice President at his press conference in Caracas,
pointing out that no request had been received from Venezuela for the
extradition of the two men, and that it was up to Venezuela to make the
next move. Dr. Santaella replied that he would do all he could to expe-
dite the legal process necessary to transmit a request for extradition.
Although he characterized political problems as being paramount,
Dr. Santaella also described the oil import problem as most serious.
He had discussed the problem at some length in Venezuela last week;
some thought the restrictions the United States had imposed were
good for Venezuela, since it enabled her to conserve her oil resources.
Mr. Rubottom agreed that there was much validity to that point of view,
since oil did not deteriorate if left in the ground, moreover, the pro-
gram also protected the price Venezuela received for her oil. It would
not benefit Venezuela if the flood of oil in the United States market
increased to such an extent that a higher level of Venezuelan exports of
oil failed, through a decline in price, to produce a comparable increase
in the total revenue received by Venezuela.
Although the Ambassador could see the logic of this argument, he
did not agree with it. He had talked last week to several leading indus-
trialists in Venezuela, all of whom felt that the Venezuelan Government
should provide them with greater protection against imports from the
United States to compensate for the protectionist policy implemented
by the United States against imports of Venezuelan oil. Mr. Rubottom
expressed the hope that nothing would be done to negate the
Supplementary Trade Agreement, which benefitted Venezuela no less
than the United States. As the head of the United States team which
had negotiated the agreement in 1952, Mr. Rubottom said he recalled
vividly the difficulties that had to be overcome to obtain permission to
high gravity oil. With the surge of protectionism in the United States at
the present time, he felt that if the agreement were reopened for nego-
tiation it would not be possible to provide an equivalent concession
on imports of petroleum. Dr. Santaella seemed to appreciate this, but
thought some formula could be evolved under the agreement to pro-
vide Venezuela with compensation for the action taken by the United
States in restricting oil imports. He admitted that he did not know of
any formula that would accomplish this.

Venezuela  1207
In departing, Ambassador Santaella thanked Mr. Rubottom and
his associates for their courtesy and assistance during the brief time he
was in Washington. Mr. Rubottom told him he would look forward to
seeing him again, either in Washington or Caracas; in the meantime, he
said, he would be pleased to do anything he could for the Ambassador.
Dr. Santaella said he was departing from Washington early Thursday
morning, May 22, since President Larrazábal was anxious for him to
arrive as soon as possible.
VE–11.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,
Washington, June 5, 19581
Washington, June 5, 1958.
SUBJECT
VENEZUELA—Petroleum Matters.
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
Dr. Carlos Perez de la Cova, Minister of Mines and Hydrocarbons of Venezuela
Dr. Eduardo Acosta, Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires
Dr. Morales Crespo, Director of Political Economy, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Venezuela
Sr. Alirio Parra, Petroleum Counselor, Embassy of Venezuela
ARA - Assistant Secretary Rubottom
The Minister conveyed to the Secretary greetings and best wishes
on behalf of himself and the provisional governing Junta of Venezuela.
He expressed appreciation for the consultations undertaken by the
United States with his Government in respect of the voluntary oil
import restriction program resulting from the current slack in demand
for petroleum and petroleum products, referring first to a visit of
Mr. Rubottom to Caracas last February and then to the technical talks
carried out by Messrs. Mann, Carson and Thompson ten days later.
He said that his Government was aware of the world-­wide problem
faced by the oil industry and had felt that the consultations had been
mutually beneficial. He recalled that the Government of Venezuela
was confronted by many serious problems of both an economic and
Assistant Secretary Rubottom; approved in the Executive Secretariat.

political nature as it undertook to lead the Venezuelan people back to
democratic constitutional government. While his Government had not
entirely agreed with the U.S. position, the talks had made it easier to
explain to the Venezuelan people the reasons for the U.S. program.
The Minister then alluded to the steps taken by the United States
Government since the March consultations, (1) additional restrictions
on crude oil imports and extension of the Buy American Act2 to the
purchase of petroleum products by U.S. Government agencies, both
of the inclusion of certain refined products on the list of items to be
restricted for import into the United States.
The Minister said that he had been instructed to propose to the
Secretary that the United States Government issue a statement of
intent to take no further restrictive measures affecting the importation
of petroleum products. He said that he had also been asked to raise
the question of revising the list No.1 of the U.S.-Venezuelan Trade
Agreement, i.e., the items on which Venezuela has granted concessions
to the United States, as compensation for the reduced oil exports to the
United States due to the U.S. voluntary restrictions.
The Secretary then carefully analyzed the approach which the
United States has taken to the subject of trade with Venezuela and
the other nations with which it maintains friendly relations, making
the following principal points: (1) his own philosophy was perhaps
best expressed in a statement in which he collaborated when he was
a member of the Commission for the Establishment of a Durable and
Just Peace on Sept. 18, 1941 in which the principle was clearly set forth
that the U.S. should consult with its trading partners prior to taking
any important steps affecting their joint trade in order to avoid as far
as possible damaging the economy of its friends; (2) governments, by
their very nature, are expected to defend the interests of their own cit-
izens and, unless this is done, they will be unable to govern; (3) at the
same time that the domestic interests are being considered, govern-
ments should take into account the economic and political effects of
important decisions on their trading partners who must also look after
the interest of their own people, and this the United States has under-
taken to do; (4) one of the best examples of our dedication to the prin-
ciple of free and unrestricted trade is the reciprocal trade legislation,
extension of which is now being debated in the Congress; (5) no nation
in the world has taken as enlightened an attitude toward trade as the
United States, nor has any other nation ever shown as much concern

Venezuela  1209
for the well being and the interests of its trading partners as has the
United States; (6) the United States, in its dealings with Venezuela, has
shown just as much consideration for the Venezuelan oil industry as it
has shown for its own; (7) he hoped that the Government of Venezuela
would recognize the extent to which the United States has defended
the Venezuelan oil industry, in the face of very strong efforts to restrict
imports to a far greater degree than they are presently being restricted
under the voluntary plan, and that it would interpret and explain this
action on our part to the Venezuelan people; (8) only 25 years ago the
world saw the United States enact the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, and later
withdraw from the London Economic Conference, to its own detri-
ment and that of the rest of the world; (9) this government is now scru-
pulously avoiding that kind of action and is, in fact, doing everything
possible to consider the economic interests of its allies, although obvi-
ously, in a time of economic recession, all nations must share a part
of the burden. The Secretary told the Minister that the actions taken
by this Government on March 25 were designed simply to equalize
the burden between the foreign producers of oil and that imposed on
United States producers.
The Secretary declared that he simply could not approve any state-
ment that would suggest that the United States would take no further
steps to restrict petroleum imports. He underlined his hope that this
would be the case, and stressed that all of the American people were
working hard to bring an end to the economic recession and that we
now hoped that the upturn was about here. Nevertheless, he was in no
position to make the kind of commitment for the future requested by
Dr. Perez de la Cova.
The Secretary said that he was not acquainted with the techni-
cal question raised by the Minister in regard to the U.S.-Venezuelan
Trade Agreement, but was sure that there were officials in the
Department who could take up this matter with him. Dr. Perez
de la Cova recalled that Mr. Rubottom had been head of the U.S.
negotiating team in 1952 when the Treaty had been consummated.
It was agreed that the Minister would discuss this question with
Mr. Rubottom and those officers in the Department responsible for
economic affairs.3
3 The points made here by Dr. Perez de la Cova regarding the petroleum issue were
reported in a conversation he had with Douglas Dillon, the Deputy Under Secretary of
State for Economic Affairs, on June 6. That conversation was recorded in a memorandum

VE–12.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs (Sprague)1
Washington, August 4, 1958.
SUBJECT
Defense Request for Eximbank to Administer Venezuelan Military Credit
Mr. Waugh has called my attention to Mr. Shuff’s letter to him of
the Eximbank to service a military credit being extended to Venezuela
under section 103(c) of the Mutual Security Act.
For your information, I am enclosing a copy of a memorandum
to Mr. Waugh, dated today, in which I state the view that it appears to
be desirable for the Department of Defense to administer this type of
transaction.3 You will recall that on a previous occasion the Eximbank
handled a similar case, that of servicing an MAP loan to Peru in 1955 to
cover the construction of two submarines in the U.S. under the terms of
Section 505 of the Act. Section 505 at that time specifically required the
involvement of the Eximbank, but its use to cover the Peruvian trans-
action actually led to the request for the authority the Executive branch
now has by the terms of Section 103(c), under which MAP credits are
almost exclusively extended and which does not require Eximbank
participation.
The very nature of military credits is such that they immediately
conflict with the Bank’s central purpose of encouraging and assisting in
the development of national economies. For the Bank to engage, even
to the limited extent of acting as agent for the Department of Defense,
in the administration of military credits would tend to compromise its
essential character and serve to make more difficult the Bank’s pol-
icy of not rendering loans for other than purely economic purposes.
Moreover, to a greater or lesser degree, military transactions inherently
carry political overtones and may even be caught up in international
crises and incidents. It would be unwise to involve the Eximbank
unnecessarily in a field of considerable political sensitivity.
In view of these considerations, as I have also set forth in the
attached memorandum, I am inclined to conclude that it would be
by Athol H. Ellis of the Office of the Special Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination
2 Not found in Department of State files.
3 The referenced memorandum was not found with the source text.

Venezuela  1211
more desirable for the Department of Defense to administer all military
credits, including the type represented by the Venezuelan transaction.
Douglas Dillon
VE–13.
National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, September 9, 1958.
THE VENEZUELAN SITUATION AND PROSPECTS2
THE PROBLEM
To analyze the political situation in Venezuela and to estimate the
prospects for the establishment of a constitutional regime and the prob-
able political character of such a regime.
CONCLUSIONS
1. Venezuela’s present political situation reflects the strains inher-
ent in a transition, in one generation, from an oligarchic social order
toward a democratic welfare state. Long-­term dictatorships have been
the rule in that country, except for a brief interval of democracy, 1941–
2. In 1948 the elected Acción Democrática government was over-
thrown by a military coup because it attempted to subordinate the mil-
itary to the civil power. The Pérez Jiménez dictatorship which followed
it was overthrown in January 1958 when the armed forces withdrew
their support in the face of a universal civilian demand enforced by a
general strike. (Paras. 14–17)
3. The stated mission of the present ruling Junta is to bring about
the establishment of a democratic constitutional government through
1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. According to a note on the
cover sheet, this estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The
Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff participated in its prepara-
tion. The members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in the estimate on
September 9, 1958, with the exception of the Atomic Energy Commission representative
and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because
the subject was outside their jurisdiction.
2 The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, is classified. For
Official Use Only. [Footnote is in the source text.]

elections now scheduled for November. The chief threat to the accom-
plishment of its mission is that of a military coup to prevent the return
4. All political parties in Venezuela are supporting the Junta, oppos-
ing military intervention in political affairs, and demanding effective
democratic government with full civil rights. Their solidarity and the
threat of a new general strike have hitherto deterred any effective coup
5. “National unity” will be the watch-­word of the Venezuelan
political parties as long as there remains any real or supposed threat
of a military coup. The major parties regard the possible restoration of
military dictatorship as a more serious danger than that of Communist
penetration and are unwilling to forego the contribution which the
Communists can make to a united civilian resistance. In these cir-
cumstances, the Communists are ensured the opportunity to func-
tion freely as a legitimate party and are shielded from political attack.
6. The Communists probably represent no more than five percent
of the Venezuelan electorate. They exert a disproportionate influence
through their infiltration of key positions in organized labor, the press,
the teaching profession, and student organizations. They have also
achieved some success in their efforts to infiltrate the government and
the major leftist parties. In national politics, however, their influence
is not comparable to that of the major leftist, but non-communist, par-
ties—Acción Democrática, COPEI, and URD—­which together represent
7. Since the July crisis, the likelihood of a concerted effort on the
part of the military to seize power appears to have receded, although
there was an uncoordinated and abortive coup attempt on 7 September
and the situation between military and civilian elements is now tense.
The military are still apprehensive regarding the political trend, but are
manifestly reluctant to take on a united and determined civilian resis-
tance. On their part, the Junta and the parties fear a coup and will prob-
ably take care not to provoke one, although they will also continue their
efforts to improve their position vis-­a-­vis the military. (Paras. 36–41)
8. The maintenance of “national unity” is precarious. It will
require the nomination of a single presidential candidate agreed upon
by the three major parties and also acceptable to the military. The
selection of such a candidate will be a very difficult and delicate mat-
ter. (Paras. 42–45)
9. Any representative Venezuelan government will conform in
general to the nationalistic programs of the three major parties (AD,
COPEI, and URD). In particular, such a government will seek a greater

Venezuela  1213
10. In Venezuela strong popular feeling holds the United States
accountable for undue intimacy with the detested Pérez Jiménez dicta-
torship and for a supposed general preference for dictatorships in the
Caribbean area. Any foreseeable government, however, will desire to
maintain friendly relations with the United States, though remaining
highly sensitive to any apparent U.S. lack of regard for Venezuelan
democracy and sovereignty. (Para. 54)
11. A democratic Venezuela will continue to side generally with the
West against the Soviet Bloc, in the UN and elsewhere, but this support
will not be dependable in situations in which Western imperialism in
underdeveloped countries is alleged. (Para. 53)
DISCUSSION
ESSENTIAL BACKGROUND
12. Venezuela’s present political situation reflects the strains inher-
ent in a transition, in one generation, from a tradition of dictatorship
and an oligarchic social order toward a democratic welfare state. Until
as recently as 1935 the country was ruled by a succession of long-­term
dictators. When the 27-­year dictatorship of Juan Vicente Gómez ended
with his natural death in 1935, the Army was the only organized body
available to assume the direction of public affairs. Gómez’ immedi-
ate successors, Generals Lopez Contreras (1935–1941) and Medina
Angarita (1941–1945), were not radical reformers, but they did desire
to liberalize political and social institutions. This liberalization released
forces demanding more radical political and social change.
13. In 1945 the Medina government was overthrown by a group
of younger officers impatient to succeed their elders, acting in combi-
nation with Acción Democrática (AD), a civilian group advocating more
rapid and extensive social and political reforms. Under the leadership
of Rómulo Betancourt (AD), the ensuing provisional government initi-
ated sweeping constitutional and electoral changes. In the subsequent
presidential election (in 1947), the AD candidate, Rómulo Gallegos, was
credited with 75 percent of the apparently free popular vote.
14. The social democratic program of Acción Democrática was gen-
erally comparable to that of the British Labor Party—­but, against the
Venezuelan background, that seemed radical indeed to conservative
business and landholding interests which denounced AD as commu-
nistic. On the other hand, the Communists, tolerated by AD as a mat-
ter of democratic principle and as allies against conservative reaction,
regarded AD as their principal rival for popular support and for the con-
trol of mass organizations. Acción Democrática withstood these antago-
nisms, but was undone when, emboldened by its popular mandate, it
undertook to subordinate the military to the civil power. Foreseeing the
loss of its special privileges, concerned by the radical tendencies of AD,

and supported by the civilian elements which shared this concern, the
same military group which had brought Acción Democrática to power
proceeded to overthrow the Gallegos government, in November 1948.
15. The military junta which took power in 1948 had no program
other than to destroy Acción Democrática and to ensure its own continu-
ing control of the country. Although initially welcomed by the social
elements and political parties opposed to Acción Democrática, it was
unable to secure any substantial and enduring civilian political sup-
port. Seeking to legitimize its rule, the Junta, in 1952, held an election
for a constituent assembly, expecting that pro government candidates
would be returned by a people grateful for its beneficent administra-
tion. When it became apparent that, instead, the assembly would be
controlled by parties demanding a return to democratic government,
a news blackout was imposed, the election returns were falsified, and
Col. Marcos Pérez Jiménez assumed the presidency “by decision of the
armed forces.” Although Pérez Jiménez subsequently went through
the form of a “constitutional” election by his hand-­picked assembly,
his regime was a scarcely veiled military dictatorship under which all
political parties were eventually suppressed or stultified.
16. Constantly increasing petroleum income enabled the Pérez
Jiménez regime to undertake spectacular programs of public works
and of industrial and agricultural development, but these resulted in no
substantial improvement in the living conditions of the masses of the
people. All elements of society were antagonized by the ostentatious
benefits conferred upon the favored few, and by the ruthless police state
methods of the regime. In 1957 the approaching expiration of Pérez
Jiménez’ “constitutional” term stimulated opposition activity. On May
Day the Archbishop of Caracas ventured to denounce the pretense that
Venezuela was a workers’ paradise. The suppressed political parties
began to concert their activities through a clandestine Junta Patriótica.
Even within the military establishment conspiracy against the regime
began to develop. In December Pérez Jiménez re-elected himself to a
second five year term by means of a yes or no plebiscite, but this totali-
tarian proceeding made his opponents only the more determined to be
rid of him before inauguration day.
17. The regime itself precipitated the revolution by arresting the
commander of the Army, Brigadier General Hugo Fuentes, the second-­
ranking Air Force officer, Colonel Jesús Maria Castro León, and other
officers for conspiring against the government. A disorganized coup-­
attempt by their supporters was easily suppressed. Despite this victory
of the regime, respectable civilian professional groups were stimulated
to demand a restoration of democratic liberties. In consequence, there
were recurring crises between the regime and its military supporters.
The climactic manifestation of popular hostility was a general strike

Venezuela  1215
organized by the Junta Patriótica. On the night of 22 January, the second
day of the strike, the military told the dictator that he must go.
MAJOR ELEMENTS IN THE EXISTING POLITICAL SITUATION
18. The Junta del Gobierno. Venezuela is now ruled by a Junta com-
posed of three military and two civilian members and dominated by its
president, Rear Admiral Wolfgang Larrazábal.3 The Junta exercises the
functions of the presidency; there is, in addition, a cabinet composed of
men selected primarily for their technical competence, rather than as
party representatives. The stated mission of the Junta is to bring about
the re-­establishment of democratic constitutional government through
elections now scheduled for November.4 The chief threat to the accom-
plishment of its mission is that of a military coup to prevent the return
of Acción Democrática to power. In military and some civilian circles,
Larrazábal is strongly suspected of unduly favoring that party, as well
as of unwise leniency toward the Communists.
19. The Political Parties: General. All Venezuelan parties are of recent
origin: the Communist party was organized clandestinely in 1931; the
oldest non-Communist parties date only from the election of 1941. The
programs of the three major parties (AD, COPEI, and URD)5 are strikingly
similar, being distinguishable only by minor differences of emphasis. They
are socialistic and nationalistic, favoring social welfare measures, varying
degrees of government direction of the economy, and greater Venezuelan
control of basic industries. The minor parties of the right-center show
strong traits of mid-19th century liberalism. All parties are supporting the
Junta, opposing military intervention in political affairs, and demanding
effective democratic government with full civil rights.
20. Inasmuch as there has been no free election in Venezuela since
1948, the relative strength of the various parties is difficult to estimate.
Some 40 percent of the electorate has come of age since that date. Chiefly
on the basis of the consensus among their political rivals, we estimate
that AD represents at least half of the electorate and COPEI about a
ernment was over thrown by the Army and Acción Democrática, he was arrested, but he
was Commandant of the Naval Forces by the end of the AD regime. The succeeding
military Junta thought it expedient to send him away, to be naval attache in Washington.
In the last months of the Péréz Jiménez regime he was president of the Circulo Militar
(Armed Forces Club), an assignment which antagonized him by disappointing his naval
ambitions, but which he used to establish contacts with officers of all the services. He
assumed the presidency of the Junta on the basis of military seniority. [Footnote is in the
source text.]
4 These elections may be postponed, for administrative or political reasons.
[Footnote is in the source text.]
5 Acción Democrática, Partido Social Cristiano Copel, and Unión Republicana Democrática.
[Footnote is in the source text.]

quarter. The remaining popular support is divided among URD, the
Communists, the relatively conservative Integratión Republicana, and six
minute political groups, probably in that order, with URD far in the
lead of the others.
21. Acción Democrática, headed by Rómulo Betancourt, is conceded
to be the largest party in Venezuela and claims to be the majority party.
It probably is the majority party in the chief urban centers, but not in
the smaller towns and the countryside. It seeks membership at all lev-
els of society, but relies on its strong labor support for the bulk of its
votes. The party is roughly comparable to the social democratic parties
of Western Europe. It advocates industrialization and agrarian reform,
a broadening of the economic base to lessen the nation’s dependence
on petroleum revenues, and a larger share for Venezuela in the prof-
its of the petroleum industry. While recognizing the importance of
foreign private capital in Venezuela’s economic development, it pro-
poses to regulate such investment more closely in the national interest
and favors gradual Venezuelan private or governmental acquisition
of majority control or ownership of Venezuela’s natural resources and
basic industries.6 In world affairs, Acción Democrática sides with the
West as against the Soviet Bloc. At the same time, it bitterly resents the
supposed role of the United States in support of the Pérez Jiménez dic-
tatorship and other dictatorships in the area, is strongly anti-­imperialist
in sentiment, and advocates greater Latin American unity in dealing
with the United States.
22. There is in Acción Democrática a younger element impatient of
the older (Betancourt) leadership and disposed to proceed more impet-
uously toward the realization of party objectives. The difference is one
of tactics rather than of purpose. The younger element, conscious of
the party’s popular strength, would forego efforts to reach agreement
with other parties regarding a joint presidential candidate and would
present a party candidate, at the risk of provoking a military coup.
Indeed, they would welcome a showdown with the military rather
than avoid it. Past experience has taught Betancourt and his generation
greater discretion. At the recent party convention, the Betancourt group
demonstrated its continued control of the party machinery. Therefore
the party, as such, will probably continue to maneuver with circum-
spection. In frustration and impatience, the younger element may tend
increasingly to take its lead from the more aggressive Communists.
23. Partido Social Cristiano Copei. COPEI, led by Rafael Caldera,
resembles the Christian social democratic parties of Western Europe.
It appeals to practicing Catholics in all walks of life. Originally the
6 U.S. private investment in Venezuela is estimated at more than three billion dol-
lars, of which two-­thirds is in the petroleum industry. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Venezuela  1217
predominant influence in the party was that of rural conservatives in
western Venezuela, but since 1949 the reformist segment in the Caracas
area has gained control. The Church’s increasing emphasis on social
action to improve the status of the workers may enable Caldera to hold
COPEI’s rural Catholic support while increasing the party’s attrac-
tion for urban elements. COPEI’s program is much the same as Acción
Democrática’s, the essential difference being that between COPEI’s
Catholic approach and AD’s secularism.
24. Unión Republicana Democrática (URD), led by Jovito Villalba,
represents primarily urban middle class elements: intellectuals, pro-
fessional men, and industrialists. Its main area of popular support is
in eastern Venezuela. The party program is similar to that of Acción
Democrática, but, like COPEI, it favors less government ownership of
basic industries. In the abortive election of 1952, from which Acción
Democrática was excluded, URD apparently attracted a heavy propor-
tion of the AD vote, but it probably could not hold that support in com-
petition with Acción Democrática itself.
25. Partido Comunista Venezolano (PCV). The Venezuelan
Communist Party was organized clandestinely in 1931, emerged as a
legitimate political party in 1945, was driven underground by Pérez
Jiménez, and has now reemerged under the leadership of Gustavo
Machado Morales. The party is numerically weak in comparison
with the three major parties of the left (AD, COPEI, and URD), but it
exerts considerable influence through its infiltration of key positions in
organized labor, the press, the teaching profession, and student orga-
nizations. It has also achieved some success in its efforts to infiltrate
the government and the major leftist parties. Its most immediate and
pressing objectives are to preserve its present freedom of action and
to prepare a firm base from which to influence future governments.
The PCV’s public efforts are directed primarily toward achieving
respectability and acceptance as the most patriotic and democratic of
Venezuelan parties. Its stated program is a composite of those of Acción
Democrática, COPEI, and URD, but more stridently nationalistic and
anti-­imperialist. It is most vociferous in its support of the concept of
“national unity”—­which is, in effect, the concept of a popular front
against military reaction. However, the party remains fundamentally
hostile toward Acción Democrática, which it recognizes as its most effec-
tive rival for popular and labor leadership.
26. Integración Republicana (IR), formed in 1958, appeals to those
independent liberals who are repelled by the radicalism of AD and URD
and the supposed clericalism of COPEI. Its own program is a slightly
moderated version of the programs of those parties, but its leaders are
of a more conservative type. It has attracted some men of national stat-
ure, chiefly businessmen, lawyers, and intellectuals.

27. The Junta Patriótica. Having functioned successfully as the clan-
destine coordinating committee of the four parties conspiring to over-
throw the Pérez Jiménez dictatorship (AD, COPEI, URD, and PCV),
the Junta Patriótica has come into the open and has enlarged its mem-
bership to include representatives of all social groups, including labor,
students, the Church, and the business community. The Junta’s concern
is to preserve that spirit of “national unity” among civilian elements
which is deemed essential to prevent a recurrence of military dictator-
ship.7 Its sanction is its capability to renew the general strike which
brought down Pérez Jiménez, a capability which it demonstrated anew
during the Castro León crisis in July and again in September.
28. Organized Labor. Labor unions are an important political force
in Venezuela, although less than ten percent of the labor force is orga-
nized. The principal unions are concentrated in the chief urban areas
and the oilfields. AD, COPEI, URD, and the Communists have all
been active in labor leadership; most unions are affiliated with one or
another of those parties. Conversely, the parties are highly sensitive to
labor sentiment.
29. The Pérez Jiménez regime took severe repressive action against
most AD, COPEI, and URD labor unions. In contrast, its attitude toward
certain Communist unions was relatively lenient: they were even allowed
to maintain open contact with the CTAL and WFTU, Communist inter-
national labor federations, throughout the period of the dictatorship.
The Pérez Jiménez regime also employed “former” Communist leaders
in the government-sponsored unions with which it sought to replace
those which had been suppressed. The explanation given was that these
Communists were useful informants. It is also notable that the regime
feared Acción Democrática more than it did Communism and was willing
to use Communist hostility toward AD for its own ends. Many AD labor
leaders in exile gained further experience working against Communism
for ORIT.8
30. The favor of the Pérez Jiménez dictatorship temporarily
improved the Communists’ relative position in Venezuelan labor lead-
ership. Since the fall of the dictatorship, they have been able to exploit
this advantage. However, it was the surviving AD-­sympathetic unions
which took the lead in organizing labor resistance to the dictatorship,
and, with the return of AD and COPEI labor leaders from exile and
prison, these unions have regained the leading position in the labor
7 In this the Junta has before it the example of the Liberal and Conservative parties
of neighboring Colombia which, despite a long history of often bloody mutual antag-
onism were able to combine to put an end to military dictatorship and to re-­establish
democratic constitutional processes. [Footnote is in the source text.]
8 Organisacion Regional Interamericana de Trabajadores, the anti-Communist competi-
tor of the Communist CTAL in Latin America. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Venezuela  1219
movement. At the recent national convention of the reorganized
Federation of Petroleum Workers relative party strength is estimated to
COPEI, 6 percent.
31. Student and Youth Groups. Through active participation in the
overthrow of Pérez Jiménez, youth and student groups have gained a
significant voice in national politics and have thereby been greatly stim-
ulated and emboldened. The four leftist parties have long-­established
youth movements, but the more effective organizations are those
of university and high school students, which cut across party lines.
Acción Democrática has apparently developed the strongest influence
among the 7,000 students at the Central University in Caracas, with
the PCV second and COPEI third. However, the executive council of
the University’s student federation is composed of five Communists,
three AD adherents, and one COPEI member. Outside of Caracas, the
COPEI youth are the most active. In general, youth groups tend to be
more extreme than the parties to which they adhere and little subject to
party control.
32. The Catholic Church. The Church has risen in popular esteem
through its recent emphasis on social action to improve the lot of the
working people and through the role of the Archbishop in events,
preceding the overthrow of Pérez Jiménez. In general, however,
Venezuelans are indifferent to religion and highly sensitive to clerical-
ism in politics, a charge which COPEI seeks to avoid. The Church’s
direct influence is therefore limited, but it is at present the most outspo-
ken anti-Communist voice in Venezuela.
THE ARMED FORCES
33. The Venezuelan armed forces consist of the Army (14,500 men,
mostly conscripts); the National Guard, a professional constabulary
three destroyers and six coastal destroyers operational; the Air Force,
125 aircraft in operational units.
34. Leading military officers have shown increasing concern
regarding the upsurge of Communist activity following the fall of
Pérez Jiménez and the soft attitude of the Junta toward Communism
(in consonance with the principle of “national unity”). Although this
Communist activity is serious enough, it is likely that the military are
actually more concerned about the resurgence of Acción Democrática.
Despite the fundamental antagonism between AD and the PCV, the dis-
tinction is probably dim in the eyes of the military, who are most imme-
diately concerned to avoid the subordination which Acción Democrática
attempted to impose on them in 1948.

35. This issue came to a crisis on 9 July, when Brigadier General
Castro León,9 then Minister of Defense, privately demanded of the
Junta that it expel both Acción Democrática and Communist party mem-
bers from the administration. After eleven days filled with rumors and
excitement, he repeated this demand to the cabinet. He was thereupon
dismissed by the Junta, but refused to vacate his office. Instead, he solic-
ited the support of COPEI and URD for a military coup. They reported
this approach to the Junta Patriótica, which immediately invoked a
general strike. In the face of this situation, an all-­night meeting of rep-
resentative officers refused to support Castro León in a coup and he
was forced to submit to the Junic del Gobierno, which sent him out of
the country. At the same time the Junta refused popular demands for a
wholesale purge of the armed forces which probably would have pro-
voked a military coup.
36. With the departure of Castro León, Col. Jesús Manuel Pérez
Morales (Army), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, became the puta-
tive leader of the armed forces. He is esteemed an abler man than Castro
León, and therefore potentially more dangerous to the regime. At the
same time, he apparently headed a “wait and see” school among the
military and was at least contingently loyal to the government. On 24
August Pérez Morales was summarily removed from office. This move
by the Junta to gain control of the armed forces might have precipi-
tated a coup, but had no such effect. Pérez Morales himself has publicly
adopted a cooperative attitude, describing his relief as routine.
37. Castro León and Pérez Morales have been replaced, respec-
tively, by Brigadier General Josue Lopez Henriquez and Colonel Régulo
Pacheco Vivas. Neither of them appears to be a threat to the government.
However, many officers remaining in service may well feel disgruntled
and insecure. In addition, an impressive number of outstanding officers
are now in exile with strong motivations against the Junta. A potential
leader of the latter group is Lt. Col. Martin Parada, former Chief of Staff
of the Air Force.
existed only at the sufferance of the military, it is commonly supposed
that the armed forces still have the power to make and break govern-
ments at will. This supposition, however, is doubtful in present circum-
stances. The rank-­and-­file of the Army are ill-­trained and unreliable
conscripts who might well refuse to impose the will of their officers on
9 Castro León, 5C, comes of a family of poor farmers and has been described as
“rank happy.” He conspired against the Betancourt (AD) regime in 1946 and was a stal-
wart supporter of Pérez Jiménez in the internal politics of the military Junta of 1948–1952.
Nevertheless, he was a leader of the abortive military conspiracy against Pérez Jiménez
in late 1957. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Venezuela  1221
a civil population united in its resistance. In any case, an all­out battle
between the armed forces and the Junta Patriótica would be a sangui-
nary affair, not to be lightly undertaken. It is notable that the armed
forces declined to fight to save Pérez Jiménez in January or to support
Castro León in July, though the Army and Air Force officers were prob-
ably preponderantly sympathetic with the latter, and that nothing hap-
pened when Pérez Morales was relieved.
39. On 7 September there was an abortive coup attempt led by offi-
cers exiled in July and supported by elements of the Military Police.
The attempt was broken up by the Army; the armed forces in general
remained loyal to the government. Subsequently, however, there was
a mob attack on the Military Police barracks which resulted in civil-
ian casualties. The ominous aspect of this affair is that Betancourt
and Villalba were proved unable to control the mob, once it had been
aroused. The general strike provoked by this coup attempt was main-
tained until the government undertook to take drastic action (such
as it did not take in July) to prevent the recurrence of such attempts.
Implementation of this undertaking in the existing tense situation
could lead to an allout conflict between military and civilian elements,
although the Junta will certainly seek to avoid that result.
POLITICAL PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
40. The Communist Problem. Since the July crisis, Admiral Larrazábal
and the leaders of the major parties have all taken occasion to declare
their lack of sympathy with Communism, but they have also supported
the right of the Communists to participate in Venezuelan politics as
a legitimate political party. It is unlikely that they regard Communist
activities as a serious danger in comparison with the possible resto-
ration of a military dictatorship. Admiral Larrazábal, in particular, has
expressed a remarkable confidence in the patriotism of Venezuelan
Communists, though perhaps only for domestic political effect. It is
unlikely that the leaders of the major parties have any such illusions,
but they regard the threat of a military coup as the real and immediate
danger and, so long as that threat remains, they will be unwilling to
forego the potential contribution of the effective Communist organi-
zation to a united civilian resistance. Consequently, there is no early
prospect of effective action to limit Communist activity in Venezuela,
at least not until a democratic constitutional government has been
securely installed in office. On the other hand, the major parties will
continue to compete with the Communists for influence in labor and
student organizations and for popular political support.
41. The Possibility of an Early Military Coup. Since the Castro León crisis,
the likelihood of a concerted effort on the part of the military to seize power
has apparently receded, although the situation between military and civil-
ian elements is now especially tense as a result of the abortive coup attempt

on 7 September. The present situation is a stand-­off. A substantial num-
ber of military officers remain disgusted with the Junta and apprehensive
regarding the political trend, but are manifestly reluctant to take on a united
and determined civilian resistance. The Junta and the parties, on their part,
fear a coup and will probably take care not to provoke one, although they
will continue their efforts to improve their position vis-­a-­vis the military.
If there should be a break in “national unity”, perhaps in conse-
quence of the forthcoming election—­specifically, if the military could
obtain the political support of COPEI or URD—­the disaffected officers
would probably attempt to seize power and establish a more acceptable
regime. Even without such political support, they might act in desper-
ation if they were to conclude that a civil government dominated by
Acción Democrática was otherwise inevitable.
42. The November Election. Great uncertainty still surrounds the
manner in which the forthcoming presidential election will be con-
ducted. The maintenance of “national unity” will require the nomina-
tion of a single candidate agreed upon by the three major parties (as
was done in Colombia). Discretion would require that this candidate
also be acceptable to the military. Manifestly, the selection of such a
candidate will be a matter of great difficulty and delicacy.
43. It is probable that no candidate could win a free election with-
out the acceptance and support of Acción Democrática. However, AD
is also aware that no AD leader would be acceptable to the military or
even to the other political parties. AD’s objective, then, is probably to
employ its electoral strength to secure the nomination of a sympathetic
candidate not so obviously identified with it as to provoke a military
coup or to antagonize the other parties. AD’s preference for this role is
Admiral Larrazábal, who is receptive to being drafted as a unity can-
didate, but he too is strongly distrusted by the military elements most
likely to attempt a coup, as well as by some civilians.
44. The principal parties are now engaged in complex negotiations
regarding the selection of a joint candidate for the presidency. COPEI,
URD, and IR have combined to propose Dr. Martin Vegas, a distin-
guished physician and IR militant. COPEI has publicly threatened that,
if AD refuses to support Vegas, it will nominate Caldera as a party can-
didate, which would mark the end of “national unity” AD has countered
by offering three alternative proposals: (1) the joint selection of one of
three persons10 as a single candidate; (2) the joint selection one of the
three to run against Vegas, so that the electorate may make the choice;
(3) that the executive power be vested in a council composed Larrazábal,
Betancourt, Caldera, Villalba, and a representative of the business
10 Rafael Pizani, Minister of Education; José Antonio Mayobre, Minister of Finance;
and Carlos Morales, a former Minister of Foreign Affairs. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Venezuela  1223
community, the presidency to rotate among them annually. If the other
parties will not accept any of these alternatives, AD threatens to nominate
its own party candidate. The other parties have rejected AD’s alternatives
and called on it to reconsider Vegas as a unity candidate. It is likely that
AD will continue to maneuver to secure the eventual joint nomination of
Larrazábal as the only available “compromise” candidate. The outcome
cannot be predicted. “National unity” could well break down.
45. Even if a coalition presidential candidate can be agreed upon,
the conduct of a competitive congressional campaign and the subse-
quent selection of a coalition cabinet will subject “national unity” to
great strain.
46. The Longer Term. Assuming that the electoral problem is resolved
and that a civil government composed of a generally accepted presi-
dent and a coalition cabinet is duly installed in early 1959, that govern-
ment will continue to be under the constant threat of a military coup.
That danger will exist as long as the military establishment remains
independent of the civil government. It will be most acute in the event
of a breakdown of “national unity” or of a government attempt to gain
firm control of the military establishment.
47. A securely established constitutional government might take
action to control Communist activities, although it would be unlikely
to outlaw the party without serious provocation. As long as the threat
of a coup remains, however, no effective anti-Communist action by
the government is likely. The Communists will make the most of the
opportunity afforded them to increase their political influence through
the penetration of organized labor, youth groups, political parties, and
the government. The eventual development of a situation like that
in Guatemala in 1954 is possible. However, we believe it unlikely in
Venezuela on account of the greater political experience of the leftist
party leaders and their view of the Communists as rivals.
THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AND PROSPECTS
48. Venezuelan national production, the highest per capita in Latin
America, has increased steadily and rapidly in the postwar period. This
growth reflects a continuous high rate of investment: over 20 percent of
GNP in 1957. Over the years, the petroleum industry has contributed
about one-­third of this investment and government resources (derived
largely from the petroleum industry) another third. The world demand
for Venezuelan petroleum has ensured the country against the foreign
exchange shortages, unmanageable budget deficits, and problems of
inflation which have beset other Latin American countries.
49. Despite these favorable circumstances, the Venezuelan govern-
ment faces serious financial problems inherited from the improvident
Pérez Jiménez regime. Although that regime expanded over half its bud-
get on spectacular public works, notably highways, it also squandered

public funds on unproductive projects, ostentatious high living, and the
enrichment of favored personages. Its favorite industrial projects, a steel
mill and a petrochemicals industry were unsuited to the present stage of
Venezuelan economic development.11 Pérez Jiménez’ rate of expenditure
exceeded even Venezuela’s handsome income. He left unpaid accounts
amounting to over a billion dollars and unfinished projects that will
require further large expenditures before they can go into operation.
50. The present administration is paying off the arrears of its pre-
decessor in part from current revenue, in part from treasury reserves
(which have been drawn down to an unprecedentedly low level), in
part from internal and foreign private loans. It cannot radically curtail
expenditures to fear of increasing the unemployment which has already
become a problem. Its plans call for further retrenchment in some areas,
but increased expenditures on more worthy projects, such as education.
51. The financial predicament of the present government will
intensify political demands for a greater share of petroleum profits. No
party proposes nationalization of the oil industry—­the dependence of
Venezuelan exports on the distributive facilities of the existing compa-
nies is a strong deterrent—­but both Acción Democrática and COPEI have
declared that they will seek a larger share of the profits for Venezuela. No
representative Venezuelan government could follow any other course.
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
52. With the fall of Pérez Jiménez, Venezuela moved from the
camp of the dictatorships into that of the democracies. In consequence,
friendly relations have been reestablished with Argentina, Uruguay,
Chile, and Costa Rica, while relations with the Dominican Republic,
Nicaragua, and Cuba have cooled. Within the Latin American commu-
nity, a democratic Venezuela can be expected to work against dictator-
ships in the Caribbean area, to seek common market agreements, and to
advocate united action in dealing with the United States.
53. In world affairs, Venezuela will continue to side generally with
the West against the Soviet Bloc, in the UN and elsewhere, but this sup-
port will not be dependable in situations in which Western imperial-
ism in underdeveloped countries is alleged. Venezuela is unlikely to
resume diplomatic relations with the Soviet Bloc in the near future, nor
is there likely to be any significant increase in Venezuelan trade with
the Bloc. Venezuelan exports compete with those of the Bloc.
54. In Venezuela, strong popular feeling, manifested in the Nixon
incident, holds the U.S. accountable for undue intimacy with the detested
Pérez Jiménez dictatorship and for a supposed general preference for
11 Because of limited internal demand for their products, these industries would
have to export to prosper, because of a lack of skilled manpower and high costs of pro-
duction, they could not compete in external markets without the support of substantial
government subsidies. [Footnote is in the source text.]

Venezuela  1225
dictatorships in the Caribbean area. There is also a general resentment of
U.S. restrictions on the importation of Venezuelan oil, which have a direct
effect upon Venezuela’s oil-­based economy. The government, however,
and any likely successor government, will desire to maintain friendly rela-
tions with the United States, because of the close economic ties between
the two countries and in order to facilitate readjustment of the division of
petroleum profits. Even so, Venezuelans will remain highly sensitive to any
apparent U.S. lack of regard for Venezuelan democracy and sovereignty.
55. If the present regime in Venezuela or an elected successor
should be overthrown by a military coup, the event would be widely
interpreted, in Venezuela and throughout Latin America, as the result
of U.S. connivance and as confirmation of the supposed U.S. preference
for dictatorships in the area.12
12 An accompanying map of Venezuela is not printed.
VE–14.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 19581
Washington, September 4, 1958.
SUBJECT
Venezuelan Foreign Minister’s Call on Secretary
PARTICIPANTS
The Secretary
Dr. Rene de Sola, Foreign Minister of Venezuela
Mr. Rubottom
The Secretary met with the Venezuelan Foreign Minister in an office
outside the Conference Room prior to this morning’s meeting of the
Foreign Ministers of the American Republics.2 The Foreign Minister said
that he wished simply to call to the Secretary’s attention the following:
1. The Venezuelan Government is under great pressure to revise the
list of items in which the United States obtained concessions of the 1952
revised trade agreement, such as milk and cigarettes. He feels that the
volume of trade in these items is relatively small and that they would
Rubottom.
measures for hemispheric economic cooperation.

be willing to offer substitutes for them in private negotiations. Most of
their milk imports, he said, come from Europe anyway and they are
suffering real hardship in the cigarette industry and need relief.
2. Venezuela would like to arrange for permanent consultation
with the United States on problems relating to oil imports. They are
greatly concerned about the proposed pipeline construction in Canada
recommended by the Borden Commission there and would be pre-
pared to offer concessions to Canada if this would cause that country to
desist in its plan. They are sure that Venezuelan oil would be cheaper
than oil brought from West Canada via pipeline to the eastern area of
the country. They would like to have three-­way consultations on the oil
problem with the United States and Canada.
3. Venezuela is concerned about the continued presence of Perez
Jimenez in the United States. This gives certain elements in his country
a chance to criticize the United States unduly and it would help in our
relations if he were to move on or if we were to deny him residence
here. The Attorney General of Venezuela, the Comptroller General and
the Minister of Justice3 are all engaged in investigations of his nefarious
activities while chief of state. A report is expected soon.
3 Dr. Andres Aguilar Mawdsley.
VE–15.
Memorandum of a Conversation1
Caracas, December 14, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Sr. Rómulo Betancourt, President–Elect2
Ambassador Edward J. Sparks
Mr. Charles R. Burrows, Minister–Counselor
Following the delayed receipt of the Department’s telegram #350 of
by Burrows, and transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 490 from
Caracas, December 16, 1958.
3 The referenced telegram instructed the Ambassador to express the Department’s
congratulations on Betancourt’s election and to explain that an informal visit to the
United States by Betancourt was not feasible in the pre-­inaugural period due to time

Venezuela  1227
ment was arranged through President-­elect Betancourt’s Secretary to
meet with Betancourt Sunday evening at the mountain retreat of a
friend of the President-elect. Mr. Betancourt had been relaxing at this
country home over the weekend. Ambassador Sparks and Mr. Burrows
arrived at 9:20 p.m. and the conversation with Mr. Betancourt contin-
ued from then until 12:45 a.m. over a wide range of subjects. Betancourt,
who was relaxed and easy, spoke with obvious frankness on everything
that occurred to him.
Ambassador Sparks opened the conversation by speaking of the
possibility of a visit to Caracas by Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann
for the purpose of discussing the petroleum situation and the problem
created by the present excess of supply over demand. The Ambassador
spoke of Mr. Mann’s close knowledge of this situation and of the
value of conversations between him and President-­elect Betancourt as
well as appropriate officials of the present Venezuelan Government.
Betancourt acknowledged with agreement the Ambassador’s ref-
erences to Mr. Mann, as well as to Mr. Mann’s long-­standing friend-
ship with Mr. Betancourt, but he did not openly express an opinion
on the proposed visit. Ambassador Sparks finally asked President-­elect
Betancourt directly if he thought it was a good idea,4 at which point
Betancourt assented but without particular enthusiasm.5 It was obvi-
ous that Mr. Betancourt did not know exactly what the conversations
would encompass but it was also obvious that he agreed that conversa-
tions would be of value.
Ambassador Sparks then offered his own personal congratula-
tions as well as the congratulations of the Department on Betancourt’s
election and also expressed on behalf of the Department its satisfac-
tion over the important contribution of the election to Latin America’s
democratic institutions in general. Betancourt was obviously pleased
at these statements and in response spoke of his own recognition of the
great responsibilities he now has and his serious intentions to carry
out those responsibilities to the best of his ability. The Ambassador
asked him when the inauguration would be scheduled. Betancourt
replied that the inauguration probably would be either late in January
or early in February. Ambassador Sparks explained that sometimes the
period between the election of a President and his inauguration offers
an opportunity for an informal visit to be made to the United States
but in view of the shortness of the Venezuelan pre-­inaugural period
4 A typewritten marginal notation reads: “On Monday and again on Tuesday, how-
ever, Betancourt himself and then his Secretary called to inquire as to the exact date of
Mr. Mann’s arrival. Betancourt on the occasion of the first call said that he wanted to
call his ’petroleum expert’ back from Mexico to participate in the conversations (Perez
Alfonso?).” Jan Pablo Perez Alfonso had been Minister of Production, 1945–1948.
5 A handwritten marginal notation reads: “Probably knew impending tax ’coup’!”

he assumed it would be impractical to attempt to arrange such an
informal visit. Ambassador Sparks continued by explaining the proce-
dure for invitations to pay official visits to the United States and that
normally two Chiefs of State of Latin America are invited each year
for state visits. He said that President Frondizi from Argentina will be
paying a state visit to Washington in January of 1959, and President
Lemus of Salvador in March. With this background of explanation the
Ambassador asked Betancourt what his thoughts on the matter were.
President-­elect Betancourt replied by making it quite clear that aside
from the fact that he could not possibly plan a trip outside Venezuela
before his inauguration, he did not feel an informal visit to the United
States would be appropriate. He said that he believed the most appro-
priate procedure to follow would be for an invitation to be issued to
him to visit the United States after his inauguration but without speci-
fying any particular date. Betancourt remarked that he felt the United
States erred in not having invited Figueres of Costa Rica6 to visit the
United States during the five-­year period of Figueres’ Presidency.
He said that Figueres is a good friend of the United States and that
he had demonstrated this in La Paz, Bolivia, when he answered an
unfriendly speech made by the Mayor of La Paz during the official
visit of Figueres to that country prior to his inauguration. Betancourt
then turned the conversation more directly to the election and the pres-
ent political situation.
In discussing the defeat of Larrazábal, Betancourt demonstrated
very little respect for him as a politician although he said that he
likes Larrazábal personally. He said that with the elections over,
Larrazábal has no further stomach for politics. Betancourt said that
he intends to appoint Larrazábal as Ambassador to Chile, although
Betancourt said he had not exerted any pressure on Larrazábal to
accept the assignment. Betancourt, almost negating his denial that
any pressure had been exerted on Larrazábal, said that although
Larrazábal has no further interest in politics, as a military man in
the recent election and as a popular figure in Venezuela, he might
even against his will become a symbol in the country for those who
might want to use him. To demonstrate the naïveté of Larrazábal,
Betancourt said that Larrazábal in conversation with him, had asked
why he had been so badly defeated and why he had not even carried
the town where he was born. Betancourt’s reply to Larrazábal had
been that AD had been actively organized in Larrazábal’s home town
for the past 20 years.

Venezuela  1229
Betancourt expressed respect for Caldera7 and said that he would
expect him to take an important part in the future political affairs of
Venezuela. He said he is honest, sincere and intelligent. He attributed
Caldera’s small vote to the facts that the Venezuelan people are non-­
clerical and that the vote in the recent election was polarized between
Betancourt and Larrazábal. In other words, many people who might
otherwise have voted for Caldera voted for Betancourt or for Larrazábal
simply because they felt Caldera had no chance of winning.
With reference to Villalba8 it was obvious that Betancourt has
little respect for him and his party. He said that if URD had not had
Larrazábal as a candidate the party would have received very few
votes. With the elections over, Betancourt obviously expects URD to
sink into an insignificant position.
Betancourt spoke of his heavy responsibilities in assuming the
Presidency of Venezuela and made clear that he intends to give every-
thing he can of himself to those responsibilities. As far as his own
political situation and that of his party is concerned, he demonstrated
complete confidence. He said with reference to the Armed Forces
that some of the younger officers represent a problem in that for 10
years now they have been indoctrinated with the idea that Accion
Democratic did everything possible before to disrupt the Army and
that if AD should return to power it would follow the same course
again. He said that after his inauguration he will give immediate
attention to this situation and that he feels he can correct it without
difficulty. Speaking to the situation in Caracas, the large vote against
him here, and the demonstrations which had already occurred,
Betancourt said that he did not feel at all hopeless about it, he said
that the great majority Larrazábal had received in Caracas repre-
sented a pro-Larrazábal vote but not necessarily an anti-AD vote. He
is very cognizant of the problems in Caracas, particularly of unem-
ployment and poverty, as well as the popular devotion to Larrazábal
as a democratic symbol, but he said that within the first four or five
months of his administration he felt that he could correct many of the
unemployment problems and swing much of the popular sentiment
toward him and his party.
Ambassador Sparks asked Dr. Betancourt if the young and more
leftist wing of his party were a cause of concern to him. Betancourt
replied that with the demonstration of AD organization and support for
him throughout the country outside the capital, there was no question
in his mind as to who controlled the party and commanded its respect.
7 Raphael Caldera, presidential candidate of Venezuela’s Christian Socialist party,
Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente (COPEI).
8 Jóvito Villalba, presidential candidate of Unión Republicana Democrática (URO).

He said that it had been assumed from the beginning that Larrazábal
would win in Caracas but that the younger wing of AD had been per-
mitted to assume the primary responsibility for keeping Larrazábal’s
plurality in Caracas as low as possible. These younger members of
AD had obviously failed in their responsibility and as a result had lost
standing in the party. He said that they spent too much of their time
talking and writing and not enough in direct contact with the people.
Speaking again of the problems which his administration will face,
he said that he considers unemployment perhaps the greatest one. He
spoke also of the educational problem and of the necessity for agrarian
reform. He by no means seemed overwhelmed by the problems which
he will face however, saying that the wealth of the country should
make it easy to face and handle these problems. Venezuela is not like
Bolivia, Betancourt said. With reference to increasing the income of the
government Betancourt made specific reference to the income from the
petroleum industry; he mentioned also in passing Venezuela’s iron ore
but his emphasis was primarily on petroleum. He made it clear that
there will be a revision of the arrangement for the sharing of income
between the petroleum industry and the Venezuelan Government, but
he said that this revision will be on the basis of bi-­lateral negotiations
and not by government fiat. Likewise, he said the Government would
not enter into negotiations on the basis of a prior commitment to any
fixed ratio (such as 65–35 or anything like that) but would, rather, begin
the discussions with a completely open mind as to what the final out-
come might be.
At various points during the conversation Betancourt made clear
his position with reference to the Communists and to Communism in
general. He recognized the danger and the threat which the Communists
represent in Venezuela but he showed full confidence that he could
meet and defeat that threat. He said emphatically the Communists will
have no part in his Government and he said also that when he says
no he means no, and when he says yes he means yes - as any of his
American friends know. With reference to the recognition of the Soviet
Government he said this is a matter which will receive very careful
study. He said it is not an easy matter to resolve, particularly when one
remembers that a number of American nations have relations with the
Soviet, such as the United States, Mexico, Argentina, Uruguay, etc., but
that no urgent decision is necessary, and that in any event it will be
given very careful study before action is taken.
Betancourt emphasized that he is a friend of the United States and
that he has always been treated well by the Department of State. He
said he has not always agreed with Department of State policies but he
has no complaint as to his treatment by the Department. He said that
one of the decisions with which he disagreed was the decision by the

Venezuela  1231
United States to support Caracas as the site for the 1954 Inter-American
Conference. By insisting so strongly that this Conference be held in
Caracas, he said that the United States had estranged several of its best
democratic friends in Latin America.
With reference to Trujillo and the Dominican Republic, he said that
if Trujillo does not throw his weight around too much as a dictator and
against democratic elements outside his own country, Betancourt will
continue normal but cool relations. If Trujillo continues his exaggerated
actions however, Betancourt will not hesitate to break relations and to
impose economic sanctions. When asked about his attitude toward the
situation in Cuba, it was evident that Betancourt had not given the mat-
ter any particular thought. However, he did say that he felt the OAS
should go into this Cuban situation or if not the OAS as a body, at least
a number of the more important countries of the Hemisphere, such as
United States, Argentina, Mexico, should demonstrate multi-­lateral
interest.
With reference to the Presidential inauguration Betancourt indi-
cated that there would be no attempt to build the ceremony into a
tremendous occasion, but he did mention names of various Latin
American personalities who would be coming to his inauguration as
members of the delegations of their respective countries.
In answer to a question about his Cabinet, Betancourt said that he
had mentally pretty well formed his Cabinet but he had not discussed it
with anyone as yet. He said that probably two or three of the more tech-
nical present Cabinet members would be kept on in the new Cabinet.
At one point in the conversation Betancourt made a disparag-
ing reference to Robert Brinsmade as the kind of American who gets
involved in political matters in Venezuela which are no concern of
his. This was only a passing remark and there was no indication what
Betancourt might have in mind doing, if anything, but it was obvious
that he has very little respect for Brinsmade.
Betancourt said that the Petroquimica, the steel mill and the
Caroni project would be continued under his administration. He
also said there will be no more 40-­year concessions nor as a matter of
fact will there be any concessions immediately since the companies
already have 6,000,000 hectares and are actually utilizing only 600,000
for exploration and exploitation; he spoke of the nation taking a more
direct part in the development of the industry as well as in a tanker
fleet. He said that nationalism is a very strong motivating force in any
country of the world today and that due regard must be taken of it in
Venezuela.

VE–16.
Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Venezuelan
Affairs (Bartch) to the Director of the Office of East Coast
Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Bernbaum)1
Washington, December 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Venezuelan Decree Increasing Income Tax Rates
On December 20, the Venezuelan Junta of Government announced
the promulgation of a decree effective immediately and applicable to
1958 income, raising the graduated income tax rates on all classes of
million) and over. The new rates begin at 2 per cent and rise to 45 per
cent on the top bracket of income. The change in the tax rates was a
part of a general tax reform which also: abolished a Bs. 5 per Bs. 1,000
transactions tax, increased the normal income tax on foreign residents
and provided for a partial exemption for investment in industry, agri-
culture, transportation and energy production. Although the increase
in the general tax does not alter the basic 1948 legislation providing
for a 50–50 additional tax applicable to oil and mining companies, it
does in effect break the 50–50 concept. In a televised speech, Finance
Minister Mayobre estimated that under the new tax scale the oil com-
panies would have paid to the Government 66 per cent of their 1957
income, instead of the 51 per cent they actually paid. He forecasted
that the companies would pay about 60 per cent of their 1958 income
to the Government.
The action taken was certainly not unexpected, since all of the
political parties’ campaign platforms contained statements to the effect
that Venezuela should derive a greater share of the profits of the oil
industry. The three presidential candidates and other party leaders have
made frequent references to the need for a change in the profit formula.
After the elections, Betancourt at a press conference stated that the
As on previous occasions, he stated that any adjustment necessary
would be made only after very careful study. Neither is it surprising
that the general income tax rates were increased, since they have long
been considered antiquated; and the current unbalanced budget and
the economic problems inherited from the previous government made

Venezuela  1233
such a revision imperative. An American professor was in Venezuela
for several months earlier this year to study the tax structure and report
on it to the Government.
What was surprising was the fact that, in contrast to previous
actions affecting the petroleum industry, the income tax reform was
kept secret until promulgated, and neither the oil industry nor other
affected interests were given an opportunity to present their views to
the Government. Moreover, despite our overriding interest in mat-
ters affecting Venezuela’s oil industry, we were neither consulted
nor given any advance notification. This was all the more surpris-
ing in view of the fact that Assistant Secretary Mann was in Caracas
when the decree was promulgated, having gone there for the sec-
ond time this year to consult on U.S. oil imports policy.2 Moreover,
Mines Minister Julio Diez left a three-­hour meeting with Mann to go
directly to the television studio to participate in the announcement
that the income tax decree had been formulated, without mentioning
to Mr. Mann the reason for his departure from the Meeting. Mr. Mann
stated that when he had expressed surprise that the Venezuelan
Government had acted as it did, the Ministers of Finance and Mines
had adopted an aggressive position, maintaining that the action taken
by their Government was an act of national sovereignty. However,
they became almost apologetic and defensive after Mr. Mann had
expressed himself strongly, stating that Venezuela’s unexpected
and unilateral action on an issue as sensitive as this, which not only
affected directly U.S. investments but which could set off a chain reac-
tion in other parts of the world and which is not unrelated to Western
Hemisphere security, is inconsistent with Venezuela’s insistence on
consultation before U.S. unilateral action affecting Venezuelan inter-
ests. Consultation, Mr. Mann informed the Venezuelans, is a two-­
way street. The Foreign Minister took the position that this was a
general tax measure affecting all Venezuelans and therefore within
the sovereign power of the Venezuelan Government. Mr. Mann and
Ambassador Sparks replied that we did not question the sovereign
right of the Government to take action; they emphasized the long
established practice of American States and particularly Venezuela
and the U.S. to consult in matters affecting important interests of the
other. They pointed out that while the U.S. has the sovereign right to
impose import restrictions on Venezuelan oil we nevertheless seek
his visit was to explain and discuss the current oil imports situation and to explore infor-
mally future means to deal with problems, including possible tripartite arrangements.
in ARA/EST Files, Lot 61 D 319, “U.S. Oil Legislation.”

through consultation to act in such a way as to accommodate the
interests of both countries.
Although everyone knew that Venezuela was moving in the
direction of a modification of the 50–50 formula, it was not expected
that any action would be taken until after the installation of the new
Government, and then only after negotiations with the companies.
Creole has stated that Betancourt had promised the company that no
action would be taken with such negotiations. The consensus seems
to be that Betancourt and his advisers were probably not consulted in
advance concerning the new tax law, and that at best Betancourt was
informed by the Government in very general terms several days in
advance. This is Mr. Mann’s impression, and Betancourt informed our
Embassy that he had known nothing of the tax change when he had
promised Mr. Haight of Creole earlier in the week that closed door dis-
cussions with the industry would be held in advance of any changes in
oil income distribution.
Preliminary estimates reported by our Embassy of the effect of the
tax revision on the oil industry are that it will vary according to the dif-
ferent companies’ incomes. Creole’s initial estimate is that it may result
in a 65–35 per cent of the company’s profit, and that others in high
income brackets will be effected to a lesser degree. New companies not
yet out of the red would be effected in the future if and they move into
higher income brackets.
Reaction to the promulgation of the tax decree was not long in
forthcoming. Duke Haight, President of Creole, issued a strong state-
ment on December 22 at Marquetia airport on his departure for San
José3 on a Christmas vacation. He said the Government’s action was a
“hard blow” at the industry and that it “drastically altered the climate
for foreign investment”. He said that by this action Venezuela became
the first country in the world to break the 50–50 principle, “completely
disregarding acquired rights and ignoring moral, if not legal, obliga-
tions to negotiate” with interested parties. He warned that an agree-
ment reached by free negotiation “cannot be unilaterally terminated
without destruction of confidence and understanding”. The present
“unilateral, retroactive action provides no quid pro quo and reduces
the incentive to further investment”, he said. He added that the new
taxes were additional costs for the industry.
The other oil companies agreed generally with Mr. Haight’s strong
statement, with Shell sending a letter to the Minister of Mines on
out prior discussions would have “grave consequences”. El Mundo
3 The source text reads “Jamaica” but was hand-­corrected to read “San José.”

Venezuela  1235
characterized Haight’s statement as a crude and unjustified reaction
against an act of full sovereignty. Venezuelan students and government
economists generally praised the Government’s action although some
of the latter were dubious of the way it was carried out. Many local
businessmen were angry or dismayed over the lack of public discus-
sion, Venezuelan businessmen avoided commenting on the effect of the
decree on the oil companies but instead concentrated on the repeal of
the 5 per thousand tax and other features of interest to local business.
Dr. Angel Carvini, generally regarded as business spokesman, deplored
the lack of consultation with commerce and industry. El Nacional men-
tioned the “sense of justice which inspired reform and which the whole
nation shares.”
In reply to Mr. Haight, Mines Minister Diez issued a statement on
December 23 saying that the tax reform “does not impair any acquired
rights of petroleum companies nor modify any existing agreement
with them”. He emphasized that it only altered internal tax rates which
apply to all Venezuelans and is the sovereign right of the Government.
Since the tax applies only to net income it does not increase the cost of
the companies and does not alter their competitive position, he said.
Most Venezuelan opinion thought Haight’s statement was too strong
and inadvisable, and the press supported the government as having
only exercised its sovereign right. However, many Venezuelan busi-
ness and professional men reportedly were not in accord with the
secrecy involved and were cynical about the purposes of the act. COPEI
reserved its position until it had further time to study the decree; AD
did the same. However, Villalba of URD issued a strong statement
supporting the decree and attacking Creole. He called Haight’s state-
ment absurd and referred to the billion dollars4 Eugene Holman of the
Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) on December 23 was as strong, if
not stronger, than Haight’s, warning that the Venezuelan Government
action would “call for re-­examination of international investments”.
On the following day, Venezuelan Ambassador Falcon Briceno released
a statement emphasizing that the decree was an act of national sover-
eignty, and that the Government had no obligation to obtain Creole’s
permission to act.
The net result of the position taken by Creole and Jersey Standard
is that the issue has now become one involving national sovereignty,
with the Venezuelans standing on their national pride. Just as the
threatened U.S. troop movement overshadowed the anti-U.S. incidents
that occurred during Vice President Nixon’s visit to Venezuela last
May, the national sovereignty issue overshadows the issue over lack
of advance consultation with the companies and the U.S. Government.
4 A handwritten marginal notation reads: “something missing here.”

The Venezuelan Government was dissuaded from issuing a decree
expelling Haight only by a promise from Creole that Haight would not
return to Venezuela.
Recommendations:
That, in your conversation today with the Venezuelan
Ambassador,5 you emphasize the following points:
1. We are very seriously concerned over the action taken by the
Venezuelan Government.
2. We recognize the fact that the Government has a perfect right to
take such action, but there are many things that we have the power to
do but have refrained from doing out of consideration of the interests
of other countries.
3. We have consulted with our friends before taking unilateral
action on matters affecting their interests, and we have made a very
special effort to consult with Venezuela.
4. We would have expected that the Venezuelans would have con-
sulted with us in advance before taking a step which effected the oper-
ation of important U.S. interests in Venezuela, and which may have
repercussions elsewhere in the world.
5. An additional factor was that Assistant Secretary Mann was
in Venezuela at the time the decree was promulgated, on his second
visit to Venezuela in a year, solely to consult with the Venezuelan
Government concerning oil import policies. Nothing was said to him
about the decree until it was announced to the public.
6. In the spirit of cooperation which characterizes our relations
with Latin America, consultation plays an important part. The Latin
American nations never hesitate to tell us what our policies should
be, and we are very pleased to receive their views and to consult with
them in advance in order to mitigate the possible adverse effects of any
action we contemplate taking.
7. In summary, we consider the action the Venezuelan Government
has taken as very serious, especially since it was taken without consul-
tation with us, and since it may have repercussions in other areas of the
world. We would hope that the Ambassador will report our concern to
his Government.
5 A summary of the conversation is contained in the Department’s telegram 382 to

Venezuela  1237
VE–17.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,
Washington, December 24, 19581
Washington, December 24, 1958.
SUBJECT
Venezuelan Income Tax Revision
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Marcos Falcón-Briceño, Ambassador of Venezuela
Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs
Mr. Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director, East Coast Affairs, ARA
Mr. C. E. Bartch, Officer-­in-Charge, Venezuelan Affairs
Ambassador Falcón-Briceño called at the Department this after-
noon at Mr. Rubottom’s request. Mr. Rubottom expressed the serious
concern of the highest levels of the U. S. Government over the action
taken by the Venezuelan Government on December 19 to increase the
general income tax rates, particularly since Venezuela failed to consult
with the United States.
Mr. Rubottom pointed out that in view of the substantial U. S.
interests in Venezuela, especially in the petroleum industry, we would
have expected that the Venezuelan Government would have consulted
with us in advance of taking action which so clearly affects those inter-
ests. Mr. Rubottom said that there was no question whatsoever of the
Venezuelan Government’s right to adjust its income tax rates, as a mat-
ter of national sovereignty. He reminded the Ambassador, however,
that the United States has scrupulously followed a policy of consulting
with other governments before taking any action which might affect
their interests. He pointed out that special efforts along these lines had
been made to consult regularly with Venezuela, as the Ambassador well
knew. Mr. Rubottom alluded to the importance we attach to friendly
consultation and cooperation on matters of common interest among
the nations of the hemisphere. He said the United States considers this
friendly consultation a cornerstone of our Latin American relations.
He pointed out that Venezuela’s failure to consult in advance with the
United States had been even more astonishing in view of the fact that
Assistant Secretary Mann was in Venezuela on the very day the decree
was promulgated and made public, having gone there for the second
time this year to consult with Venezuelan officials concerning the oil
import situation. As a matter of fact, Minister of Mines Julio Diez had
by Bartch, and initialled by Rubottom.

gone directly from a three-­hour meeting with Mr. Mann to the White
Palace to participate in a ceremony announcing the income tax reform,
without having even mentioned to Mr. Mann the reason for his depar-
ture from the meeting.
An additional reason why consultation would have been expected
is the fact that the action of the Venezuelan Government could have
far-­reaching repercussions in other areas of the world, Mr. Rubottom
stated. He asked that the Ambassador report to his Government the
serious concern of the United States over the action it had taken.
The Venezuelan Ambassador declared that he had no expla-
nation of the lack of advance discussion with the United States of
the action taken by his Government. He said he was certain that his
Government’s action, and its failure to consult with us, did not imply
that his Government did not value highly the friendship and good will
of the United States. He assured Mr. Rubottom that the Government’s
action did not mean that his Government did not appreciate the impor-
tance of consultation. He thought that the reason the tax reform was
announced without consultation or other advance notification was that
it was considered a matter of extreme urgency. He referred to the eco-
nomic problems and unpaid debts inherited from the Pérez Jiménez
Government and the unbalanced budget for the current fiscal year. He
said Venezuela’s need for additional funds was imperative and that
action before the end of this calendar year was considered necessary in
order to obtain the benefits of the higher tax rates on 1958 income. He
mentioned also the fact that the foreign loan of $225 million approved
by the Provisional Government had been delayed until Congress con-
vened in January.
The Ambassador called attention to the statements by the Ministers
of Mines and Treasury concerning the income tax reform, and repeated
the most significant points made in the statements. He reiterated his
Government’s position that the tax revision was an internal matter and
entirely within the sovereign power of Venezuela. He characterized the
statement issued on December 22 by Mr. H. W. Haight, President of the
Creole Petroleum Corporation, as somewhat violent (“una poca vio-
lenta”) and as unfortunate. He attempted to refute the claim made by
Mr. Haight that the new tax rates would affect the costs of the oil com-
panies or impair Venezuela’s competitive position in the world petro-
leum market.
The Ambassador repeated Mr. Rubottom’s expression of serious
concern several times in order to make certain that he would interpret to
his Government precisely the attitude of the United States. In response
to Mr. Rubottom’s request, he promised to ask his Government for
additional information on the background and meaning of the action
it had taken.

Venezuela  1239
VE–18.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,
Washington, January 5, 1959.
SUBJECT
Effect of Venezuelan Tax Law
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Thomas C. Mann—E

Mr. Craig Stark—E
Mr. Maurice Bernbaum—OSA

Members of the Petroleum Industry
Mr. Carl Bartch—OSA
Mr. Hollis Kannenberg—FSD
At the request of the Department of State, 38 leaders of the petro-
leum industry met to discuss the probable effects of the Venezuelan tax
decree announced December 19. Mr. Mann opened the meeting with a
review of the events leading up to the Venezuelan move and outlined
steps taken since then by the Department of State. He described at
some length the attitude of the Venezuelan people and government
toward the tax decree and cautioned against any overt retaliation on
the part of industry. Mr. Mann pointed out that one of the major prob-
lems in Venezuela is in attempting to get the Government to speak
frankly to its people. Mr. B. C. Schmidt (San Jacinto Petroleum) said
that the Junta was under no pressure and that the move was evidently
motivated by fiscal goals. It will not be possible to arrive at an exact
figure, he said, because the effect will vary with the size of the com-
pany. Mr. Mann asked that the companies determine, within a range,
what the effect of the cut will be. The newcomers should calculate
what the effects in 1958 will be, how long it will take them to recover
their initial investment and how the flow of oil in 1959 will be effected.
These facts would be complementary to those provided by the estab-
lished firms. Both groups should understand their case and present
it to the Venezuelans in relation to their own company interest. He
cautioned against making public and written protests. Private conver-
sations with prominent Venezuelans, as well as with the Government,
would be more advantageous and would provide the Department of
State with support.
Mr. T.S. Petersen (Standard of California) indicated that the tax
decree must increase the Venezuelan tax revenue since his compa-
ny’s tax bill was due within a few weeks. Any company working for
Drafted by Stark.

stockholders, however, will buy where the oil is cheapest. Mr. Mann
suggested that we should admit the temporary advantages to
Venezuela, but also point out that there will be disadvantages, partic-
ularly in the long run, since some Venezuelan oil is high cost and will
be gradually displaced. Mr. Petersen stated that his company has been
in Venezuela for 30 years and has spent 125 million without finding
light oil with the exception of a single recent strike at great depth. The
new tax law, he said, may make exploration costs in less desirable
areas in Venezuela prohibitive.
This is the sort of experience we should point out to the Venezuelans,
Mr. Mann said. He commented that President-­elect Betancourt is not
anxious to increase production, but on the contrary, feels that too
many concessions have already been let. Mr. T. L. Lenzen (Standard
of California) suggested that U.S. Ambassadors to other oil countries
be informed. Mr. Mann commented that there seems to be close con-
tact between the Venezuelans and the Arabs. Mr. R. C. Sauer (Sohio
Petroleum) suggested that we ought to talk about other things; the
issue of the contract price and the world price, for example. A depreci-
ation allowance would also be desirable.
Mr. Eugene Rolman (Standard of New Jersey) said that the indus-
try ought to get the door open for talks. There are many knowledge-
able Venezuelans, particularly in the Bureau of Mines, he said, and it
is to these people that we ought to make our points. The Venezuelans
made this decision on political, not economic grounds, he said. Mr.
Mann pointed out that we can talk to the Government along technical
lines; what the decision means for the long and short run. The indus-
try can help the Department of State in that the Department cannot
know how it will affect companies without cooperation. He cautioned
against over stating the case. Mr. Holman indicated that many other
industries are largely dependent on the oil industry. Mr. Peterson said
that he believed that a drop in tax revenue would be taken more easily
if we begin now to educate people to the real effect of economic laws.
The most dangerous thing to do is to give the impression of retaliation
by design, he said. The meeting closed with several companies prom-
ising to send in their estimates of the effect of the tax decree within a
short time.

Venezuela  1241
VE–19.
Instruction from the Secretary of State to Certain
Diplomatic Missions1
Washington, January 19, 1959.
CA–6027.
SUBJECT
Recent Change in Venezuelan Income Tax Law
tive to 1958 income, the Government Junta of Venezuela decreed an
amendment to the Venezuelan income tax law providing for increased
surtax rates. The decree has the effect of breaking the 50–50 principle
which had its origin in Venezuela as pertains to the petroleum and min-
ing industries.
1. Venezuelan Concession System
The Venezuelan concession system, during its entire history,
including under the 1943 Petroleum Law, has fixed and defined the
terms and conditions of the respective concessions in the Petroleum
Laws themselves. Until enactment of the 1943 Petroleum Law, such
terms and conditions referred not only to technical and operating mat-
ters but, moreover, froze the tax regime for the full life of the conces-
sions in that the concessionaire was guaranteed against taxes directly
burdening his enterprise or in amounts larger than those in existence at
the time of concession issuance. The foregoing rights were considered
to be acquired and inherent in the concession.
During the discussion of the 1943 Petroleum Law, the principle
of equal sharing of profits between the Venezuelan Government and
the petroleum concessionaire was developed. Although the petroleum
industry full well realized that by converting petroleum concessions
issued under prior laws to the Petroleum Law of 1943, it was expos-
ing itself to the legal possibility of unlimited income taxes, industry
had, from the outset, the moral assurance from the government that
the purpose of the new arrangement was only to share equally with
the concessionaire the profits arising from his Venezuelan operations.
While, as stated above, the Venezuelan Government has always had
Hollis Kannenberg of the Fuels Division, Bureau of Economic Affairs, and John Shaw of
the Office of Near Eastern Affairs; approved by William M. Rountree, Assistant Secretary
of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs. This despatch was also sent to the
Embassies in Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Dhahran, Jidda, Kuwait, and Tehran.

principle, it never did so. On the contrary, until December 19, 1958,
the Government repeatedly reaffirmed the 50–50 principle. Relying
on such assurances, the petroleum industry has invested in Venezuela
vast sums of money.
Therefore, under the “equal sharing principle”, government and
industry have shared profits from the industry on the basis that royal-
ties plus income and other incidental taxes would give the Venezuelan
Government 50 percent of the concessionaire’s profits. In other words,
if a petroleum concessionaire, after paying royalty and taxes, as afore-
said, had a profit which exceeded government “take”, the excess profit
was to be divided on a 50–50 basis between government and the respec-
tive concessionaires.
2. Pre-December 1958 Tax System
In Venezuela the oil industry has been subject to three different
taxes on income. The first two are general provisions applicable to
all personal and corporate incomes, and the third is a special provi-
sion covering the extractive industries. Until the December 20, 1958,
tax decree, the oil companies tax bills were made up in the following
manner.
(a) The Basic or Normal Tax
This is a 2½ percent assessment on net income derived from normal
industry operations such as production, transportation or refining. Net
taxable income is calculated by deducting from gross income the usual
charges of doing business, similar to those in the U.S. Depreciation and
depletion are allowed, but depletion is limited to a return of cost rather
than as a percentage of total production income as in the U.S. Losses are
deductible much on the same basis as in the U.S. and a carry-­forward of
losses for the purpose of this tax is permitted for two years.
(b) The Supplementary Tax (Surtax)
This was levied at progressive rates commencing with 1.5 per-
cent on net taxable income up to Bolivars 10,000 ($3,236) reaching a
million). In some cases a reduction in the supplementary tax rate was
granted for new investment in increased production facilities.
(c) The Additional Tax (50–50 Provision)
Under this provision of law, a levy of 50 percent was assessed on
the amount by which a company’s net income after deduction of taxes
included as taxes paid) exceeds total taxes paid. This classical exam-
ple of the 50–50 principle applied only to companies whose net income
for the tax year was 15 percent or more of the capital invested in the
production of that income. For companies whose net income was
more than 10 percent but less than 15 percent of capital invested, the

Venezuela  1243
additional tax applied to only ½ of the excess income over the aggre-
gate of the taxes. Companies whose net income after the normal and
surtax did not exceed 10 percent of the capital invested were exempt
from the additional tax.
In practice the 50–50 principle has resulted in a somewhat greater
share of revenues for the government than profits for the companies.
It has been characteristic of the Venezuelan petroleum industry that
a high volume of operations has been required before a profit could
be realized. Therefore, until a level of production and profits has been
reached allowing the 50–50 profit sharing tax to become effective, the
division has resulted in favor of the government by reason of a rela-
tively high royalty and heavy exploration and development costs. An
unofficial, although reliable comparison of the direct income of the
Venezuelan Government from petroleum companies (other than from
bonuses for new concessions) with the net profits of those companies
able to the government.
The decree law of December 20, 1958, increases the supplementary
tax (No. 2 (b) above) to provide for a minimum of 2 percent on taxable
income up to Bs. 10,000 and a maximum of 45 percent on net taxable
income in excess of Bs. 28,000,000. As under the prior law, certain
reductions may be granted for new investment in increased production
facilities. Neither the “basic tax” (No. 2 (a) above) nor the “additional
tax” (No. 2 (c) above) is altered. Although the additional tax remains
unchanged in the new law, it is rendered ineffective so far as the oil com-
panies are concerned since the operation of the new surtax schedule in
combination with the basic tax and royalty payments will, in all cases
that can be envisioned, result in total revenue to the Government of con-
siderably more than 50 percent.
In view of public statements made by the Venezuelan government
that the level of the Venezuelan income tax is still favorable when com-
pared to other countries such as the U.S.A. where the corporate rate is
52 percent, it must be pointed out that this is not accurate in the case of
a U.S. corporation producing oil in the United States. With the appli-
cation of the 27.5 percent depletion allowance, the level of U.S. income
taxation is substantially below that of the Venezuelan law, i.e., about
While much study is needed to make a precise calculation as
to the effect of the December 20 decree, preliminary estimates indi-
cate that most oil companies will find their payments to government
for 1958, and succeeding years, increased from a 50 percent to a
60 percent basis.

The action of the Government Junta was not preceded by pub-
lic discussion of the measure and it came as a complete surprise. In
February 1958, Admiral Larrazábal, then President of the Government
Junta, had given explicit assurances to the oil industry that the pro-
visional government intended to maintain, without modification, the
then prevailing laws affecting the petroleum Industry. On various occa-
sions since the provisional government gave the foregoing assurances,
government spokesmen, both publicly and privately, have acknowl-
edged the moral undertaking of the Venezuelan Government to respect
the 50–50 principle and reaffirmed the intention, in any event, to leave
fundamental decisions for the elected government which was to take
office early in 1959.
4. Action Taken to Date
The U.S. has expressed no opinion on the substantive provisions
of the tax law amendment. However, our Embassy in Caracas, on
first learning of the measure, expressed to the Venezuelan Ministry
of Foreign Affairs surprise that action on an issue as sensitive as
this, which not only directly affected U.S. investments in Venezuela,
but which could have an adverse effect on U.S. interests in other
parts of the world had been taken without consultation. Further, the
Embassy pointed out that failure to consult was inconsistent with
Venezuela’s insistence on consultation before U.S. action on matters
affecting Venezuela’s interests. Similar representations were made
to the Venezuelan Ambassador by the Department. The Venezuelan
Government has taken the position that the decree was a general tax
reform affecting all Venezuelan tax-­payers, including oil companies,
and, therefore, within its sovereign power. In reply, we have said that
we do not question Venezuela’s sovereign right to take the action, but
are seriously concerned over the failure to consult in advance and the
manner in which the decree was promulgated.
On January 5, Assistant Secretary Mann met with representa-
tives of U.S. oil companies having operations in Venezuela in order to
exchange views on the effect of the recent tax decree on the Venezuelan
oil industry and on world trade. The consensus of the meeting was that,
although the tax amendment would obviously result in immediate and
short term fiscal benefits for Venezuela, the long term effect would be
adverse in view of the harmful effect it would have on Venezuela’s com-
petitive position in the world oil market, and the lessened attractive-
ness of Venezuela in the future to investors. It was considered unlikely
that the elected government, which is to take office early in 1959, would
find it politically possible to undo the decree itself, even if the new gov-
ernment were so inclined. It was agreed that the main objective of the

Venezuela  1245
companies, and of the Department, should be to reduce the possibil-
ity of further harmful action by the new government, and to modify
or to ameliorate the effect of the decree itself. It was recognized that
Venezuela’s government would be sensitive to any action which could
be interpreted as retaliation by the companies against the tax decree.
It was agreed that the companies should attempt to inform influential
Venezuelans of the probable economic consequences of the tax decree
and should avoid public statements that might further exacerbate the
issue. It was agreed that the Department would undertake to induce
the Venezuelan Government to educate the Venezuelan public on the
economic issues involved so as to remove the matter as far as possible
from a political and emotional plane. The Department suggested that
each company evaluate the effect of the decree on its own operation
and on Venezuela’s competitive position in the world oil market both
in the short term and as far in the future years as can be projected.
Although industry is still assessing the financial impact of the new tax
regime, there is little doubt of the detrimental effects of this action on
investment climate, on Venezuelan oil in world markets, on Industry
operations in Venezuela, and, in general, the impairment of confidence
which, up to now, has caused foreign capital to invest vast sums of
money in Venezuela.
In summary, although the petroleum industry realized from
the beginning that by converting their concessions to the Petroleum
Law of 1943 the legal possibility existed that unlimited income taxes
could be imposed, industry had the assurance from the outset that the
Venezuelan Government’s intent was to share equally with the conces-
sionaires the profits arising from their operations.
While the Venezuelan Government has had the legal right since
by the government. The sovereign right of the Venezuelan Government
to do this is not challenged; however, the wisdom of handling the mat-
ter as it did is questioned, particularly due to the adverse effect on
investment climate and the ultimate detriment to the economic well-­
being of the country.
Neither the Department nor American petroleum companies regard
the situation created by the Venezuelan tax decree as having that final-
ity which would preclude discussion between Venezuela and industry
of the issues involving mutual interests. Protests have been registered
with the Venezuelan Government stressing the lack of prior notice and
opportunity to be heard both on the part of the U.S. Government and
the oil industry. It is hoped that as a result, the Venezuelan Government

will grant the opportunity for friendly consultation aimed at reducing
the adverse impact of the decree.
When considering the possible Impact of Venezuela’s action on
Middle Eastern arrangements, it is the Department’s firm view that the
concession relationships in the Middle Eastern countries are contracts
which may be modified only by mutual agreement of the interested
parties. The United States attaches utmost importance in international
relations to the maintenance of confidence that contractual obligations
will be honored, and would be deeply concerned if contracts with
its citizens should be breached. This is in contrast to the situation in
Venezuela where the concessionaire was not legally assured of any
limitation on the government’s power to tax, but relied on the moral
assurance of the government’s stated intention to adhere to the 50–50
principle.
5. Recommended Action
The foregoing is forwarded to provide U.S. representatives with an
accurate picture of the Venezuelan situation as it stands today and to
enable U.S. Missions to answer questions which may be put to them on
the subject by host governments. It may also be used, at the discretion
of the Missions, as the basis for discussions with senior representatives
of American oil companies. In the Department’s judgment, it would
be unwise for U.S. representatives to initiate conversations with the
respective governments. However, if approached, U.S. representatives
should indicate that the U.S. disapproves of the failure of Venezuela to
consult with interested parties prior to the promulgation of the decree
law, and is deeply concerned over the probable economic consequences
to Venezuela. The total effect of this law on Venezuela’s revenue and
investments remain to be seen. If appropriate in the circumstances, rep-
resentatives should emphasize the difference between the Middle East
arrangements and those in Venezuela, stressing the requirement, in the
case of the former, for prior consultation in any effort to change con-
tractual relations, since commitments in the Middle East are subject to
international contracts which may only be modified by mutual agree-
ment between the interested parties.
In the event the government indicates intention to revise existing
arrangements, the Department should be promptly notified.
The Department would appreciate receiving information on press
comments and other views being expressed in Middle Eastern coun-
tries on Venezuela’s tax decree.
Dulles

Venezuela  1247
VE–20.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela,
February 14, 19591

Caracas, February 14, 1959.
SUBJECT
President Betancourt of Venezuela
PARTICIPANTS
President Betancourt; Mrs. Betancourt
Governor Dewey, Head of United States Delegation to Inauguration of President
Betancourt
Ambassador Sparks
ARA—Mr. Rubottom
Ambassador Falcón Briceño
Governor Dewey, Ambassador Sparks, and called on President
10 minutes on the porch of the residence, along with Venezuelan
Ambassador to the United States, Sr. Marcos Falcón Briceño, and then
were greeted by the President and Mrs. Betancourt, who escorted the
group2 into the dining room for breakfast.
The President wasted no time in getting down to business.
Addressing himself to me in Spanish, he said that Venezuela intended
to raise in the OAS the question of expelling the dictatorship coun-
tries. He declared that communism profited by the continuation of the
dictatorships and that their fall would deal the communists a mortal
blow. He began to refer by name to Trujillo, with noticeable feeling, and
aimed most of his thrusts directly at him.
I stated our policy of supporting the basic principles of the OAS,
including non intervention, and my conviction that this was fully com-
patible with the encouragement and growth of democracy. I questioned
whether a majority of countries in America would support his position
of expelling members which had not yet arrived at democratic systems.
I reminded him of the risk, in tolerating any kind of intervention, that
“bad” governments would feel justified in intervening just as much as
“good” governments. Governor Dewey, who followed the discussion
and initialed by Rubottom on February 16.
gation to attend the inauguration included the following: former N.Y. Governor Thomas
E. Dewey; Rubottom; John M. Budinger, Vice President of the Rankers Trust Company;
Harry Darby, Chairman of the Board of Darby Corp. and former U.S. Senator from Kansas;
General Lyman L. Lemnitzer, Vice Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; and Serafino Romualdi,
AFL–CIO Representative for Latin America (who replaced AFL–CIO President George
Meany, who was ill).

through Ambassador Sparks’ running translation, asked who would
judge when direct intervention was called for.
The President reasserted his position. He would consult with
Colombia and Argentina. He acknowledged that Mexico was strongly
against any kind of intervention. If the OAS would not join Venezuela
in expelling the Trujillo Government, then Venezuela would withdraw
from the OAS. They would continue to adhere to the Río Treaty3 and
the Caracas Resolution.4 He had favored our stand against Arbenz.5
The President said he had learned much in 10 years. Things were
now different in Venezuela. He would no longer tolerate the constant
insults against him personally and his country. Venezuela would take
economic sanctions such as not allowing Pan American Airways to stop
in Venezuela if it continued stopping in Ciudad Trujillo; the same with
the Grace Line. He recalled Mr. Mann’s call on him 10 years ago to warn
him of possible air attacks on Venezuela by Trujillo backed planes.6 He
reminded me of the recent reports of possible bombing of Venezuelan
oil fields by Dominican planes. He kept referring to the “aggressive”
tone of the Dominican Republic reply to Venezuela’s invitation to his
inauguration, sending Mrs. Betancourt upstairs to try to find a news-
paper with the text of the “offensive” document. (Her mission was
unsuccessful but he promised to send me a copy to the Embassy.) The
President said that he would tolerate no Dominican attempt against
Venezuela, and would reply with force if attacked. On the other hand,
he was categoric in stating that he would not permit any revolt against
the Trujillo Government or any other to be staged from Venezuela.
(Later I was informed that he had made a similar declaration to OAS
Secretary General Mora.)
I reentered the discussion on a different tack. I told the President of
Haiti’s problem which was really a hemisphere one but for which the
United States was paying the cost. I asked him what he thought of the
Haitian exiles’ open call from Habana for the overthrow of Duvalier
3 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for signa-
4 A reference to Resolution XCIII, titled “Declaration of Solidarity for the Preservation
of the Political Integrity of the American States Against the Intervention of International
Communism,” approved on March 28, 1954, at the Tenth Inter-American Conference which
Conference: Report of the Delegation of the United States of America with Related Documents
mentation regarding the resolution, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The American
Republics.
5 For documentation on U.S. policy toward Guatemala during the presidency
American Republics.
6 Documentation on the subject of Dominican revolutionary activity on Venezuela is
printed on Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. VIII, The American Republics, Chapter 77.

Venezuela  1249
who, whether or not a “good” President, had been freely elected by the
Haitian people after a year of chaos. Here was Cuba, in the first flush of
victory over a tyrant, permitting attacks on a nearby government. Did
he approve?
The President didn’t know about this situation but would look
into it.
Then I said that he could count on the OAS for absolute protection
of Venezuela against any outside attack. He was reminded of the Río
Treaty which had proved its effectiveness. With reliance on the OAS,
Venezuela need have no concern about aggression; it could concentrate
on its internal affairs without fear. The United States would join with
others to defend Venezuela before any serious ill could fall on his coun-
try. The President seemed to listen carefully, but he did not respond in
any detail to my statement. Our host mentioned the reference to revi-
sion of the trade agreement in his inaugural speech. He described it as
an “escape valve” to ease pressure on him from affected Venezuelan
interests. I said we would discuss the subject through regular chan-
nels if he wished, but added that the agreement was carefully balanced
and would have to continue to offer advantages to both parties. With
the slack in demand for petroleum, and with the new crisis in the coal
industry in the United States as result of reduced market in Germany,
the time was not the most propitious. He did not press his point.
Finally, he turned to the subject of military equipment. The coun-
try had been left deeply in debt by Perez Jimenez. The military would
be loyal to him. They need new equipment, especially for the armored
forces. They hope to buy it from the United States at “token” prices. This
would be one tangible way of helping and supporting his government.
I asked whether he was talking about additional equipment, or that
included in the purchase agreement of 1957.7 His reply was not clear,
but he seemed to mean a revision of the terms of the 1957 purchase
agreement, and he again referred to the need to buy it for token prices.
As we left the table, I told the President of the United States’ effort
to meet the Junta Government’s request for an early date to inaugurate
the Boliver Statue in Washington.8 We wanted President Eisenhower
to participate because of the event’s importance, and we were cog-
nizant of the plan of Venezuela to send Admiral Larrazábal for the
credit facilities offered by the United States in its note of December 6, 1956, for the
purchase of U.S. military equipment to implement the defense objectives assigned to
557) Documentation concerning the extension of credit for military equipment is printed
in Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. VII, American Republics: Central and South America,
Chapter 17.
8 President Eisenhower accepted the statue on behalf of the U.S. Government on

ceremonies. I had received his messages via Ambassador Falcón,
Assistant Secretary Mann, and Mr. Proudfit. The problem of setting the
date had been difficult, all the more so because of the uncertainty of the
Venezuelan inaugural date which had been changed twice. He laughed
and said that this had been hard on him, too, and that it was the fault of
the Venezuelan Congress.
The President said that the date of February 27 was all right.
They would send a fitting delegation, possibly headed by the Foreign
Minister, or maybe the President of the Congress, Dr. Leoni. He reas-
sured me that our problem was understood. He made no reference
whatever to Admiral Larrazábal.
Ambassador Sparks asked the President to tell us how he felt about
the presence of Perez Jimenez in the United States. The President said
he understood the technical and legal points involved – ­that the man
had a Venezuelan diplomatic passport, and that the Junta Government
had requested a visa. Nevertheless, he said, United States relations with
the people of Venezuela would remain “below zero” as long as he stays
in our country. The man has no future anywhere; he is no problem in
Venezuela to the President, but he is an impediment to good relations.
I asked whether, at this time, he would prefer to see Perez Jimenez in
the Dominican Republic. The President replied affirmatively. I said I
would look into the matter. He didn’t mention extradition and I didn’t
suggest it.
After expressing our appreciation to the President and
Mrs. Betancourt and Ambassador Falcón, we departed at 9:40.
VE–21.
Editorial Note
On March 10, 1959, President Eisenhower signed Proclamation
3279, “Adjusting imports of petroleum and petroleum products into
the United States.” This proclamation made the voluntary import sys-
tem mandatory. The new program, like the voluntary program, was
based on national security requirements and was intended to insure
a stable, healthy industry in the United States capable of exploring
for and developing new hemisphere reserves. Proclamation 3290 of
and Mexican crude oil from mandatory restriction. For the text of

Venezuela  1251
VE–22.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela,
March 10, 19591
Caracas, March 10, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
President Rómulo Betancourt
Ambassador Edward J. Sparks
Minister-Counselor Charles R. Burrows
Economic Counselor Harlan P. Bramble
The conversation with the President began with the usual
kind of light chit-­chat. The President remarked, in response to the
Ambassador’s comments concerning redecoration in his office, that he
wanted to change some of the portraits on the walls. He said he would
prefer to have portraits of some civilians, in addition to the military
portraits which are there now, but he can’t forget that the only civilian
President Venezuela has had was overthrown.2 The President proceeded
from here to a brief mention of how, since his days of exile, he always
sits in a public place with his back to the wall and facing the door. He
mentioned in this connection an assassination attempt against him in
Havana in 1952.
Ambassador Sparks introduced the subject of the Bolívar statue
dedication and commented that he thought the ceremony had gone off
very well indeed. He then handed President Betancourt a letter from
President Eisenhower expressing the President’s appreciation for the
medal which Betancourt had sent to him by Dr. Uslar Pietri. President
Betancourt referred to President Eisenhower’s speech and expressed
great satisfaction with its content.3 He asked if we had received the text
of this speech here and said that he would like to have a copy of it. He
asked that it be sent to him through the Foreign Office. Ambassador
Sparks said that this would be done and said that as a matter of fact
the full text of the speech had been given to all of the Caracas newspa-
pers but that it was carried only in excerpt t by those papers. President
Betancourt suggested that the Embassy develop closer relations with
Burrows. Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place at a
luncheon. The memorandum was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of
was “somewhat in the nature of a basic document to which reference will be made by the
Embassy on various occasions in the future.”
2 Reference is to Romulo Gallegos, President of Venezuela, 1948.
p. 373.

the publishers of the various papers and expressed his opinion that
if material of this kind were handed personally to the publishers, he
felt sure that the newspapers would carry it. He mentioned specifi-
cally Miguel Angel Capriles4 in this connection. He also mentioned EL
UNIVERSAL as being a newspaper which he believed would be recep-
tive to this kind of approach.
Speaking of the newspapers apparently reminded him of the
front page story carried by LA RELIGION today concerning the immi-
nent arrival in Venezuela of ex-President Arévalo of Guatemala. He
went to his desk to get this newspaper and indicated his surprise that
LA RELIGION, of all papers, would carry such a complete story on
Arévalo’s visit. Proceeding from this, President Betancourt opened up
the entire field, of discussion concerning Arévalo’s trip to Venezuela.
The President said that Arévalo will not be here in any kind of official
capacity, but that he has rather been invited to Venezuela by the Central
University to deliver “some lectures”. Betancourt will see Arévalo pri-
vately he said, and perhaps entertain him in his home but he will extend
no official honors to Arévalo and will not receive him at the Palace. The
President expressed an opinion to the effect that he sees no reason why
Arévalo should not come to Venezuela—­that he is not a Communist
although he is used by the Communists. President Betancourt expects
there will be increasing activity on the part of Venezuelan Communists
but he feels that this situation can be handled and that he will soon be
able to bring it under control. In later conversation on the same subject,
during lunch, Ambassador Sparks observed again that Arévalo is bit-
terly anti-American and that he is a disturbing element for the Americas
in general, but particularly in the Caribbean area. Ambassador Sparks
in this connection referred to Arévalo’s visit to Bolivia in 1953 and to a
three-­hour speech which he delivered in La Paz in which he included
innumerable false statements about the United States designed to spread
sharply anti-American feeling. Betancourt said that he intends to talk to
Arévalo when he arrives, to explain clearly the situation in Venezuela,
to warn him that the ambiente here is not conducive to anti-American
propaganda, that the Venezuelan Government position is definitely
anti-Communist, and so on. Betancourt will make clear to Arévalo that
he should restrain his activities in Venezuela or that he will not be able to
remain here. President Betancourt in this connection said that Arévalo
only has a three-­month visa. He admitted that he is a friend of Arévalo
but not an intimate one; it was clear from the conversation that they are
on first name terms. Betancourt explained Arévalo’s anti-Americanism
by saying that Arévalo “discovered” anti-­imperialism very late in life,
4 Proprietor and editor of the Caracas newspapers, La Esfera, El Mundo,
and Ultimas Noticias.

Venezuela  1253
just a few years ago. As Betancourt said, others like himself “discover”
anti-­imperialism at an early age and then grow away from it. In reply
to Ambassador Sparks’ observation that Arévalo had a great deal to
do with Arbenz’ accession to the Presidency of Guatemala, Betancourt
expressed his doubt that this was true. He referred to a conversation he
had with Arévalo in 1953 in Chile at which time Arévalo made clear his
lack of admiration for Arbenz.
As a further development of the early conversation on United States
Embassy relations with the Venezuelan press, President Betancourt
devoted considerable attention to the importance of United States and
Venezuela pursuing vigorously a closer cultural and exchange pro-
gram. He spoke specifically of the contribution which could be made
to United States-Venezuelan relations by increased travel on the part
of students, professors, labor leaders, etc. He suggested that groups of
U.S. students and labor leaders visit Venezuela, with their Venezuelan
counterparts visiting the United States. He said that if the United States
would sponsor the visits of such groups to the extent of paying their
transportation, Venezuela would cooperate by declaring them guests
of the nation and handling their maintenance expenses while they are
in Venezuela. He suggested that perhaps the same thing could be done
with reference to Venezuelan students and labor leaders who might
visit the United States. Turning to his suggestion that American profes-
sors come to Venezuela to visit the University, Betancourt said he has
many professor-­friends in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas and
Columbia University who speak Spanish and who know Latin America
and who could perform a fine service during brief visits to Venezuela,
In this connection he mentioned specifically Ronald Hilton in Stanford
University.5 He said “don’t be afraid” with reference to both students’
visits and workers’ visits to Venezuela—­making clear that he had in
mind the experience of Vice President Nixon last year. He said that U.S.
students could visit the University here with no trouble and could have
a very good effect on the situation here. He said he would see that any
workers who came were taken to the Casa Sindical and that here again
any contact they had with Venezuelans could be very productive.
President Betancourt suggested that the Embassy explore the pos-
sibility of organizing some kind of a cultural exchange committee of
younger pro-American professional people, with the emphasis on mid-
dle class rather than wealthy good families, to be composed in large
part of doctors, lawyers and businessmen who may have studied in
the United States and who are friendly to the United States. He said
there are many of these people, and he mentioned Dr. Marcel Roche6
5 Professor of Romance Languages and Director of Hispanic-American Studies.
6 An atomic scientist.

as an example, who with some organization would be able to make a
real contribution to United States-Venezuelan relations. He suggested
that this group for example might be able to help select and find pro-
fessors in the United States or other public figures who might come to
Venezuela on visits for study or speaking purposes. The President said
that he would speak to the Minister of Education7 about this and sug-
gest that he work with the Embassy on the idea. Betancourt said that it
would be more productive to develop a program of this kind with the
Minister of Education rather than attempt to do it with the University
authorities.
With reference to petroleum restrictions the President made it clear
that he was informed but not excited about the obligatory program.
He recognized the cutbacks in production which have taken place in
the United States and he recognized also the importance of explaining
correctly to the Venezuelan people what the true situation of the petro-
leum market is. He spoke of the extreme importance to Venezuela of
having a stable market for petroleum and of not having to experience
a sharp drop in price. At the same time he said of course it is essential
for Venezuela that its overall income from petroleum not be sharply
reduced. There was at no time a suggestion that Venezuela would pro-
test the mandatory program but the President obviously trusts that the
United States will administer the program in such a way as to avoid
any unnecessary hardship on Venezuela. He said that he will work
with the Minister of Mines to accomplish a good understanding by the
Venezuelan people of this situation and he also said that he will tell
the Minister to draft a note for delivery to the United States contain-
ing Venezuelan reaction and ideas concerning the restriction program.8
President Betancourt said that his Government has no intention of con-
fusing the trade agreement negotiations with the oil restrictions; he said
that in his opinion these are two entirely different things.
President Betancourt spoke of the problem of military expendi-
tures and said that he is anxious to accomplish a number of things for
the Armed Forces that will represent an expenditure additional to the
regular budget. He made clear that what he has in mind is not an expen-
diture to improve the lot of the officers, and he made reference to the
Circulo Militar when he said that the Venezuelan people already think
that the military fare very well, but that he would like to improve some
of the barracks for the soldiers, to move a transport unit now located
7 Rafael Pizani.
8 The Venezuelan Government did not vigorously protest the mandatory restric-
tions program. However, in a memorandum dated April 24, 1959, the Government of
Venezuela did protest to the U.S. Government about the proposed modifications of the
mandatory imports program which would exempt Canadian and Mexican petroleum
imports. (ARA Files, Lot 61 D 318, “Oil-U.S. Legislation”)

Venezuela  1255
in Caracas outside the city and so on. He estimates that the things he
has in mind might cost 10 million dollars. In order to accomplish these
expenditures without increasing the budget he hopes that it may be
possible to acquire some of the normal materiel by means other than by
direct purchase at full price, as under the Credit Arrangement with the
United States for example, If he can arrange this normal acquisition at
a lesser price he perhaps will be able to use the money thus saved for
these other improvements which he has in mind. The President said
that his military officers have told him that other Latin American coun-
tries, specifically Colombia and Brazil, are able to make purchases of
materiel in the United States on the basis of more or less token pay-
ments. He is not familiar with the arrangements these countries may
have with the United States but he made clear that he is interested in
learning more about those arrangements. He explained that he is not
complaining at all and that he realizes the Perez Jimenez Government
made much of its alleged ability to pay cash for all of its extravagant
purchases. The situation is quite different now and his Government is
prepared to admit its problems; he hopes that the United States may be
able to help him in some of the solutions.
With reference to other governmental programs, he spoke of his
plans for public beaches on the Litoral, of a public park in the east of
the city and another on the site of the old hipodromo (with baseball
fields, basketball courts and other facilities), of moving people from
the ranchitos in Caracas back to the countryside and helping them to
set up in small scale agricultural endeavors. With specific reference
to this last point, President Betancourt said that 3,000 families have
already indicated their willingness to move from Caracas back to
the country.
The Foreign Minister had spoken to President Betancourt about
the Jerusalem vs. Tel Aviv conflict for the location if diplomatic mis-
sions in Israel. The President showed knowledge of this situation and
of the United Nations resolutions on the subject and indicated that
Venezuela’s decision will probably be in favor of Tel Aviv. He sug-
gested that the previous decision to locate the Venezuelan Legation
in Jerusalem had been made by the former Foreign Minister who
had perhaps been influenced in that decision by the fact that he is
Jewish.
President Betancourt made a strong statement in support of locat-
ing the new Inter-American Bank in Caracas. He said that this would be
an opportunity to lessen the North Americanization of inter-American
institutions and said that he thought it would be an excellent idea from
the point of view of the United States as well as Latin America for this
bank not to be located in Washington or New York. He said he felt that

Caracas was a reasonable compromise as a location for the bank and he
hopes very much that this will be the final decision.
President Betancourt referred briefly to the Dominican Republic
and Venezuela’s problems with Trujillo, stating very definitely that
Venezuela will present the problem of the Dominican Republic for con-
sideration in the OAS within the next few weeks.
With reference to Puerto Rico and his friend, Mufioz-Marin,
President Betancourt said that the Governor will be coming to Caracas
for a visit in about six weeks. Betancourt said that he intends to meet
the Governor on his arrival in Maiquetia and that Muñioz-Marin will
be his personal guest in his home during his visit to Caracas.9
9 At the request of Assistant Secretary Rubottom, the Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs, William P. Snow, excerpted some of the state-
ments recorded in this memorandum and sent them to the Acting Secretary of State.
Program.”)
VE–23.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting
Secretary of State1

Washington, March 27, 1958.
SUBJECT
Expulsion from U.S. of Pérez Jiménez and Family
The action of the Immigration and Naturalization Service in
ordering Venezuelan ex-President Pérez Jiménez and family to leave
the United States by April 15 already having been taken and pub-
licly announced, this Department should acquiesce in that decision.
In my opinion, however, it is unfortunate that we were not consulted
in advance in order to bring into the purview of discussion certain
political and other considerations which I will briefly allude to below.
We should recognize that much pressure has been exerted on the
Department of Justice to expel Pérez Jiménez by (1) liberal organiza-
tions and the press, (2) members of Congress, and (3) in all likelihood
Vice President Nixon.

Venezuela  1257
From the standpoint of our relations with Latin America, includ-
ing Venezuela itself, the Pérez Jiménez problem was no longer serious.
We had stood on our long time principle, plus the added factor of his
having entered the U.S. on a Venezuelan passport issued by the Junta
Government and with a visa requested by that Government, and this
seemed to have been widely recognized. In Venezuela itself, every-
body knew that President Betancourt had resided in the United States
and Puerto Rico for many years in spite of repeated demands by Pérez
Jiménez that he be expelled.
It is particularly unfortunate to have the Pérez Jiménez issue head-
lined again on the eve of Castro’s probable visit to the U.S., and while
we are considering cases of many former Cuban officials in the Batista
administration, some of which are real hardship cases. Decision regard-
ing these cases will now be more difficult.
There remains the basic problem of the failure of the Department
of Justice (Immigration and Naturalization Service) to consult with us
on a highly charged case which directly involves our relations with all
of Latin America and especially Venezuela where U.S. Investment is the
highest in the world except for Canada.
I recommend that you call Attorney General Rogers at once to
advise him of our concern over the way this case was handled and that
Messrs. Murphy, Hanes and I be authorized to take immediate steps in
concert with the Justice Department to prevent a recurrence.2
VE–24.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to
the Department of State1
566. Saturday papers front paged INS stories order that Perez
Jimenez and family leave U.S. by April 15, possibility appeal noted but
general impression is Perez Jimenez will depart. UP and ’AP reported
State Department supports INS order and that his expulsion is in U.S.
interests.

Editorial and cartoon comment hall move EL NACIONAL com-
ments “if they really expel Perez Jimenez, welcome Mr. Nixon” EL
INDEPENDIENTE editorial welcomes change of policy of support
toward Perez Jimenez and other dictators although considering it
overdue follow up stories report Perez Jimenez planning go Spain or
Dominican Republic.
Sparks
VE–25.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela,
March 31, 19591
Caracas, March 31, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
President Rómulo Betancourt
Minister of Mines Juan Pablo Pérez Alfonso
Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Asst. Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
Ambassador Edward J. Sparks
Minister-Counselor Charles R. Burrows
Economic Counselor Harlan P. Bramble
The conversation took place at a luncheon at Miraflores which
President Betancourt offered for Mr. Mann.2
Mr. Mann spoke to the President of the reports which have reached
Washington concerning the auspicious beginning of the President’s
term of office. President Betancourt expressed his appreciation to
Mr. Mann for these thoughts, indicating his obvious satisfaction and
belief that his five-­year term will be a constructive one. The President
spoke of the problems which Venezuela faces and of the demanding
work which is required of him. He gave particular emphasis here to
the problem of unemployment and said that the total number of unem-
ployed in the country is some 250,000. He spoke of his plans to attack
the unemployment problem and to improve the basic economic posi-
tion of the country. Mr. Mann spoke of the importance of small industry
to a country like Venezuela and the President agreed, saying that this
Burrows, and sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 867 from Caracas,
April 3, 1959.
ing the U.S. oil imports system.

Venezuela  1259
was an integral part of his plans. President Betancourt, expanding on
this idea of small industry, gave particular attention to the resuscitation
in Venezuela of handicraft industries and spoke of the desirability of
decentralizing industries of this or any other and throughout the coun-
try and away from Caracas, The President spoke also of his plans for
agrarian reform, irrigation, and low-­cost housing. He referred again as
he had in an earlier conversation (on March 10) to the Government’s
program directed toward facilitating and encouraging the return of
many of the ranchito dwellers in the various centers of population to
agricultural areas. The President spoke of the necessity for local financ-
ing, particularly in the field of housing, and of his desire to broaden the
base of this financing by instituting a system of popular investment in
government housing bonds. In terms of a basic source for such invest-
ments, the President spoke particularly of the higher paid workers of
the country, specifically in the oil industry but also in certain other
fields, and of the necessity of encouraging these workers to save their
money and to make it available through investments of this kind for
the development of the country. He said he is thinking seriously of a
plan under which up to 50% of year-­end utilidades in the petroleum
and other industries would be invested by the workers in Government
bond issues for low-­cost housing.
The President throughout the conversation demonstrated full
confidence and conviction that he would be able to carry through his
program with complete success. He recognized the activities of the
Communists but expressed his opinion that by 1964, the next election,
the Communists will be able to account for no more than 60,000 votes.
The President, and Minister Pérez Alfonso (who arrived some five min-
utes late) spoke with obvious preoccupation of the various labor dis-
putes and strikes with which they have had to deal in the last two or
three weeks. The President said that it has taken a great deal of his time
since he has had to deal personally with all of them. He spoke particu-
larly of the illegal LAV pilots’ strike and the hunger strike of the impris-
oned military officers. Pérez Alfonso mentioned and then the President
discussed a bit further the Orinoco Mining Comp any strike. The reac-
tion of the President and Pérez Alfonso seemed to be that the company
has been inclined to be overly legalistic in its dealings with the workers.
There was no protracted discussion of this subject however, except that
the President’s preoccupation was obvious, as was his apparent deter-
mination to endeavor to contribute to a solution of the strike.
The President made a very quick reference to the news from
the United States concerning the decision of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service respecting the continued stay in the United
States of Pérez Jiménez; in this connection he referred smilingly to LA
ESFERA’s editorial of this morning (this editorial suggested that now

was the time for the Venezuelan Foreign Office to press, as it should
have done before this, for the extradition of Pérez Jiménez). There was
no further discussion of this.
The President then turned to Mr. Mann to ask him what “good
news” he brought from Washington. Mr. Mann described his detailed
conversation that morning with the Minister of Mines3 and said that
he felt there had been a thorough discussion of the petroleum situa-
tion. Mr. Mann emphasized to President Betancourt his belief that it is
extremely important for the President and the Minister to have imme-
diate conversations with representatives of the petroleum industry in
order to dissipate what Mr. Mann fears is a growing misunderstanding
and fear on the part of the industry of the Government‘s plans. President
Betancourt seemed obviously taken aback at the suggestion of indus-
try fears and agreed that such conversations would be undertaken
forth-­with. Mr. Mann suggested perhaps such conversations might
begin with a person like Mr. Proudfit of Creole, in whom he believed
the President and the Minister had full confidence, and who Mr. Mann
considers to be a fair representative of the industry as a whole. In agree-
ment with the President’s expressed position on this, Pérez Alfonso
said that he would begin tomorrow conversations with Mr. Proudfit
which would later be expanded to include the entire industry. With
reference to U.S. restrictions on petroleum imports, the President sug-
gested that the petroleum companies seem to have followed the posi-
tion of the Communists more than they have that of the United States
or Venezuelan Governments. He said that the U.S. Government feels
that restrictions are necessary and that the Venezuelan Government has
not protested this decision. On the other hand the Communists have
protested as have also the petroleum companies.
At this point the President made reference to nationalistic pres-
sures in Venezuela and suggested that the Government would be orga-
nizing soon a national governmental petroleum company. Mr. Mann
expressed the hope that this operation would not be a cause of further
misunderstanding on the part of the industry in Venezuela and that
the company would not engage in competitive activities. The President
said that was not all his idea and explained that at a time like this
when nationalistic pressures have to be answered, it is better for the
government to take a small step to deflect the pressure rather than to
hesitate and be forced into a much bigger step later on. He said that
one of the main purposes of the company would be to provide oppor-
tunity for the training of Venezuelan technicians, who Pérez Alfonso
said are in extremely short supply. The Minister said for example that
Files, Lot 61 D 319, “Oil Imports Program.”

Venezuela  1261
it is very difficult for his Ministry to find qualified people to fill neces-
sary positions.
Ambassador Sparks opened the subject of recent developments
in the Caribbean and the President’s reaction to them. Mr. Mann
described how the initial favorable and enthusiastic public reaction in
the United States toward the successful outcome of the Cuban revo-
lution is now being tempered by second thoughts as developments
in Cuba and continuing unfriendly and extreme statements by Castro
are being observed. Pérez Alfonso expressed his understanding of the
immediate reaction in Cuba to the sudden release from the Batista dic-
tatorship but he showed concern at the continuing lack of discipline
there and the failure to return to normalcy. President Betancourt made
clear that he retains his basic sympathy for the new Government in
Cuba, although being disturbed by present developments, and that he
intends to do everything he can to advise Castro and to help in bring-
ing some reason back into the situation. Betancourt said that Castro
is a very young man, that he has a great deal to learn, and that he
is very naive. The President spoke of Castro’s attempt to obtain from
Venezuela, when he spoke to Betancourt here in January, a loan of
$300,000,000. He said also that Castro had suggested that Venezuela
might sell petroleum to Cuba at a reduced price, in answer to which
Betancourt said that he had suggested to Castro that presumably. Cuba
would likewise be prepared to sell its sugar to Venezuela at a discount.
The President said that a Cuban commercial mission is expected to
arrive soon in Caracas and he indicated his intention to receive it sym-
pathetically although he expects the mission will have far too much
optimism in regard to Venezuela’s capabilities in this field. Betancourt’s
attitude was more one of sadness and sympathy than anything else. In
answer to Ambassador Sparks’ reference to the experience of Figueres
in Habana, President Betancourt said he believed that any monetary
misunderstanding with Castro had been cleared up before Figueres
left. In connection with Betancourt’s references to Figueres, he took the
opportunity to recall (as he has done previously) the fact that Figueres
did not receive an invitation for a State Visit to the United States while
he was President of Costa Rica.
With regard to the Dominican situation, President Betancourt
described Venezuela’s attitude as one of forbearance and resistance
to a break in relations. This has been true despite continued needling
by Trujillo, such as declaring the Venezuelan Charge “persona non
grata,” unbridled newspaper and radio attacks on Venezuela and on
Betancourt, the departure from Caracas and return to Ciudad Trujillo of
the Dominican Ambassador and so on. Betancourt does not plan to break
relations nor to take any other direct action but he definitely expects to

introduce at the Quito Conference in 19604 a resolution under which
membership in the OAS would be made dependent upon the presence
in each country of a democratically elected government - perhaps even
with the election having been supervised by the OAS. There followed
some general discussion as to the United States’ position concerning
intervention and Betancourt expounded his ideas on multilateral vs.
unilateral action. He feels that if the United States were to take part
in a multilateral action or position with reference to dictatorships, this
would be generally accepted and applauded by the great majority of
Latin American nations. The only ones which would criticize would be
those very few countries which do not now enjoy democratic regimes.
Mr. Mann indirectly questioned this by a reference to the long-­standing
position of Mexico, for example, on the subject of intervention, but
President Betancourt expressed the belief that Mexico would go along
with a multilateral approach. President Betancourt said that as far as he
himself is concerned he definitely plans to have an OAS team present
in Venezuela for the 1964 election. He said that the one real imminent
danger for Trujillo is that the barbados from Cuba will take things into
their own hands and mount an invasion of the Dominican Republic.
President Betancourt then entered into a discussion of the great
desirability of doing everything possible to strengthen the OAS,
particularly by decentralization of some of its functions outside of
Washington. He mentioned the Inter-American Juridical Council in Rio
de Janeiro as being the only OAS Agency not located in Washington
and then repeated the Venezuelan arguments for the establishment of
the new Inter-American Bank in Caracas. Mr. Mann reviewed the entire
background of this question from the U.S. point of view and described
the basis on which the U.S. position has been adopted favoring the loca-
tion of the Bank in Washington or New York. President Betancourt was
obviously not impressed by these arguments and Mr. Mann asked him
if this were a highly important issue to him. The President responded by
saying that it is a highly important question to the future welfare of the
OAS more than it is of importance to him personally or to Venezuela.
Mr. Mann said that he would discuss the matter again in Washington,
presenting the President’s points of views, although he said he feared
that he could offer little hope of success.
Ambassador Sparks raised the question of Pan American Airways’
problem of jet flights to and through Venezuela and the company’s
hope that the air base at Palo Negro might be used for its Asunción run
until the runway at Maiquetia may be lengthened. The Ambassador
4 Reference is to the Eleventh Inter-American Conference which was scheduled to
meet in Quito in February 1960, but which was delayed at the request of the Ecuadorean
government until early 1961 and then postponed indefinitely.

Venezuela  1263
explained that a total of some 12 or 13 landings (one a week south-
bound) is probably all that would be necessary since the strip at
Maiquetia should be finished within the next three or four months,
Betancourt was fully briefed on this matter and as we were leaving
his office he read an order to the effect that the work on the runway at
Maiquetia be undertaken and completed as quickly as possible.
In reply to Ambassador Sparks’ question concerning the recently
expressed position of the AD youth concerning Figueres, Mufioz-
Marin, Romauldi, and so on, the President said this small wing of the
party is completely a dissident one, of very small consequence, and that
its members will be expelled from the party. He said that his invitation
to Mufioz-Marin to visit Venezuela still stands, and he expects there
will be no trouble when he comes, but the President also made clear
that there is at the moment no definite date for the visit. The inference
was that the President would await developments before issuing a defi-
nite invitation.
The President in an aside to Ambassador Sparks at the luncheon
table referred to the previous conversation on March 10 and recalled
to the Ambassador how he had said Venezuela would establish its
Legation in Tel Aviv rather than Jerusalem which had been done.
VE–26.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Venezuela1
645. Re recent discussions oil problem with Perez Alfonso, we have
questioned Canadian Emb in detail regarding time factor. After con-
sulting with Ottawa Emb has informed us:
1) Canadian Prime Minister2 has already publicly announced that
Govt will move quickly to establish national energy board.
2) Govt will propose resolution which will give Govt authority to
control imports and exports of oil and gas.
3) This proposed resolution will be debated approximately
April 20.
by Mann.
2 John G. Diefenbaker.

4) Debate will increase pressure on Govt to take positive action
including action on Montreal pipeline.
Inform Perez Alfonso as promptly as possible of foregoing and
state that Dept has no repeat no doubt that Canadian Govt rapidly
approaching position where it must commit itself to a course of action
which could be very prejudicial to Venezuela.3
Dept giving this matter further attention. Separate telegram to
Emb will be sent early next week.4
“Department seeking authority inform Canadian Government in
confidence within next few days that crude oil, unfinished oils and fin-
ished products imported by pipeline will be exempted from restrictions
imposed by mandatory oil import program effective May 1. Purpose
proposed exemption to forestall or minimize adoption by Canada of
more nationalistic oil policies lessen Canadian criticism of our oil poli-
cies and reduce friction between Canada and U.S. over this issue which
threatens impair our joint defense arrangements.” It added, “Exemption
for oil imported by pipeline not expected lead to important increase
imports and therefore it is not believed either domestic or other foreign
VE–27.
Despatch from the Ambassador in Lebanon (McClintock)
to the Department of State1
Beirut, April 3, 1959.
No. 576.
SUBJECT
Publication in Arabic of the Recently Enacted Income Tax Law in Venezuela
In an effort to win friends and influence people, Mr. Bernardo
FLORES, Venezuelan Minister to Lebanon, has announced the publi-
cation in Arabic of the new “Income Tax Law”, which has had such a
serious effect on the foreign oil companies doing business in Venezuela.

Venezuela  1265
There follows a translation from the original French of the arti-
cle which appeared in the afternoon daily “Le Soir” of March 17, 1959,
announcing that an Arabic text was now available.
LAW AN INCOME TAX IN VENEZUELA JUST
PUBLISHED IN ARABIC LANGUAGE
In its Arabic publication series of economic laws in Venezuela, the
Legation of this country in Beirut, headed by H.E. Mr. Bernardo Flores,
Minister Plenipotentiary, has just published the new “Income Tax Law”
promulgated lately by the President of the Republic of Venezuela, Mr.
Romulo Betancourt, who was the first precursor of the economic rule of
“fifty-­fifty” (50%–50%) on the Venezuela oil revenues.
In his preface, written especially for the Arabic edition, Mr. Flores
writes: “Venezuela, which considers the Arab Nation as a sister coun-
try to which many bonds attach it socially and humanely, hopes that
the present translation will be of use to the Arab states, and that it will
lead to an understanding of the juridical-­economic measures adopted
in Venezuela, as well as to their excellent results.”
VE–28.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela,
April 27, 19591
Caracas, April 27, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
President Rómulo Betancourt
Ambassador Edward J. Sparks
Minister-Counselor Charles R. Burrows
Ambassador Sparks told the President that he had brought
Mr. Burrows along as he was going to be absent next week in Chile
to attend the Chiefs of Mission Conference and he felt Mr. Burrows
should be completely informed on the subjects of today’s conversation.
President Betancourt expressed his understanding.
The President was 15 minutes late for the appointment, which had
been arranged at Ambassador Sparks’ request, and it became obvious
immediately that the reason for his delay had been a telephone call
Burrows and transmitted to the Department under cover of despatch 957 from Caracas,
April 28, 1959.

from Ambassador Falcon Briceño in Washington. Before Ambassador
Sparks had an opportunity to indicate the purpose of his visit, the
President said that he was concerned and worried by a report which
he had received with reference to a decision by the United States to
exempt Canada from the petroleum import control restrictions. He
said that Falcon Briceño had told him that a draft letter has been pre-
pared in Washington for President Eisenhower to send Betancourt
simultaneously with the announcement of the exemption, explain-
ing the reasons for the action and making clear that conversations
would continue in an effort to find a satisfactory hemispheric solu-
tion to the general problem.2 Ambassador Sparks said that this had
been one of the reasons he had asked for an audience, and then
explained the detailed reasoning behind the exemption for Canada.
The Ambassador placed primary stress on the integrated defense
position of the United States and Canada, and on the impossibility
of satisfying Canada that she should be subject to petroleum import
restrictions at the same time that our security plans are so completely
and indistinguishably intertwined. Ambassador Sparks also gave
particular attention to the thesis that in taking this step the United
States is actually protecting Venezuela’s market for petroleum in
Canada, since we will hope that as a result pressure will be lessened
in the Canadian Parliament to authorize the construction of a pipe-
line from Alberta to Montreal thus excluding imports of Venezuelan
petroleum. President Betancourt accepted the logic of these explana-
tions and also said he appreciated the fact that Venezuela’s sales of
petroleum in the United States will probably not suffer much because
of the exemption for Canada, but he said that this action puts him in
a very difficult position public opinion-­wise. As long as the dictator-
ship was in power, Venezuela had protested the imposition of import
controls by the United States, had encouraged delegations like that
of the American Chamber of Commerce to go to the United States in
protest, and had even threatened retaliation in the form of iron ore
export controls. In contrast, Betancourt has not protested the obliga-
tory import control system but on the other hand has adopted a very
2 There were two drafts of the letter. One prepared by Carl Bartch, dated April 24,
of the Bureau of Economic Affairs, which ultimately was used. (ARA Files, Lot 61 D 319,
“Petroleum Policy.”)
transmitted to the Embassy in telegram 724. It stated that the forthcoming amendment
to the mandatory program would, “improve the operation of the program and serve the
interests of the Western Hemisphere. While the relatively small amount of Canadian oil
sold in the North Central and Northwestern part of the United States does not compete
with Venezuelan oil, this amendment will, we hope, reduce the serious risk of a perma-

Venezuela  1267
understanding position. At the same time Canada made public its
protestations and now Canada is being granted an exemption from
the controls. This, says the President, will make him look to his peo-
ple as being entirely too weak or even cowardly to protect his coun-
try’s best interests. Ambassador Sparks expressed understanding of
the President’s problem and asked him if he had any suggestions as
to how the matter might best be presented to the Venezuelan public.
The President said that he has a radio-­television address scheduled
for the night of April 30 and he hopes he may be able at that time to
tell the Venezuelan people of the Canadian exemption and that he has
received assurances from the United States Government that there
will be no untoward effect on importations into the United States of
Venezuelan petroleum. The Ambassador said he would report imme-
diately to the Department the President’s thoughts on this matter.
The President was not bitter in his conversation but he was obviously
very concerned.
The President then discussed somewhat the Venezuelan economic
situation and said that he feels confident about it. He said that a group
of Venezuelan banks have assured the Government that they can han-
dle an internal credit of 500,000,000 Bolivares. He recognized also
that there will have to be some foreign loans but the President said
that he is thinking of this in terms of an Export-Import Bank loan for
electrification development, and also an overall IBRD loan based on
fundamental economic studies of what the country needs in the way
of really basic development. He said that the Government’s employ-
ment program is going along quite well and that the excitement over
unemployment is very much reduced. He pointed out, for example,
that the threatened unemployment demonstration a few days ago was
never held.
President Betancourt said that in the Government’s budget plan-
ning he is thinking in terms of an operating Budget and a Public Works
Budget. He is anxious also to do a few things for the Armed Forces and
he repeated what he had said on a previous occasion about the deplor-
able conditions in many of the barracks. He wants to take corrective
action but this work will not fit into his budget unless he can some-
how economize on other expenditures. The President said that expen-
ditures for military materiel will total Bs. 45,000, 000 next year unless
arrangements can be made to make token payments” to the United
States as he understands Uruguay and Brazil do. The Ambassador
recalled that the President had spoken of this before but had not set
forth his ideas in any detail. The President said he would send the
Ambassador a memorandum on this subject and he hoped something
could be done about it.

The President talked also about Communism in Venezuela and
although he recognized quite readily that the Communists are active,
and that they infiltrated very successfully during the Provisional
Government regime, he said that steps have been taken and will be
continued to keep them under control. He pointed out that there are
no Communists at high levels in the Government, that the Communist
Party has not been included in any political conferences sponsored by
the Government and that they themselves have been protesting their
exclusion. He recognized that in the University the Communists are
active and dangerous but said (very confidentially) that plans are being
made now to have another person elected Rector in July of this year
who will take a much stronger stand against the Communists than
has the present Rector. The President expressed satisfaction with the
change in the newspaper field and pointed out that the Capriles pub-
lications are now carrying anti-Communist articles. He said that the
Communist Youth Conference which has been discussed will not be
held in Caracas; he has issued instructions that no visas be given to any
prospective delegates. He said also however that he has issued instruc-
tions that the so-­called Anti-Communist Conference under the lead-
ership of Prieto Laurens not be permitted to be held. Betancourt has
known Prieto Laurens for many years and he considers him an adven-
turer who has seized upon the anti-Communism banner for his own
self-­serving purposes, He recalled that on one occasion when he was
passing through Mexico, while he was in exile, Prieto Laurens said that
he would bring Lombardo Toledano3 to the airport to see Betancourt.
Toledano did not come to the airport. Betancourt’s inference seemed to
be that at the time Prieto Laurens was trying, unsuccessfully, to build
himself up in Toledano’s eyes.
Ambassador Sparks mentioned that he had heard rumors of a
possible meeting here on May 1 of Latin American labor leaders inter-
ested in organizing a labor federation from which the United States
and Canada would be excluded. The President indicated that he also
had heard these reports, but he said nothing of this kind was going to
happen here. He said the AD labor leaders have no intention of leav-
ing CRIT.
Ambassador Sparks reviewed for President Betancourt the con-
tents of Embtel 625 concerning the Venezuelan position on Trujillo
3 Vicente Lombardo Toledano, Mexican labor leader and unsuccessful popular
party presidential candidate in 1952.

Venezuela  1269
as described by the Foreign Minister,4 and Deptel 698 outlining the
Department’s reaction to the conversation with the Foreign Minister.5
President Betancourt made clear in no uncertain terms that the Foreign
Minister had stated accurately the Venezuelan position with reference
to Trujillo. The President also confirmed that if he did not react imme-
diately to an attack on Venezuela by attacking Trujillo he would be
overthrown by the Armed Forces. In reply to a question the President
confirmed that Gonzalo Barrios is going to Washington within the
very near future and that his mission will be not that of Permanent
Representative to the OAS but the very special one of introducing into
the OAS a suggestion for action against Trujillo. He also made it clear
that what Venezuela has in mind is not just a general anti-­dictatorship
resolution but a very definitely pin-­pointed anti-Trujillo position. The
President said that Trujillo is the one threat to hemispheric peace and
every country in the Hemisphere should realize this. The President
said that he is being subjected to great pressure to break relations with
the Dominican Republic but he has opposed this action. He hopes
to handle Trujillo through the OAS. He also said he is not concerned
over Somoza or Stroessner; Trujillo is the enemy. With Batista, Peron
and many Perezjiministas in the Dominican Republic certainly Cuba,
Venezuela and Colombia can never feel secure and he feels that even
Argentina should be concerned. He confirmed that one of the missions
of the Foreign Minister on his trip to Buenos Aires for the Meeting of
the 21 will be to discuss this anti-Trujillo move in the OAS with the
Argentine, Uruguayan and Brazilian Governments. The President said
that Castro will certainly not restrain himself long from an all-­out attack
on Trujillo. Betancourt is convinced that unless Trujillo is made to leave
by what he called “diplomatic means”, there will be an international
war in the Caribbean - between Cuba, and the Dominican Republic -
within two months.
The President said that he would prepare and give Ambassador
Sparks a copy of a memorandum outlining the basis for his accu-
sations against Trujillo and for the Venezuelan position toward the
that the Venezuelan Cabinet had reached the conclusion that the U.S. was supporting
Trujillo and the Foreign Minister implied that if Trujillo attacked Venezuela, Venezuela
would reciprocate. The telegram also reported that the Embassy denied emphatically the
Cabinet’s conclusion about the U.S. position, and stressed that the U.S. position was to
support OAS and Inter-American treaty commitments on non-­intervention and the rights
vinced there would be strong, unfavorable reaction throughout the American states if
Venezuela launched an attack against another American republic without adequate evi-
dence that the latter attacked Venezuela, and without at the same time taking the the

Trujillo Government; the President suggested that Ambassador
Sparks might take this memorandum along with him to Santiago
to discuss it with Mr. Rubottom. One of the main complaints the
President will include in this memorandum, it seemed apparent
from the conversation, will be a detailed reference to the daily radio
broadcasts from the Dominican Republic attacking Betancourt. Every
morning at 6:30 a.m. the official Dominican Station carries a vitriolic
diatribe, in insulting terms, against the Venezuelan Government and
Betancourt personally. This program is monitored by the Venezuelan
Armed Forces, the President says, and transcripts are furnished him
immediately. The President said the Venezuelan Government radio
never broadcasts propaganda of this nature. The President also said
that he would suggest to Gonzalo Barrios that he talk to Mr. Burrows
before he goes to Washington and explain to Mr. Burrows what he
intends to do in the OAS.
The President then turned to the matter of anti-Betancourt and anti
Venezuelan propaganda which has been “flooding” the country from
the Dominican Republic. He referred specifically to the American ship
SS NANCY LYKES which is being held in Puerto La Cruz and said
that he is going to issue definite instructions that any ship or airplane
coming to Venezuela from the Dominican Republic be subjected to a
thorough inspection before any cargo or passengers can be discharged.
The land of inspection he envisaged will result in costly delays, but
he is satisfied that the only answer for the shipping lines or the air-
lines will be not to have any ships or planes attempt to enter Venezuela
after having stopped in the Dominican Republic. Ambassador Sparks
observed that this was a very strong measure to take and the President
agreed that it was but he made quite clear that as far as he is concerned
there is no alternative.
President Betancourt at this point also referred to the numerous
bombs that are being found around the city. So far they have been
found before explosion and he trusts the police will continue to be
successful in this. He is satisfied they are being placed by Dominican
agents; certainly he thinks no Venezuelan would be capable of man-
ufacturing one. Venezuelans, he said, have had no experience as
terrorists.
The President said that his military people advise him that
members of the American military missions have been expressing to
Venezuelan military officers their concern about the inroads of the
Communists in Venezuela. The President made it very clear that he did
not think these matters fell within the purview of the American military
missions and that he did not consider that remarks of this kind made
his job any easier. He said that he is not ingenuous about the position
of the Communists and he repeated that appropriate attention is being
paid them; he said further that the Armed Forces are solidly with and

Venezuela  1271
behind him. Ambassador Sparks agreed that our military mission peo-
ple should not engage in conversations of this kind and said that he
would look into it.
The President, in speaking of his position with regard to the
Communists and the Armed Forces, also said that reports concern-
ing division among the three major parties are very much exagger-
ated. He said that, as a matter of fact, he was having lunch that day
with leaders of the three parties in order to discuss important current
problems.
At the end of the conversation Ambassador Sparks asked President
Betancourt if the matter of PAA jet landings at Palo Negro pending the
completion of the Maiquetia airstrip is a closed issue. The President said
that the one experimental landing presents no problem, but the Armed
Forces are very much opposed to continuing landings on a commercial
basis until the airstrip at Maiquetia is finished and the President did not
see how he could properly override this objection. The President said
that in any case the work on the Maiquetia airstrip will be completed
in October.
VE–29.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Great Britain1
Prior to his departure for Arab Petroleum Conference Venezuelan
Minister of Mines Pérez Alfonso was requested by Department to stop
in Washington for consultation on proposed exemption from U.S.
import restrictions of crude oil and derivative products transported
into this country by pipeline. Latest information indicates he is return-
ing from conference via Athens, Belgrade, London and Washington,
not arriving here until May 4. View his change of plans and imminence
Canadian debate on national energy resources bill it not possible delay
public announcement of exemption until Department has had opportu-
nity consult with him as originally planned.
Embassy is therefore requested contact Pérez Alfonso as soon as
he arrives in London later this week to inform him before April 30
by Bartch and approved by Snow; repeated for information to the U.S. Embassies in
Canada and Venezuela.

if possible of action being taken and reasons such action essential in
advance of agreement with Venezuela on possible broader hemisphere
approach to oil import problem. Probable timing this action which
amends President’s Proclamation of March 10 to provide exemption
for crude oil, unfinished oils and finished products imported by pipe-
line, motor carrier or rail is that it will be approved by President April
The proclamation President proposes to issue in effect provides for
exemption from U.S. restrictions of Canadian crude oil and derivative
products imported by overland transportation.
In discussing amended oil import program with Pérez Alfonso fol-
lowing major considerations should be emphasized:
1. Possibility that U.S. might have to take action along these lines
has been subject informal conversations between U.S. and Venezuela
for several months.
2. Although we had hoped through informal discussions with
Canada and Venezuela to reach agreement on some form of hemi-
sphere approach to oil import problem action concerning Canadian
oil was necessary soonest because Canadian Parliament begins
debate April 30 on national energy resources bill with broad policy-­
making and regulatory authority including control of imports and
exports of oil and gas. Ultimately adoption of such policy proba-
bly would involve building uneconomic pipeline across Canada
and imposing restrictions against foreign oil which now supplies
Montreal refining area.
3. Since market for Venezuelan oil in eastern Canada is second in
importance only to U.S. market we believe any action we can take that
would tend preserve this market is in Venezuela’s long-­term interest as
well as our own.
4. We do not expect exemption will result in important increase
in imports of Canadian oil nor that it will cause any significant reduc-
tion in amount of oil imported from other supplying countries includ-
ing Venezuela. Levels of imports established for allocation purposes
shall not apply to crude oil and derivative products exempted from
program and therefore no significant reduction is expected in alloca-
tions as result amendment. Allocations can be reduced under amended
program only if President finds such action necessary to prevent total
imports from attaining levels which seriously impair accomplishment
purpose of program.
5. Canadian oil is high cost relative to that of other major produc-
ing countries and competes successfully only in Districts II and V nei-
ther of which is important market for Venezuelan oil. Present program
announced March 10 already provides for what in effect is preferred

Venezuela  1273
treatment for Canadian oil imported into District II. It is not expected
that increase in Canadian oil imported into District V as result proposed
exemption will substantially exceed present level. Nevertheless if con-
trary to our expectations any substantial displacement of Venezuelan
oil should occur as result exemption U.S. is prepared consult with
Venezuela and Canada to adjust situation.
6. We regard amended program as consistent with our joint
interest in common with Canada and the other American Republics
in defense and security of hemisphere. We therefore hope that
Venezuela will not/repeat not consider our action as discriminatory
but as necessary initial step toward possible broader hemisphere
approach to problem.
7. We have Venezuela’s interests very much in mind and will in
future give full and sympathetic consideration to views of GOV. We are
mindful of understanding and cooperation displayed by present GOV
on oil imports problem in the past and hope that bilateral talks seek-
ing broader solution may be resumed near future. FYI Perez Alfonso
is close adviser to Venezuelan President on petroleum matters and is
understood have President’s complete confidence and support. In past
he has shown sympathetic and cooperative attitude toward restrictions
U.S. has imposed on oil imports. Present Venezuelan Government took
the initiative in preparing Venezuelan public opinion for imposition
March 10 of mandatory oil import program and President Betancourt
apparently hopes do so in regard Canadian exemption from program.
President and Minister of Mines have particularly emphasized inter-
est in maintaining Venezuela’s share of U.S. market and stabilizing oil
prices at high level. They recognize that U.S. restrictions have contrib-
uted to market stability. Since action we are about to take applies only
to Canadian oil it introduces new feature in U.S. oil import program
to which GOV objects in principle on grounds it discriminates against
Venezuela in favor Canada.
END FYI
Cable Department and repeat Caracas report conversation with
Perez Alfonso.2
Dillon
ited stay in London, the general purport of the message, as given in telegram 9575, was

VE–30.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Santiago, Chile,
August 18, 19591
Santiago, August 18, 1959.
US/MC/11
SUBJECT
1) Former President Perez Jimenez;
2) Fidel Castro
PARTICIPANTS
United States

Venezuela
The Secretary

Foreign Minister ARGAYA Bivero
Mr. Rubottom

Ambassador FAIGON Bricano, Amb. To the U.S.

    and the OAS
The Venezuela Foreign Minister, Dr. Arcaya, called on the Secretary by
appointment today accompanied by the Ambassador to the United States
Marcos Palcon-Briceno. The Foreign Minister expressed great apprecia-
tion for the Secretary’s role at the Conference then said that he had an
important message to deliver at the request of President Betancourt.
The President had either yesterday or today ordered the
Venezuelan chargé in Washington to deliver a note to the Department
of State requesting the extradition of former President Perez Jimenez
and especially calling for his detention under the terms of Article 11
of the Extradition Treaty.2 He said that Venezuela had been working
towards this end for more than a year and that it was now empow-
ered under its laws to make the request as a result of a decision by the
Supreme Court. He stressed the “spectacular” effect which the deten-
tion of Perez Jimenez would have, although recognizing that he would
be able to get a habeas corpus action releasing him on bond within a day
or two. (The Foreign Minister explained that he had lived in the United
States for five years and was a qualified attorney there.)
The Secretary said that the documents furnished by Venezuela in
support of its request would have to be taken up through judicial chan-
nels in the United States, assuming that Perez Jimenez would invoke
legal defense. The Foreign Minister recalled that the Vice President,
1959.” Confidential. Drafted by Rubottom. Information on the source text indicates that
this conversation took place in the Hotel Carrere at 1.00 p.m. The Secretary was in Santiago
to attend the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of American
DR–11; VE–34.

Venezuela  1275
while in Caracas last year, had, in response to a press question, indi-
cated that the United States would grant a request for extradition if
made by the Venezuelan Government. Mr. Rubottom recalled that the
Vice President had actually said that the United States would give full
consideration to any such request in accordance with the terms of the
Extradition Treaty. The people of Venezuela would be unable to draw
that fine a distinction, retorted the Foreign Minister.
The Secretary said that he wanted to direct the discussion toward
Cuba, which probably looked on Venezuela as its closest friend among
her Latin American neighbors. Castro seemed to be slipping rather badly
and  leading Cuba into difficulties, and be hoped that the Venezuelans
would be able to have some influence on Castro whom he hoped to see
sometime next month, possibly stopping off in Cuba en route to the meet-
ing of the General Assembly. Mr. Rubottom described the deterioration
of United States-Cuban relations and the futile efforts in which Castro
seemed to be engaged in trying to separate the U.S. people from U.S.
Government, an impossible task in the name of a democracy like the
United States. Repeated attacks on the U.S. Government, with nothing
substantial to back them up, had gradually alienated most United States
public opinion and would redound to Cuba’s great detainment in the
long run. Castro had gained widespread public support in the United
States, especially after his trip last spring, but this had been frittered away.
VE–31.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,
Washington, August 23, 19591
Washington, August 23, 1959.
SUBJECT
Extradition of Pérez Jiménez
PARTICIPANTS
Minister Counselor Armando Rojas, Chargé d’ Affaires of the Venezuelan Embassy
Mr. José Gil-Borges, Counselor, Venezuelan Embassy
Assistant Secretary R. R. Rubottom, Jr.
Mr. William T. Briggs, EST
Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges called on Sunday, August 23, at
3:30 p.m. at Mr. Rubottom’s office to present a note requesting the
by Briggs.

provisional arrest of General (retired) Marcos Peréz Jiménez,2 in view
of the formal request for extradition of General Pérez Jiménez which
the Venezuelan Government was preparing and planned to present on
August 24 or 25. Minister Rojas said that his Government had asked
him to present this note immediately and that he had desired to make
the presentation to Mr. Rubottom personally in order to ensure that
his Government’s request would receive prompt consideration with a
view to eliminating the possibility that Pérez Jiménez might leave the
United States before extradition proceedings could get under way.
Mr. Rubottom replied that the Department had been informed
by Embassy Caracas that a request for extradition by the Venezuelan
Government was imminent and that Embassy Caracas had already
authenticated the documents connected with this request. Consequently,
and also in view of Minister Rojas’ earlier telephone call requesting the
appointment, the Department’s Legal Advisers had already been look-
ing into the matter and if Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges could wait, an
answer to their note could be drafted and given them within the hour.
Minister Rojas said that he and his colleague would wait.
Mr. Rubottom then instructed Mr. Neidle of L/ARA to proceed
with the preparation of the reply, and he gave the original of the
Venezuelan Embassy note to Mr. Neidle. Mr. Rubottom also instructed
Mr. Briggs to remain and to give whatever assistance might be nec-
essary to Mr. Neidle and to Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges, inasmuch
as his presence was required elsewhere because of a previous engage-
ment. Mr. Rubottom departed after an exchange of pleasantries and the
Venezuelan representatives accompanied Mr. Briggs to his office.
There was some general discussion of the case by the Venezuelan
Embassy representatives and Mr. Briggs, the gist of which was as
follows:
1. The Venezuelan Government would proceed rapidly with the
formal request for extradition of General Pérez Jiménez, and it was
estimated that the documents necessary to sustain this formal request
would arrive in Washington the following day.
2. Meanwhile, the Venezuelan Government, in view of the possibil-
ity that General Pérez Jiménez, learning of the Venezuelan Government’s
plans, might attempt to escape, desired that he be arrested and detained
pending initiation of the extradition process.
3. The U.S. attorneys for the GOV were prepared, immediately
upon receiving the Department’s note, to initiate proceedings toward
this end in the appropriate court in Miami, Florida, where General
Pérez Jiménez is at present.

Venezuela  1277
4. Although the Embassy had not received the pertinent doc-
uments, Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges understood that the charge
of murder contemplated in the extradition request may well have
referred to the assassination of Colonel Delgado Chalbaud, who at
the time of his assassination was head of the Venezuelan junta of
government and therefore the Chief of the Venezuelan State. The
two Venezuelan representatives gave an account of the circum-
stances surrounding this assassination. They commented that as far
as they knew the “Intellectual authorship” of the crime had not been
proved up to now. They said, however, that should this be the mur-
der charge which is being lodged against Pérez Jiménez, he would
not be able to avoid extradition proceedings on political grounds,
inasmuch as the treaty exempts the assassination of heads of state
from the list of political crimes. They added that at the time of his
assassination Colonel Delgado Chalbaud was head of the military
junta which governed Venezuela and was therefore the Chief of the
Venezuelan State.
After some further desultory conversation Mr. Neidle came in and
presented the Department’s note to Minister Rojas,3 whereupon he and
Mr. Gil-Borges took their leave.
3 The note, which was attached to the source text, is not printed.
VE–32.
Telegram from the Ambassador in the Dominican
Republic (Farland) to the Department of State1
124. Reputable confidential source has advised that Luis Chafardet
Urbina, former Perez Jimenez Ambassador to Dominican Republic and
who for last 18 months has resided Spain, has returned Ciudad Trujillo.
Presence Chafardet here possibly presages (1) return Perez Jiminez to
Dominican Republic to avoid extradition or following deportation by
INS; or, (2) Chafardet may be offering his services for propaganda or
other type campaign against Venezuela or Betancourt personally. If
aforementioned assumption (1) correct Embassy suggests efforts be
for information to the Embassy in Venezuela.

made prevent Perez Jimenez from returning Dominican Republic as his
presence here would undoubtedly contribute unresolved Caribbean
tensions. While it would obviously be preferable if Perez Jimenez
were away from western hemisphere, this choice may not be avail-
able. Choice may be U.S. or Dominican Republic and of these alterna-
tive evils Embassy submits that peace in Caribbean somewhat more
favored by his remaining in U.S.
Farland
VE–33.
Telegram from the Chargé in Venezuela (Burrows) to the
Department of State1
135. Foreign Ministry director international policy and other
Foreign Ministry officials at reception last night demonstrated open
pleasure at news Perez Jimenez preventive arrest2 indicating aware-
ness legal procedures could be protracted but assumption eventual
extradition.
Federal district governor Carrillo Batalla telephoned yesterday
afternoon to express concern Perez Jimenez’s deportation or flight
from U.S., now with legal procedures underway would cause serious
reaction here and throughout LA. Creole President Proudfit also tele-
phoned yesterday to express apprehension about adverse Venezuelan
reaction which he felt would follow if Perez Jimenez jumps bail and
escapes. Proudfit had made personal call Monday to voice opinion
based on conversation with Creole Venezuelan and U.S. executives
that failure of U.S. to extradite Perez Jimenez would result in serious
deterioration U.S.-Venezuelan relations with adverse repercussions on
U.S. business here.
Other reactions to Perez Jimenez arrest as reported in press:
Presidential Secretary General Velasquez “It is great news but I will
have to see him here before I believe it.”
entered an extradition petition in Miami’s Federal District Court, charging Pérez with
embezzlement and murder. Extradition procedures were completed on August 16, 1963.

Venezuela  1279
Presidential press secretary Stredel “it is great to see the old dicta-
tor on opposite side of fence for a change but we still see his extradition
a little far off. Let us hope justice is done.”
Presidential private secretary Yabrudy “too great to be true, time
will tell if they are really going to send him to U.S.”
All local papers featured headline news of arrest and released on
bail. Press, favorably impressed by arrest, increasingly insistent Perez
Jimenez be returned LA. ESFERA frontpage editorial typifies attitude:
first favorable impression caused by reported arrest was set back by
news that Perez Jimenez had been released on bond which, while
adequate for others, is insignificant in case of Perez Jimenez who has
robbed millions from public treasury; Venezuelan and continental dem-
ocratic opinion expects State Department to honor extradition request
based on Venezuela’s faith in U.S. fulfillment of international commit-
ments “we look on preventive arrest of Perez Jimenez as best evidence
for confidence in rectitude of U.S. justice and we expect extradition to
make just amends for blood, sweat and tears shed by Venezuelans for
ten years in cause of liberty.”
Burrows
VE–34.
Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela,
August 27, 19591
Caracas, August 27, 1959.
I called on the President at his home, where he is working while he
is on a 2-­week “vacation”. The interview was arranged at my request
for the purpose of conveying a message from Assistant Secretary Mann
and Ambassador Sparks as instructed by Department telegram 153.2
I first read to the President the message from Mr. Mann and
Ambassador Sparks, translating it as I read. The President nodded
Drafted by Burrows, and transmitted to the Department of State, under cover of despatch
a message to Betancourt which read, in part: “Due to circumstances beyond its control
it will not be possible to reach a definitive decision on question of possible relaxation of
import controls or residual fuel oil for burning until week commencing September 7.
U.S. general position is that country quotas for petroleum imports or exports would be

and expressed understanding at various points but did not indi-
cate any substantive reaction to the content of the message. He said
he wanted to discuss this with his advisers, particularly Minister of
Mines, and Hydrocarbons, PEREZ Alfonso, and that he would be able
to see them tomorrow night for this purpose. I mentioned that the tele-
gram had been sent NIACT and that I felt Ambassador Sparks would
await in Washington3 a reply from the President. President Betancourt
responded by saying in that case he would see Perez Alfonso tonight
and would convey to me tomorrow his decision as to whether he
would prefer that Mr. Mann visit Caracas.4 It became obvious during
the conversation that the President was turning over in his mind the
relative desirability of having the United States’ position become
known in Venezuela following a visit of Mr. Mann as compared with
having it become known through a formal note to the Foreign Office.
He also expressed tentative approval for his own part of a visit by Mr.
Mann to Caracas.
I asked the President how he felt about the outcome of the
Santiago Conference5 and the President said he was very satisfied. He
said that he had been somewhat disturbed by the editorial reaction of
most of the newspapers in Caracas and indicated he felt most of the
editorialists had exhibited a lack of intelligence or of understanding of
the Conference.
From the Santiago Conference the conversation turned to the
Dominican Republic and the situation in the Caribbean. The President
referred to the continued propaganda being issued by Trujillo against
him and spoke also of the libelous statements that are being distrib-
uted through the mails concerning MUÑOZ Marin. I spoke of our
interest in international free trade and asked the President if in his
opinion Venezuela will endeavor to exercise a complete boycott against
the Dominican Republic. The President understood that my remarks
had specific reference to the matter of ships proceeding here from
the Dominican Republic and said that although the Government had
3 Sparks was in Washington for an appearance before the Senate Permanent
Investigating Committee on Government Operations regarding the Bolivian aid pro-
4 The Venezuelan Government responded that Mann should not come to Caracas
since his visit would not help to explain the U.S. position. Perez Alfonso also handed the
5 Reference is to the Fifth Meeting of consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
so-­called Declaration of Santiago de Chile that restated the general inter-American com-
mitment to democracy and human rights, and another that directed the Inter-American
Peace Committee to study the whole question of political conflicts such as had recently
been occurring and to report to the Eleventh Inter-American Conference, scheduled to
meet in Quito in 1960.

Venezuela  1281
issued the orders for close inspection of such ships, the refusal of the
longshoremen to unload the vessels was a spontaneous one. He said
that of course the Government could do nothing about this but also
inferred quite clearly that even if the Government were in a position to
order the longshoremen to work the ships, he would not be inclined to
do so. The President referred to the years of persecution and attack he
has suffered at the hands of Trujillo and said that as far as freedom of
international trade is concerned, one has to be “realistic” about these
matters. I mentioned Haiti in this same part of the conversation and the
President said that after talking to Mr. James of the Saturday Evening
Post yesterday, he was satisfied that DUVALIER is a “zombie”. The
President added further that he knows that Duvalier’s Chief of Police
is in the pay of Trujillo.
The President then mentioned the arrest of PEREZ Jiménez and
I explained to him somewhat the procedure for handling extradition
requests in the United States. The President demonstrated understand-
ing of all of this including the probability that the extradition hearings
will be a protracted affair. He referred to PJ’s description of Betancourt
as being a Communist in derisive terms.
The President then brought up the subject of delays in arms ship-
ments which Venezuela has ordered under the Defense Assistance
Agreement. I said General LOPEZ HENRIQUEZ had spoken to the
Ambassador about this the evening of August 20 and that I knew the
Ambassador was following the matter up in Washington. Although
speaking in pleasant terms, the President made it very clear that the
Venezuelan Government is a serious one, that it has funds to purchase
the arms which it needs and which it would not buy if it did not need,
and that if it cannot get those arms under the contract with the United
States, it will have to look elsewhere, specifically France or Italy. I
explained the basis and the reason for our giving careful consideration
to arms shipments at the present time in the Caribbean and said that
although some shipments of arms to Venezuela have been delayed I
was not aware that any had been definitively rejected. The President
was obviously unimpressed and said that as long as Trujillo is in the
area threatening Venezuela militarily, Venezuela has to be prepared
to defend itself. He made it clear that General Lopez Henriquez had
been speaking for him on August 20 and although the President did not
say so, I gathered from the conversation that he supposed that Lopez
Henriquez had made just as strong a representation for the prompt
shipment of arms ordered by Venezuela as he, the President, had just
done. I did not remark to the President that the Minister’s approach
had been much less positive.

VE–35.
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State
(Murphy) to the President1
Washington, September 10, 1959
SUBJECT
Venezuela: Imports of Residual Fuel Oil
For the reasons set out below, the Department of State proposes
that the importation of residual fuel oil be liberalized.
Because of large United States private investments in the
Venezuelan oil industry and the strategic importance to us of the large
Venezuelan oil reserves, demonstrated by the Second World War, the
Korean conflict and the Suez crisis, the Venezuelan people have come
to expect privileged treatment from us.
The Venezuelan Government accordingly protested when the
imposition of our import controls restricted their access to their largest
market. It also protested the exemption from our controls of oil imported
by overland means on the ground that this was discrimination in favor
of Canada even though this action probably will prevent, for an indef-
inite period, Canadian restrictions on the importation of Venezuelan
oil and even though the limited increase in Canadian exports resulting
from the exemption have not yet displaced Venezuelan oil.
At the same time, there exists in Venezuela a growing national-
ism directed principally against the foreign oil companies, which are
accused of depleting Venezuela’s irreplaceable oil reserves while mak-
ing unconscionable profits.
The present Venezuela Minister of Mines, who thus far has enjoyed
the complete confidence and support of President Betancourt, seeks to
exploit this situation. On the one hand, he has proposed that Western
Hemisphere oil be exempted from our import controls and, on the
other, he has publicly announced his intention of
a) progressively increasing the Government’s share of industry
profits;
b) invading management prerogatives in the production, exporta-
tion and marketing of oil; and
c) encouraging Near Eastern oil producing states to increase their
share of profits and to cooperate with Venezuela in the control of prices.
by Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of. State for Economic Affairs, on September 8.

Venezuela  1283
The implementation of nationalistic policies outlined above would
not be limited to the possible unsettling effect on American investment
and interests in Venezuela and Latin America. The position of our oil
companies throughout the world would be weakened, as would the
assured access of consuming nations to adequate supplies of oil at rea-
sonable prices. The importance to Western Europe of an assured access
to oil was demonstrated in the recent Suez crisis.
Moreover, these nationalistic policies will not serve Venezuela’s
own economic self-­interest. Venezuela is already in a weak competitive
posture, attributable in part to its action, taken without consultation, to
upset the “50-50” division of profits through large income tax increases.
Given the present situation of world oversupply of all and the threat
that cheaper Near and Far Eastern oil will displace Venezuelan exports
in its traditional markets, our task is to get Venezuela to understand that
it can best maintain a satisfactory level of oil income by improving its
competitive posture rather than by seeking an international commodity
agreement for government control of production, prices and marketing.
Against this background, the Department of State considered the
possibility of offering Venezuela a country import quota in exchange for
abandonment by Venezuela of it nationalistic oil policies. This course
of action is believed to be impracticable because it would discriminate
against Far and Near Eastern producing countries; because Venezuela
is in any case unwilling to change its policy at this time; and because
such action would, by appearing to reward nationalism, encourage
nationalistic oil policies in Venezuela and in the Near and Far East.
Those companies which have the largest investments in Venezuela con-
cur in this estimate.
The Department of State has also considered the possibility of
completely rejecting Venezuela’s desire for special treatment and has
concluded that this would create a situation of maximum risk of nation-
alistic reaction.
In an effort to find a middle ground – ­one which, on the one hand,
could be regarded as a gesture of equal importance to the one which
we have made toward Canada, and, on the other, which would not
facilitate the carrying out of nationalistic oil program—­the Department
of State has recommended that the importation of residual fuel oil to
be used for burning be freely licensed to historic importers who have
used storage capacity. This course of action would be tantamount to an
effective decontrol of residual imports but it would not remove residual
from the import control program. It would favor Venezuela because
more than 40 percent of its oil exports to the United States are in the
form of residual.
This action would not satisfy Venezuela’s aspirations. The seri-
ous risk that Venezuela will implement nationalistic oil policies will

remain. But a concession of this kind will weaken the position of those
Venezuelans who assert that our oil policy disregards Venezuela’s needs
and it involves less risk than either of the other alternatives open to us.
Liberalization would be strongly opposed by the coal industry, both
capital and labor, which hopes that import quotas, will ultimately raise
residual fuel oil prices to the point where coal will become more competi-
tive. The “independent” sector of our oil industry has expressed concern,
but not opposition, on the ground that liberalization of imports may
result in lower prices for domestic residual fuel oil.
On the other hand, liberalization would be strongly supported by
the major oil companies who are faced with a very difficult situation in
Venezuela. Consumers along our Atlantic coast, who are increasingly
dependent on residual imports and who fear that the present import
quotas will result in scarcities and high prices during the winter months
of peak demand, will also welcome the assurance of adequate supply
at reasonable cost.
The Department of State believes that, on balance, the national
interest will best be served by liberalizing imports of residual fuel oil
and recommends that this now be done.
Robert Murphy
VE–36.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy
Director for Operations of the International Cooperation
Administration (Fitzgerald)1
Washington, September 25, 1959
SUBJECT
Mutual Security Program for Venezuela.
you noted this desire of ICA to terminate its present activities in
Venezuela.
Drafted by Briggs.
2 Not printed. Documentation concerning the subject is located in ARA Files, Lot 61
D 319, “ICA.”

Venezuela  1285
Without commenting specifically on the projects which comprise
the ICA program in that country at this time, the Bureau of Inter-
American Affairs considers that to terminate the program in Venezuela
would be contrary to the best interest of the United States.
Although, as your memorandum pointed out, the per capita
income of Venezuela is in excess of that of most other countries in Latin
America, this figure is misleading when viewed either as a measure of
the economic and social development of the country or as a measure of
its ability to carry forward in economic development without outside
technical assistance. In spite of the country’s high per capita income,
the majorities of Venezuelan people, and especially those in rural areas,
have a standard of living which is roughly equivalent to that prevailing
in the rest of Latin America. The economic development of the country
as a whole, excluding two or perhaps three urban centers, is in a rudi-
mentary stage. Moreover, standards in health, education, agriculture,
public administration and other technical fields vital to economic prog-
ress are still low.
Venezuela, like most of Latin America, has a one-­product econ-
omy, and is dependent on this commodity, petroleum, far from 60 to
70 percent of the Government’s annual revenue. Although marketing
conditions for petroleum have been reasonably favorable in recent
years, so that the country has been outwardly prosperous, relatively
little progress has been made either in diversifying the basic economic
pattern or in moving ahead in the technical fields enumerated above.
We believe that this situation is due in large part to the developmen-
tal emphasis which the dictatorial regime, which until recently gov-
erned Venezuela, placed on the largest urban areas, with little attention
to basic nationwide problems. The present government, which was
installed subsequent to the overthrow of the dictatorship by revolution,
is a constitutional regime brought into power through free elections. It
has wide popular support and is pledged to a broad program of general
economic improvement and diversification.
The foregoing indicates that Venezuela’s need for outside technical
assistance is likely to be greater in the immediate future then has been
the case in the past. The opportunity for the United States to partici-
pate in a sound and meaningful program is correspondingly greater.
Although the Venezuela Government has not progressed to the stage
of consulting this Government with respect to possible technical coop-
eration in its economic development effort, the fact that there have
been several approaches in the field of health and sanitation indicate
that other and more significant approaches in broader fields may well
be forthcoming. Consequently, this does not seem to be the appropri-
ate time to adopt a policy which would make it more difficult to take
advantage of the opportunity when it is offered.

On the political side, one of our major problems in Venezuela is
the prevalent belief there that the United States is partial to dictator-
ships in Latin America and, more specifically, in Venezuela. Inability
or unwillingness on our part to respond affirmatively to requests of
the present constitutional government for technical assistance would
tend to strengthen this belief. Moreover, it is in the best interests of the
United States to support the present Venezuelan Government insofar
as possible and to maintain and improve our relations with it, as a
bulwark against a recurrence of military dictatorship on the one hand
or the establishment of a far left-­wing regime on the other. So far,
most of the matters which the Venezuelan Government has taken up
with us have been such as to preclude U.S. acceptance of Venezuelan
proposals, and therefore the U.S. attitude toward Venezuelan requests
has had to be largely negative since the inauguration of the present
Venezuelan Government. We are consequently most anxious to find
ways in which the Venezuelan Government can be accommodated
and the negative impression which the Venezuelan Government has
can be dispelled. I therefore believe that we should keep the door
open for technical cooperation with Venezuela and should exam-
ine each request from the Government of Venezuela on its merits, in
the hope that we may be able to accede to some of them and in so
doing take advantage of opportunities for increased U.S. influence in
Venezuelan economic development and planning. I agree with your
view that the GOV can probably afford to pay for much of the cost
of these programs and I regard this fact as a positive aspect of the
possible future expansion of technical cooperation activities there.
However, in the interest of maintaining and extending U.S. influence
in Venezuelan economic development, I believe that cases may well
arise which would justify the expenditure of U.S. funds. No action
should be taken at this time which would tend to preclude freedom of
action in such cases.
Recognizing, however, that the rise of the program in Venezuela
at this time may not justify the administrative and supervisory over-
load presently devoted thereto, I concur in the suggestion contained in
your last paragraph that for the present, at least, the program be limited
to responding affirmatively to Venezuelan requests for short-­term ser-
vices of experienced U.S. technicians.
R.R. Rubottom, Jr.

Venezuela  1287
VE–37.
Despatch from the Chargé in Venezuela (Burrows) to the
Department of State1
Caracas, October 16, 1959.
No. 317.
REF: CIRCULAR 1492
SUBJECT
MUTUAL SECURITY AND RELATED PROGRAMS
1. Objectives
As seen from the Embassy point of view, the principal U.S. objec-
tives in Venezuela would seem to be:
1. To strengthen and support the present freely-­elected democratic
government as an ally of the Free World.
2. To cooperate in the maintenance of a well trained military force
capable of, and devoted to, defending the interests of the Free World in
this Hemisphere.
3. To strengthen Venezuelan economic stability and assist in the
development of economically feasible industrialization so as to achieve
independence from the almost sole reliance on its petroleum and min-
eral industries.
4. To assure strong Venezuelan petroleum and iron ore industries
whose resources would be available to the United States in times of
national emergency.
5. To maintain in Venezuela a political and economic climate favor-
able to the investment of foreign capital, to foreign commerce, and to
the use of foreign technical know-­how in order to foster free enterprise,
free trade, and the development of the country and its resources.
6. To promote recognition by Venezuela of the dangers of Communism.
II. Role of MSP
The MSP offers an opportunity to demonstrate to Venezuela
our interest in her well-­being and her development. It supplements
the work of the technical missions of the UN and such of its special-
ized agencies as the FAO, the World Bank, etc. Most important, the
MSP is concrete evidence of our continued interest in and support
for, Venezuela in these critical years of her democratic development
Use.

following the overthrow of the dictatorship. Venezuela is a target of
the communists who are quick to point out failures and difficulties of
the present Government as indicative of the weaknesses of capitalism
and who are as quick to allege American disinterest in the needs of
the people and our intent to maintain Venezuela in a position of eco-
nomic independence. The importance of Venezuela in the Caribbean
and the South American political and economic picture, as well as its
importance as a field of U.S. private investment points up the necessity
of the United States making every reasonable effort to keep Venezuela
friendly, politically stable, and economically prosperous.
III. Technical AID
A. MSP Present Program
Mutual Security Program projects in Venezuela at present are lim-
ited to a small Technical Cooperation Program administered by USOM
Caracas in fields related to public health. A modest TCA program oper-
of a request by the Government of Venezuela to transfer rural water sup-
ply program of the Cooperative Health Service to Ministry of Health.
This leaves only consultants in occupational health and vital statistics as
the total program at present with several other consultants requested.
While the costs of the Inter-American Geodetic Survey activities in
Venezuela are partially reimbursed from MSP funds, this essentially
military program is not commented upon in this airgram. With excep-
tion of changes in the rural water program noted above the basic need
with respect to aid, including loans, has not changed substantially since
has not been making progress but the Constitutional Government has
confined itself to basic planning for the next four to five years and as yet
has not executed any extensive implementation of this planning.
B. Non-U.S. Programs
Since the revolution, the Venezuelan Government has stepped
up the program of requesting and obtaining through the UN an addi-
tional number of technicians, about 30 of whom fall into the techni-
cal assistance class. Specialties of these experts are: steel, coal, forestry,
veterinary medicine, soils, cattle fences, fisheries, general industrial
development, telephones, governmental organization, budget, per-
sonnel, tariffs, education, sociology, industrial health and safety (OIT),
labor training and legislation, nurses training, and econometrics. It is
expected that about 30 more technicians in different fields complement-
ing the present group will be requested from the UN.
A ten-­man mission from the IBRD is now engaged in a study of
the Venezuelan economic situation with a view to recommending any
needed revisions of government economic and fiscal policy.

Venezuela  1289
There have been and are private technical groups here on gov-
ernment contract to study various phases of the economy including
transportation, public administration, etc., to assist in the more orderly
development of governmental processes and policies.
IV. Loans
The Government of Venezuela continues to reiterate its reluctance
to borrow from foreign sources. The proposed extraordinary budget
will require about Bs. 1.1 billion if passed in full by the Congress. The
Government hopes to raise this amount from local sources.
Some capital requirements for specific projects might lead to bor-
rowing from such organizations as the IBRD, the International Finance
Corporation, the Export Import Bank, and the Development Loan Fund.
V. Coordination of Programs
The coordination of technical and economic assistance programs
is by government order the responsibility of the Oficina Central de
Coordinación y Planificacion in the President’s office. In the past there
has been no particular problem for Embassy in field of coordination
because of very special nature of USOM and IAGS activities here. There
has been no duplication of U.S.-UN aid efforts in the past.
VI. Future AID and Loan Programs
Although it is easy to comment on future policy when there are
existing programs or studied projects in being, we are troubled here
with the fact that the needs, probable utilization of aid and loan pro-
grams, and the possible desires of the Venezuelan Government cannot
be based upon either any historical concept or known present planning.
As noted, the demands in the past have been small, with the exception
of the UN technical and program; there has been no history of foreign
loans from international organizations and only a minor amount of
loans from private banking. Thus we must comment upon possibilities
which are still in the minds of the Venezuelan Government officials and
we will not know how the program can develop until it is revealed to
us through requests. We do know that on the technical aid front, in
addition to the expected request for more UN technicians, the President
himself in an exchange of letters with Assistant Secretary Rubottom
expressed deep interest in the present health program and in its expan-
sion. It is expected that further technical assistance in other fields will
very probably be the subject of future requests. Also, apart from strict
technical aid, we know the Government is interested in acquiring arms
at token cost. Another field in which some interest has been shown is
that which is covered in other countries by the ICA Labor program.
With respect to loans it is felt that it may not be possible to meet the
financial needs from private local sources and therefore the facilities of

the Export-Import Bank, the Development Loan Fund, the International
Finance Corporation and the IBRD may well be utilized.
VII. Recommendation
I feel that the United States aid program and those in which it
cooperates, through the United Nations, can make a very definite con-
tribution to the economic development of this country and thus to its
political stability; nothing should be done at the present time to make
more difficult the request for or the granting of such aid or for loans
where needed.
Technical assistance and/or financing given to Venezuela during
this formative period of its first democracy in many years will be well
repaid in both political and economic results.
I believe that the Government is desirous of taking advantage of
technical aid and certain types of financing that it can profitably use
and 1s appreciative of our interest in cooperating.
I believe that the present MSP program should be continued as our
minimum contribution to the orderly development of Venezuela and as a
demonstration of our continued interest and good will, and that we should
hold ourselves receptive to new proposals for technical aid and financing.
Charles R. Burrows
VE–38.
Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State,
Washington, November 16, 19591
Washington, November 16, 1959.
SUBJECT
VENEZUELA: Financial Situation and Proposed Import Restrictions
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Marcos Falcon-Briceño, Ambassador of Venezuela
Mr. Manuel Perez Guerrero, Director, Commission of Coordination and Planning
Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
Mr. John J. Ingersoll, Officer in Charge of Venezuelan Affairs
Mr. William Pryce, Staff Assistant, Economic Affairs
Mr. Perez Guerrero was introduced by the Ambassador, who had
requested this appointment on his behalf.
Ingersoll.

Venezuela  1291
Perez Guerrero said that, as is widely known, Venezuela is faced
with serious balance of payments difficulties, with her reserves being
eroded at a rate of about $100 million per month. Foreign exchange
reserves had dropped from over one billion dollars to about $600
million. The Venezuelan Government feels it must act quickly to
stem this flow while it can still do so coolly and deliberately, and
not wait until reserves are exhausted and be forced into measures of
haste and desperation.
Mr. Mann said that he had been aware of this situation and was
pleased to hear that the Venezuelan Government intended to face-­up
to the problem.
Perez Guerrero said that his Government intended to cut imports
of items which are considered to be draining off Venezuela’s foreign
exchange. As a temporary step it is proposed to immediately (within
a few days) require licensing of all imports of a list of items which are
considered to be of a non-­essential or luxury nature. He exhibited a
typewritten list which included, among other things:
caviar
wines
liquors
perfumes
cigars, cigarettes
leaf tobacco
automobiles
cameras
film (except motion picture film)
radio receivers
television receivers
marble
building ornaments
He said that with the introduction of the licensing system, imports
of these items will be severely restricted, possibly being limited to
only those items already en route or on contract order. This is to be,
however, only temporary until action can be taken by the Congress
to impose a new, heavy excise tax on all goods in this list, whether
they be imported or of domestic manufacture. When the tax becomes
effective, which he estimated to be in “a matter of weeks”, the licens-
ing requirements would be abolished. The tax would curtail effec-
tively the importation and domestic production of these items and,
at the same time, provide a new source of revenue to help balance the
national budget.

Mr. Mann said this sounded like a step in the right direction but he
doubted that import controls alone would be enough to cope with the
problem. He also emphasized the importance of consulting with the
IMF before taking any step such as this and the need to insure that such
action is not discriminatory against U.S. products.
Perez Guerrero said that he had come up from Caracas only last
night and that he would return this evening. He had already talked
with the IMF staff technicians and there seemed to be a possibility, he
said, that a small IMF mission might go to Venezuela to discuss these
matters. He made note of Mr. Mann’s remarks about avoiding discrim-
ination and pointed out that the tax would apply to domestic goods
as well as to imports. Perez Guerrero noted that this was not a matter
calling for U.S. approval and that this meeting was designed merely to
continue our customary policy of confiding in one another with respect
to our problems and the actions proposed to meet them.
Mr. Ingersoll raised the question of the consistency of this pro-
posed action with our bi-­lateral Trade Agreement. Perez Guerrero said
that, of course, a lot of the items to be licensed are included in the bi-­
lateral but that neither the temporary, emergency licensing system nor
the non-­discriminatory excise tax would contravene that agreement.
Mr. Mann said that while this might help, he felt that other actions
were imperative, especially the restoration of confidence in relations
between the foreign oil companies and the Venezuelan Government.
He said that the increasing oversupply of oil on the world markets cou-
pled with the increasing efforts of such areas as the European Common
Market to reserve their markets for preferred suppliers in their own
political orbit, all augured ill for the competitive position of Venezuelan
oil unless there is a high degree of cooperation between the Government
and the private producers.
Perez Guerrero said that President Betancourt, Perez Alfonso, and
others in his Government were trying to deal with these problems. He
said that he, himself, was much more optimistic than Mr. Mann with
respect to future markets for Venezuelan oil.
Perez Guerrero spoke of various, recurring rumors that the Bolivar
will shortly be devalued and said, in a most emphatic tone, that there
will be no devaluation. Such will be avoided at all costs.
Both Perez Guerrero and Mr. Mann agreed on the extremely
sensitive nature of the information which had been discussed con-
cerning proposed import restrictions. It was recognized by all pres-
ent that a serious and embarrassing scandal could result if there were
any leak of this information before the official announcement by the
Venezuelan Government.

Venezuela  1293
VE–39.
Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affair (Mallory) to the Under
Secretary of State (Dillon)1
Undated.
SUBJECT
Briefing Memo: Venezuela’s Current Financial Situation
Venezuela has recently developed serious financial difficulties and
is, for the first time in recent history, actively seeking assistance from
the U.S. and international financial agencies. An IMF Mission is now
in Caracas to consult with the Government of Venezuela on a possi-
ble standby credit agreement. At the same time, the Government of
Venezuela is negotiating with a group of U.S. private banks for a pos-
sible $200 million credit and may seek an interim, gold-­backed loan of
$150 million from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
In the event that any discussion of these matters should be initi-
ated by the Venezuelan representatives at San Salvador, you may find
the following information helpful.
Background
Between 1951 and 1955 Venezuela’s official gold and dollar
reserves increased by about $150 million. In 1956 they jumped by over
the large-­scale leasing of new oil concessions. At the end of 1957 (which
roughly coincided with the end of the Perez Jimenez regime) official
reserves stood at $1,446 million, an amount exceeded by only six other
countries in the world.
This favorable trend changed early in 1958, since when there has
been a steady decline in reserves continuing up to the present time.
was in the gold stock, which the government was extremely reluctant
to deplete for reasons of public confidence.
Though many details are lacking, the main outlines of the factors
responsible for this deterioration in Venezuela’s balance of payments
position are clear enough. The volume of imports, which increased
very sharply in 1957 in response to the stimulus afforded by the record
exports and massive investments of 1956–57, has continued at a heavy
Drafted by Ingersoll on February 2, 1960, and concurred in by John Parke Young, Chief of
the International Finance Division, Bureau of Economic Affairs.

rate, even though new oil investments have been sharply contracted,
outward earnings remittances have reached very high levels, and
exports have receded. Concurrently, the previous capital inflow has
apparently turned into a net outflow, principally for two reasons: pay-
ments on the short- and medium-­term foreign debt incurred under
Perez Jimenez, and capital flight. Finally, and perhaps most important,
imports have been maintained and capital flight has been stimulated by
expansionary fiscal and credit policies.
Along with the cumulative drain on the central bank’s foreign
exchange reserves, a series of grossly imbalanced federal budgets,
largely attributable to efforts to carry on extensive public works and
development programs, have depleted treasury holdings and created
a serious fiscal problem. Treasury holdings are currently less than $100
million. Although purportedly determined to balance the federal bud-
get next year, the Government of Venezuela requires some $300 million
over and above anticipated revenues to meet the current, FY 60 budget
with its politically essential works programs. The Venezuelan constitu-
tion prohibits treasury borrowing from the central bank and the tight
domestic credit situation precludes heavy borrowing from domestic
commercial banks, so that recourse must be had to foreign sources for
the needed funds.
Current Status
The balance of payments problem is being dealt with in part by
various measures to curtail imports of less essential goods through
quantitative restrictions and prohibitive duties, and discourage the
outflow of nervous, flight capital, while at the same time seeking to
encourage new capital inflow for investment purposes. It is as yet too
early to appraise the adequacy of these measures, but they are already
ameliorating the drain of reserves to some extent. It was necessary,
however, for the central bank to sell some $65 million worth of gold in
the fall of 1959. Remaining gold reserves are probably an adequate bul-
wark against any immediate payment crisis but large scale gold sales
are considered undesirable by Venezuela because of the anticipated
psychological reaction.
Rather than accentuate her unemployment problems by further
curtailment of public works programs to permit a balanced budget,
the Government of Venezuela hopes to obtain foreign credits of about
$300 million. The first $100 million of this was obtained in November,
1959 by sale of tax anticipation certificates to the foreign oil companies
operating in Venezuela. An informal IMF consultation in December
served to advise the Government of Venezuela on certain measures
recommended to remedy the financial problems. On February 1 an
IMF Mission arrived in Caracas to begin two weeks of talks look-
ing to a stand-­by agreement. Without awaiting the outcome of these

Venezuela  1295
talks, a group of U.S. private banks have informally agreed to extend
$200 million in credits to the Government of Venezuela, although the
terms are not yet known to the Department. To cover the interim before
these credits can be formally arranged, it is expected that the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York will respond favorably to a Venezuelan
request for a $150 million, 90-­day, gold collateral loan.
A factor which bears on the future stability of Venezuela, both
political and economic, is the still unsettled petroleum industry-­labor
contract negotiations.
Recommended Position
Bearing in mind Venezuela’s hitherto aloof attitude toward the
International Monetary Fund, you might wish to express satisfaction
with the manner in which Venezuela is now seeking the advice and
guidance of the Fund and the serious efforts the Government is making
to remedy its financial problems before they attain crisis proportions
and while there is still room for maneuver.
VE–40.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Venezuela1
914. Recent Castro-Leon rebellion attempt,2 particularly with
implication GODR advance knowledge if not direct involvement,
regarded by Dept as additional manifestation international tensions
Caribbean area which Inter-American Peace Committee directed to
study by Santiago Fonmin Mtg Res IV. Request you inform Fomin or
President as appropriate U.S. Chairman IAPC considering suggesting
that Committee, noting apparent increase in Caribbean tensions, renew
its request of September 18, 1959 to all OAS Govts that they provide
any information they may have regarding such tensions in order to aid
Committee in preparation general report required under Res IV. In this
connection would be desirable for Venezuela and Colombia submit any
evidence re international aspects recent Castro-Leon rebellion and we
would appreciate knowing whether they would do this.
by Jamison and initialled by the Deputy Assistant Secretary Mallory. Repeated to the
Embassies in Colombia, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic.
2 Reference is to Jesús María Castro-León. Documentation concerning his activities

FYI We believe Castro-Leon attempt and other recent incidents
Caribbean area emphasize desirability information be provided IAPC
and studied by it in relation broader problem Caribbean tensions.
Above would offer opportunity for Colombia provide data re GODR
official requests for visas for those subsequently involved in rebellion
attempt and for GOV furnish any information.
GODR complicity it may have, as well as occasion for U.S. to pro-
duce relevant information its possession.
Herter
VE–41.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Venezuela1
926. Department has noted with interest three separate occasions
your conversation reported Embtel 8192 on which Betancourt indi-
cated his view satisfactory Inter-American resolution Castro problem
depends on prior action re Trujillo and that he prepared take lead on
Cuba, which he certain most other Latin Americans would quickly join,
if Trujillo problem resolved with U.S. cooperation. We believe this frank
statement made by Betancourt offers good opportunity which, in your
discretion and if you believe it can be done without becoming known
to Fonmin, you should pursue to endeavor ascertain from Betancourt
what he and others of like view have in mind as to leadership which
might take over in Dominican Republic if Trujillo resigns or is ousted.
Should be clear to Betancourt that Castro or elements associated him
only too ready move into Dominican Republic to establish Castro-­type
regime and that in resultant situation Castro would be strengthened
with consequent immediate threat to Haiti as well as to Betancourt’s
own position in Venezuela. We would appreciate his thinking on man-
ner such development might be avoided, since it obviously one to
which he must have given serious thought. This is of course a major
preoccupation for us.
Distribution. Drafted by Jamison and John C. Hill, Special Assistant to the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. The telegram was repeated for information
to the Embassy in the Dominican Republic.

Venezuela  1297
In this connection, would be particularly interesting to know
Betancourt’s evaluation of potential and orientation of various anti-Tru-
jillo groups within Dominican Republic and abroad, including those in
Venezuela.3
3 When queried on the substance of telegram 926, Betancourt responded that the
United States should speak to José Figueres and “trust in his judgment,” since Figueres
had been very active in working with non-Communist Dominican exiles.
He stated that there were very few Communists in the Dominican Republic or
among the exile groups and that the United States should not worry about another Fidel
Castro in the Dominican Republic. He reasserted that the United States must face up
to the Trujillo problem before the United States faced the Cuban problem, and warned,
“do not attack Cuban problem and expect handle it way Guatemala under Arbenz was
handled.” He advised that the program which should be followed vis-á-­vis Cuba was
VE–42.
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in
Venezuela1
970. Ambassador Falcon Briceño returning Caracas Pan American
Jet Thursday May 12 expecting return Washington after about ten
days. Department informed Romulo Gallegos travelling Caracas same
flight.
Falcon Briceño called on Rubottom and Mann May 10 take his
leave.
Rubottom expressed U.S. concern continued existence Trujillo dic-
tatorship and its disturbing contributions Caribbean tensions. Stated
U.S. objectives same as those of GOV but pointed out fact Trujillo has
indicated he will eliminate all potential successors of any stature if and
when he falls from power. This poses delicate problem. Falcon Briceño
said he had heard similar views from Dominican exiles. Rubottom said
most reports indicate Trujillo’s days numbered. Rubottom mentioned
recent conversations Betancourt with Ambassador Sparks and said that
while he fully understands bitter hatred of Trujillo he is concerned over
Betancourt’s impatience. Said we wish work through Peace Committee
and expect that GOV may have evidence which we do not have and
Distribution. Drafted by Ingersoll and initialled by Rubottom.

that we may have evidence GOV does not have. Requested Falcon
Briceño convey to Betancourt information U.S. attitudes and actions
aiming toward common objective.
Falcon Briceño said that in telephone conversation Betancourt
spoke of a letter from Trujillo to Perez Jimenez. Said he was not
sure whether Betancourt meant he had such letter or wanted know
if U.S. Government had it. Rubottom said he had no knowledge
such letter.
Conversation with Mann confined general subjects, though did
include mention of recent pressure by group of independent oil produc-
ers associations for reduction import quotas. Mann indicated unlikely
any action this nature imminent.
Memoranda conversations by pouch.
Herter
VE–43.
Editorial Note
On June 3, 1960, the Inter-American Peace Committee of the
Organization of American States issued a report, in which the United
States concurred, which concluded that the Dominican Republic had
contributed to political tensions in the Caribbean area by its flagrant
violation of human rights, including the use of intimidation and
terror as a political weapon. Seven Latin American nations, includ-
ing Venezuela, had already broken diplomatic relations with the
Dominican Republic before the Sixth Meeting of Consultation of the
American Foreign Ministers convened on August 16, 1960, in San
José to discuss the problem which the Trujillo regime presented to the
hemisphere. At this meeting, the Government of Venezuela charged
the Dominican Government with aggression and intervention, and
on August 20, 1960, the Foreign Ministers voted unanimously to con-
demn the Dominican acts and resolved to break diplomatic relations
with the Dominican Republic and to interrupt, partially, economic
relations with that country. For documentation concerning the matter,

Venezuela  1299
VE–44.
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State,
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting
Secretary of State1
Washington, July 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Venezuelan Request for American Foreign Ministers Meeting regarding Dominican
Republic.
Discussion:
The Venezuelan Government has requested the Council of the
Organization of American States to convoke urgently the Organ of
Consultation (Meeting of Consultation of American Foreign Ministers)
under Article 6 of the Rio Treaty to consider acts of intervention and
aggression of the Dominican Government against the Venezuelan
Government, culminating in the assassination attempt against President
Betancourt on June 24,2 and to take measures in defense of Venezuela’s
sovereignty and for the maintenance of hemispheric peace and security.
The OAS Council received the Venezuelan request at a meeting on
July 6, and decided to meet on July 8 in order to vote on it. While the
Dominican representative rejected Venezuela’s charges and opposed
the convocation of the Organ of Consultation, the sentiment expressed
in the Council was favorable to Venezuela. Also, the Venezuelan repre-
sentative presented what seemed to be impressive evidence linking the
plotters in the assassination attempt with Generalissimo Trujillo and
Dominican officials.
It is therefore recommended that the United States at the July
8 meeting of the OAS Council support the Venezuelan request for
the convocation of the Organ of Consultation in this case. It is antic-
ipated that the Council will decide on July 8 to act provisionally as
Organ of Consultation and will appoint an investigating committee
to examine the available evidence, fixing at a later meeting the place
Robert J. Redington, Officer in Charge of U.S. – O.A.S. Delegation Matters in the Bureau
of Inter-American Affairs.
2 That morning, Betancourt and his wife left their residence, entered their limou-
sine, and proceeded down Avenida Los Proceres, passing a parked car in which a bomb
exploded. The limousine was thrown across the street, killing a military officer sitting
next to Betancourt, who suffered severe cuts and burns. The Venezuelan police deter-
mined that the assassination attempt was carried out from the Dominican Republic and
with the active support of Trujillo.

and date of the Foreign Ministers Meeting. ARA considers that the
first week of August would be the most acceptable date for the latter
Meeting. Present indications are that Mexico City or Washington will
be proposed for the site of the Meeting, either of which would seem
to be acceptable.
The Department is consulting with the other American govern-
ments regarding the desirability of convoking another Meeting of
Foreign Ministers, to be held at the same place and immediately after
the first Meeting, in order to consider the Cuban problem. This matter
will be treated in a separate memorandum.
Recommendations:
1. That you authorize the United States Representative on the OAS
Council to vote in favor of the convocation of the Organ of Consultation
as requested by Venezuela.
2. That you authorize the United States Representative to sup-
port the first week in August as the date for the Foreign Ministers
Meeting on the Venezuelan case, and to consult further regarding the
place of the Meeting, with preference for Mexico City and, if neces-
sary, Washington.
VE–45.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to
the Secretary of State1
25. In requesting appointment with President Betancourt I told
his private secretary I would require at least an hours time (to per-
mit his perusal of Chafardet documents authorized Departments’
had no conversations that long but he later gave me appointment
yesterday 5 p.m. without condition. I talked with President for over
one hour.
I was shocked at President’s appearance. His hands are still heav-
ily bandaged while his face is discolored and with large burn scabs.
However, he was completely composed and relaxed. He assured me
Distribution.

Venezuela  1301
his ear and eye injuries had completely cleared up. Doctors have sub-
jected him to rigorous diet and rest and he happily reported his blood
pressure was down to 130 (I had been reliably informed it had been as
high as 220). President told me details of his horrifying experience fol-
lowing explosion and then related details of Dominican involvement in
attempt against his life.
Since it was impossible for President to read three Chafardet
documents due to condition of his hands, he requested me to do so.
However, I first read him carefully prepared statements in Spanish
giving substance Department’s A–2 stating in effect we considered it
undesirable release actual documents at this time. President made no
comment on this and asked me read documents. I read about ten pages
of Chafardet’s letter July 24 to Perez Jimenez when President became
utterly bored and requested me to read Trujillo’s letter of September
20. I did so and showed him document with signature. He made no
direct comment on this document. He immediately launched into vir-
tual harangue on Trujillo’s nefarious operations over years. He asserted
Trujillo is completely ruthless and capable of anything. He said his
immediate concern and apprehension is Trujillo may attempt drop
bombs on Caracas and oil fields or mount new attempt against his life.
He told me precautions had been taken to defend against air raid and
showed me anti-­aircraft battery set up just outside Palacio Miraflores.
He said were Trujillo to be so foolhardy Venezuela must retaliate imme-
diately. He admitted Venezuelan air capabilities are very limited and
he actually inquired if U.S. would permit Venezuelan planes refuel in
Puerto Rico.
I then referred to Allan Stewart’s conversation with Oropeza
Castillo.3 After assuring President we welcome his constructive efforts,
I gave him substance DEPTEL 1114.4 President expressed deep and seri-
ous concern over recent developments in U.S.-Cuban relations and was
acutely apprehensive U.S. might deem it necessary engage in some mil-
itary operation against Cuba. He virtually pleaded that under no cir-
cumstances should U.S. be drawn into such move. He made it clear U.S.
position vis-­a-­vis Cuba is good, that it has been provoked to an extreme,
that Castro is menace to Western Hemisphere, that his actions are those
bordering on a mad man, but that U.S. must restrain itself. He said
were U.S. to engage in military action, directly or indirectly, it would
3 Reference is to Presidential adviser, Alejandro Oropeza Castillo, who had been
asked to propose a plan, which Betancourt was interested in sponsoring, that would
allow Latin American countries to offer guaranteed payment of property expropriated
the United States welcomed Betancourt’s constructive efforts as suggested by Oropeza in

immediately lose understanding and support of majority of American
Republics. In such case, he said, his first act would have to be to send
battalion of Venezuelan troops to protect American Ambassador.
President again said Venezuela and many American Republics are
not prepared to take action required against Castro until problem of
Trujillo is definitively resolved. This is an oft-­repeated Betancourt posi-
tion but Department will wish consider Betancourt has contemplated
this situation for days and recognize that his conviction was not hastily
reached. Betancourt wants and is prepared to do those things vis-­a-­
vis Castro in line with U.S. objectives—­difference between his and U.S.
position is one of timing and method.
I informed President of measures being taken re Cuban sugar
quota pursuant to the new sugar legislation and I stressed unanimity
opinion in U.S. Congress. President recognized this U.S. action as inev-
itable and even appropriate in circumstances. Again he repeated his
plea that U.S. not take direct or indirect military action which would
alienate from U.S. support of American Republics.
As President was obviously wearying, I broke off conversation and
said I would return at later date.
Sparks
VE–46.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to
the Department of State1
146. Monday night President Betancourt met with sixteen Chiefs of
Mission American Republics. Also present was First Secretary Cuban
Embassy. Costa Rica, El Salvador and Uruguay have no representa-
tion. Also present were Foreign Minister and high Foreign Office offi-
cials. Significant were presences Senator Prieto representing AD, Jovito
Villalba URD, and Miguel Angel Landaez COPEI.
President Betancourt addressed group extemporaneously for about
45 minutes. He first expressed appreciation of sympathy extended by
American Governments following attempt on his life as well as their
support Venezuela request convoke organ of consultation.

Venezuela  1303
President reviewed Venezuelans unsatisfactory relations with
Trujillo government beginning 1939 with various interruptions and
culminating with full break 1959.
President outlined briefly Venezuela’s investigations of attempt
against his life and asserted GODR and Trujillo himself were involved.
President referred to recent political developments in Dominican
Republic and affirmed this was simply mockery to confuse MFM.
At close of meeting memorandum of GOV position was made
available (see EMBTEL 144).2
President expressed strong hope MFM would condemn GODR
and apply sanctions provided Article 8 Rio Treaty. He stated if effective
action is not taken by MFM against GODR then GOV will have to study
and evaluate situation and consider what action might be incumbent
upon it to take unilaterally. (President offered to provide transcript his
remarks but I now learn tape recorder did not function).
President then summarized his views on communism, explaining
while Venezuelan Communist Party has status of legally recognized
political party it has no participation in Venezuelan coalition govern-
ment. Re international communist intervention in Cuba, he ratified his
statements to NEW YORK TIMES correspondent Juan de Onis pub-
lished July 23 and declared GOV stands firmly “hands off America”.
Sparks
2 Telegram 144 transmitted the verbatim text of the referenced memorandum given
VE–47.
Telegram from the Chargé in Venezuela (Stewart) to the
Department of State1
418. In view current generally precarious situation in Venezuela,
it is vital that country’s economic, political, and social problems be
placed in proper perspective in Department’s and Embassy’s thinking
gram was transmitted in two parts.

in order that sound approach can be adopted re Venezuela’s need for
external assistance.
It would be easy dismiss Venezuela as country too rich to
need external assistance for economic and social development
projects. Indeed Venezuela still enjoys high level foreign exchange
income and government revenues relative other Latin-American
countries. Moreover, if Venezuela were able utilize these resources
effectively, without waste, for sound economic and social develop-
ment projects, it is possible that Venezuela would in fact not need
outside assistance.
But U.S. must face reality that Venezuela not likely achieve stable,
well administered, democratic government for some years to come.
While rich in resources, Venezuela is young and inexperienced in
democracy, short of capable public administrators, lacking in techni-
cians, and as result, weak and ineffective in implementing government’s
good intentions. Venezuela’s background in dictatorship governments
over the years was characterized by rapidly increasing expenditures on
expanding bureaucracy and on ill-­planned projects of questionable eco-
nomic usefulness. Waste and corruption were widespread. To expect
Venezuela to shake off heritage of dictatorships and evils of dictator-
ships and to establish responsible, effective, democratic government in
one or two years would be expecting too much under very favorable
conditions. It is unrealistic under conditions prevailing in Venezuela
today. It may not even be possible during President Betancourt’s five
year term of office.
Coalition government has increased difficulties achieving goals in
economic and social spheres but considered by President Betancourt
essential for achieving political stability and maintaining democracy
in Venezuela. Withdrawal URD from existing coalition, which now
appears imminent, will increase Betancourt’s political problems and
opposition parties.
Ineffectiveness coalition government and effect unstable politi-
cal situation on Venezuelan economy have been adverse and serious.
They have undermined confidence, both business and public, which
in turn has resulted in the withdrawal deposits from banks and flight
of capital. President Betancourt faced up to this problem this week. On
advice of his closest economic advisers, and apparently also, IMF, he
proposed to devalue the bolivar. This engendered such overwhelming
and unanimous opposition, not only among industry, commerce, bank-
ing and labor, but also from COPEI and URD, coalition partners with
Betancourt’s AD Party, that he was forced instead to adopt exchange
controls. Country has not yet recovered from shock and confusion.
Budget for current fiscal year is out of balance by over 600 million

Venezuela  1305
bolivars, and to reduce expenditures further not only is difficult but
could be politically and socially explosive.
President Betancourt is our best bet to achieve kind of government
in Venezuela that would best promote and protect U.S. national inter-
ests. He stands for what we stand for. He recognizes the dangers of
Castroism and can be counted upon to assist in blocking its spread. He
has come long way in being able be openly critical in his November 1
speech what is happening in Cuba. This would not have been possible
six months ago.
Venezuela is thus beset with serious political, social and eco-
nomic difficulties. President Betancourt needs help and Embassy
considers it vital that U.S. give him all possible assistance along fol-
lowing lines:
1) Expanded technical assistance for remainder this fiscal year.
Request for technicians are still pending, even those for which GOV
willing cover costs. If necessary, contingency funds should be provided.
President commented bitterly to me about inability obtain technicians.
2) Urgent reconsideration of policy limiting Venezuela to very
restricted ICA program. President Betancourt informed me his govern-
ment is definitely interested in expanded ICA program coming fiscal
year and would welcome discussions about such program. However,
Embassy is reluctant approach GOV unless USG policy is such that we
can follow through on any reasonable program.
3) Prompt action on loans. President made strong plea for urgent
action on GOV money needs. He said he did not want grant aid; that
his country would be able to repay loans. What is needed, he said, is
financial assistance at this time since government is in trouble.
4) Embassy has been pushing GOV for some indication what
PL-4802 assistance will be wanted from U.S. President said country still
interested and experts working on program. Embassy is aware U.S.
agencies concerned are interested in a PL–480 program for Venezuela
and only asks that when request are made they be given sympathetic
prompt action.
In conclusion, Embassy again emphasizes that special conditions
exist in Venezuela at this time; that our stake in Venezuela amounts to
some four billion dollars and that our best bet is President Betancourt.
If Venezuela’s inexperience in applying for assistance makes it impossi-
ble to meet normal economic criteria of our government then assistance
must be provided on political grounds. With the imminent breakup of
2 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of

tri-­party coalition, with battle lines formed between anti-­democratic
extremism and constitutional democracy we must in our own national
interest, support Betancourt to limit.
Stewart
VE–48.
Memorandum of a Conversation, British Foreign Office,
London1
November 25, 1960
PARTICIPANTS
United States

United Kingdom
Under Secretary Douglas Dillon

Lord Home, Foreign Secretary
John N. Irwin II, Assistant Secretary
Edward Heath, Lord Privy Seal
of Defense for International

Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh, Deputy
Security Affairs

    Under-Secretary of State,
W.T M. Beale, Minister for

    Foreign Office
Economic Affairs,

Peter Ramsbotham, Foreign Office
Embassy London
William C. Trueheart, First
Secretary, Embassy London
Charles A. Sullivan, Special
Assistant to the Under
Secretary
SUBJECT
Oil, the OEPC and Venezuela
Lord Home raised the subject of oil, the OEPC, and Venezuela.
Mr. Dillon said that several U.S. oil companies had got the same idea
at the same time, and it was apparent that thinking among the oil
companies was much the same, except for the French oil companies.
He said that in his opinion the situation is bad from the viewpoint of
over-­all security. He pointed out that the OEPC put control of prices in
the hands of Middle East companies and Venezuela. He said that the
basic concept of controlling prices had been accepted in agreements
Confidential. Drafted by Beale. Information on the source text indicates that the conver-
sation took place at 3:00 p.m. Dillon was in London following a trip to Bonn for finan-
cial discussions with German officials, which he undertook with Robert B. Anderson,
Germany; Austria.

Venezuela  1307
relating to coffee and tin, but that he did not like the people who are
exercising the control in the case of oil. He expressed the view that
the trouble stems from the Soviets, and asked whether the British side
had any ideas about what could be done substantively to slow things
up. Lord Home, in response, inquired whether Mr. Dillon felt that
the Soviets are likely to upset the situation. Mr. Dillon replied that
he thought they could cause trouble, but nothing insuperable. Lord
Home asked whether there was any influence that could be brought to
bear on Venezuela. Mr. Dillon replied that he did not know what could
be done since power rested with one man. He expressed the opinion
that the oil companies had done as much as they can to influence the
Venezuelan situation.
VE–49.
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the
Embassy in Caracas1
496. Yesterday Venezuelan Representative COAS informed Council
of Dominican Government’s alleged complicity and intervention
Venezuelan affairs, and immediately thereafter requested IAPC initiate
investigation, thereof. Presentation consisted of review past Dominican
sins and was not effective principally because he had no specific details
to support general assertions of new conspiracy. Peace Committee
adjourned to allow Venezuelan representative time to obtain and pres-
ent charges in more specific form. Presumably it will not be reconvened
until Venezuela indicates it is ready.
In light Embassy’s 4632 which was not decoded until after meeting
it to appears there may be grounds for Venezuelan concern. However,
neither U.S. nor other delegations had this information during yester-
day’s sessions and statements so far have been made only by Venezuela
and Dominican Republic.
Drafted by Mann and by Edward A. Jamison, Deputy Director of the Office of Inter-
American Regional Political Affairs.
Foreign Minister had made available to the Embassy that day a series of diplomatic
reports indicating another civilian-­military movement to overthrow Betancourt, which
had the support of Trujillo.

Department desires cooperate within limits U.S. law in attempt-
ing control revolutionary activity anti-Betancourt elements in U.S.
Can GOV give us any leads which would facilitate our investiga-
tions here?
You may in your discretion promptly inform Betancourt or Falcon
Briceño of foregoing and include following additional points:
(1) As indicated to Perez de la Cova yesterday Department
thinks GOV should give urgent consideration to broadening terms
of requested investigation so as to permit inclusion of subversive
activities Communist elements directed from outside Venezuela.
From Venezuelan point of view there seems to be little doubt that
Communist and Castro elements were prime movers in recent distur-
bances in Venezuela. Betancourt himself has publicly described these
disturbances as Communist attempt to overthrow constitutional
government, and has privately informed Embassy of Cuban involve-
ment (EMBTEL 460).3 It would therefore appear strange and illogical
for any OAS investigation to be limited to only one aspect of recent
difficulties. From U.S. standpoint GOV will understand that while
we feel as strongly as anyone concerning Dominican Government
aggressions and conspiracies we would find it difficult to understand
or explain to our public a second time why Communist and Castro
aggressions should not be included in investigation and remedial
action, particularly if specific OAS action should subsequently be
decided upon.
(2) Although U.S. not member IAPC we will of course cooper-
ate to extent feasible and appropriate with any investigation which
that Committee may undertake. However, we suggest that in view
of threat which conspiracy and disorders inspired from abroad
pose to constitutional processes, Venezuela give consideration to
invoking Rio Treaty and requesting convocation COAS as Organ
Consultation in order obtain investigation under Rio Treaty pro-
cedures. As described DEPCIRTEL 7674 this could be done with-
out fixing date for 8th Fonmin Meeting or indeed without finally
committing governments that such meeting necessary. Purpose
would be to obtain full and complete investigation of the facts after
which governments could decide whether further action called for.
Department doubts IAPC procedure would be as efficacious as Rio
Treaty investigation.
ment among responsible AD COPEI and independent political sectors from President

Venezuela  1309
In conveying above you should of course emphasize deep preoc-
cupation with which we observe that Venezuelan Government chosen
by popular vote in orderly constitutional elections is victim of disorder
inspired from abroad.
Dillon
VE–50.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to
the Department of State1
479. Conveyed DEPTEL 496 in detail yesterday morning to Foreign
Minister who left Cabinet meeting to receive me. I stressed points one
and two particularly need broaden terms requested investigation since
Communists and Castro elements have been prime movers in recent
disturbances in Venezuela. Foreign Minister made copious notes and
said he would confer at once with President Betancourt. He observed
however Venezuela can actively proceed against Castro. Foreign officer
telephoned me yesterday evening President Betancourt will receive me
Monday 11:00 a.m.
Sparks
VE–51.
Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to
the Department of State1
483. Reference: Department telegram 496
Stewart and I met at noon today for three hours with President
Betancourt and Foreign Minister Falcon. Among other matters we

discussed at length Department suggestion GOV request investigation
under Rio treaty of attempts outside forces overthrow his regime. I
stressed U.S. internal political factors which make difficult again probe
into Dominican Republic’s actions against GOV without including
Cuba in same investigation.
President appreciated these facts but repeated what he has told
me many times, namely insofar as Venezuela is concerned no action
can be taken on Cuba until Trujillo problem is resolved. President is
convinced Venezuelan people are on his side in this matter and from
standpoint his own personal honor he cannot enter into any action
against Cuba until Trujillo regime is forced out of power. As President
has stated before he does not want link any OAS action against Trujillo
with that of Cuba. President is fully aware of dangers of Castroism
and he repeated he gladly would head movement of Latin American
countries to dispose of Castro problem once effective action were taken
against Trujillo. He said Colombia, Chile, Argentina and Peru were in
full accord with GOV in this line. He added he had discussed Cuba
with President-­elect Janos Quadros of Brazil when latter made brief
visit to Venezuela after his trip to Habana and he had received recent
assurances Quadros Brazilian executive agreed with Venezuelan posi-
tion vis-­a-­vis Castro and Trujillo. Betancourt believes present Brazilian
Government is playing ball with Trujillo.
At one point in conversation President said he was willing move
against Cuba as soon as effective sanctions contemplated in sixth MFM
in San Jose were put into effect. Plan he envisaged would call for rep-
resentatives of Latin American nations meet privately with Castro and
inform him that there must be reassignment of Cuban foreign policy
failing which full weight of sanctions then would be imposed on Cuba
by membership of OAS. Mere fact Cuban Government has violated
terms of OAS agreements would be sufficient, but fact also it has placed
itself within Soviet orbit would result in hemisphere-­wide support
of action against Castro. He belittled any efforts of countries such as
Guatemala or Nicaragua to initiate action against Castro.
Reiterated offer Venezuela and Colombia send armed forces pre-
vent Castro penetration Dominican Republic if requested by OAS or
provisional GODR.
I presented our case in strongest possible terms and Betancourt’s
reply was equally firm. I do not think it is at all likely Betancourt will
change his mind.
Sparks

Venezuela  1311
VE–52.
Letter from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs (Coerr) to the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
(Knight)1
Washington, December 7, 1960.
Dear Mr. Knight:
As you aware the United States Government agreed by an exchange
Government of Venezuela credit totaling approximately $180 million
dollars over a period of ten years for the purchase of military equipment
and material. The terms specified in this agreement are: “A suitable down
payment followed by semi-annual installments over a three-year period at
three percent per annum interest on the unpaid balances”.
In view of a difficult budget situation which arose and the need
to reduce military expenditures, a representative of the Venezuelan
Ministry of Defense visited Washington on November 25, 1959 to inquire
about the possibility of modifying the credit agreement to provide more
favorable credit terms. This representative was advised at a joint State-
Defense meeting that a reconsideration of the interest rate in light of the
prevailing rates would most likely result in a higher, not a lower interest
rate, and that it was virtually impossible to extend the repayment terms
beyond three years because of the accounting limitations and the inflex-
ibility of the three year limit on revolving fund financing.
Nevertheless, it was indicated that some adjustment of repayment
terms might be worked out, without exceeding the three-year limit, in
order to afford some relief to the Venezuelan Government. It was sug-
gested that a formal request for adjustment be submitted through dip-
lomatic channels and the representative was informed that the United
States [illegible in the original] concerned would expeditiously con-
sider the request.
By a letter dated December [illegible in the original], 1959 to the
Chief of the United States Army Training Mission in Venezuela, the
Venezuelan Ministry of Defense requested extension of the credit
repayment terms from three to ten years.2 Since the extension of credit
beyond three years meant that repayments revert to the United States
Treasury and no longer become available for credit financing, there
were logical objections at the time to accommodating the Venezuelan
Mansfield Amendment.” Secret. Co-­drafted by John J. Intersoll and Allan F. McLean of
the Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs on November 29. The source text is
a carbon copy bearing Coerr’s typed signature.
2 The reference letter was not found Department of State files.

request in full. The Defense Department, therefore, proposed that the
two Governments modify the credit arrangement in order to provide
the Venezuelan Government relief by permitting annual payments in
lieu of semi-annual installments for all transactions not consummated
credit program on the basis of ten percent down and payment of the
balance at the end of the three year period.3
This modification was offered to the Venezuelan Government in
ingly grave political and economic situation which has arisen since
the Department’s proposal, the Venezuelan Government responded to
the note by sending another special representative to Washington this
month to plead on its behalf that the United States Government recon-
sider its request for longer credit terms, and, as a measure of immediate
relief, to request the United States Government to grant a moratorium
on payments now due and which will become due on most purchases.
This request was confirmed by the Venezuelan Embassy note no. 1180
dated November 14, 1960, a copy of which is enclosed for your infor-
mation and reference.5
Since the original request of the Venezuelan Government for mod-
ification of the credit terms was received, the economic situation of
Venezuela has deteriorated rapidly. The Venezuelan Treasury is seri-
ously depleted and the Government faces a deficit of about 220 million
dollars this fiscal year. The present Government has already pared its
budget down about as far as is politically prudent. In fact, the politi-
cal disturbances that have taken place recently even in part from that
Government’s rigid [illegible in the original] and such disturbances and
riots are likely to recur, at least sporadically in the foreseeable future.
[illegible in the original], the present Venezuelan Government feels that
it is in no economic position to make payments on past purchases and
will require an extension of repayment terms.
The Department of State considers it to be in the interests of United
States Government to support on an urgent basis this request from
the Venezuelan Government for relief upon its present overburdened
budget.
The Department of State strongly recommends that both our
Departments give immediate consideration to granting relief to the
Venezuelan Government by providing a moratorium on payments
“Defense Affairs: Mansfield Amendment”)
4 Not printed;
5 Not found with source text; a copy is separately filed under

Venezuela  1313
due and that will come due on past purchases, and to extend the credit
terms to a ten-year period in lieu of three.
Sincerely yours,
Wymberley D.R. Coerr
VE–53.
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Secretary of State and
the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1
Washington, December 9, 1960.
SUBJECT
Meeting on Proposed Oil Proclamation
In accordance with instructions I attended a meeting at 8:30 this
morning in the White House under Gerry Morgan’s2 chairmanship on
the proclamation proposed by Secretary Seaton of Interior relative to
oil imports. Essentially the draft would modify the President’s procla-
flexibility into the procedures established thereunder.3
The meeting was also-­attended by Judge Walsh,4 General Persons,5
Secretary Seaton, Under Secretary Bennett,6 Secretary Anderson, Don
I argued strongly for delay in a decision on this matter on the
grounds that there had not been adequate inter-Departmental consid-
eration of the matter and, further, that there, had been a substantial
Confidential.
2 Deputy Assistant to the President.
3 The proposed amendment would require the Secretary of the Interior to make
corrective adjustments in the mandatory oil import program in order to prevent over-­
estimates and under-­estimates of total demand from having an unintended impact on
levels of importation of oil into the United States.
4 Lawrence E. Walsh, Deputy Attorney General.
5 Wilton B. Persons, Assistant to the President.
6 Elmer F. Bennett, Under Secretary of the Department of the Interior.
7 Special Assistant to the President.
8 Assistant Special Council to the President.
9 Harlan P. Bramble, Deputy Director of the Office of International Resources of the
Department of State.

neglect of the element of national security on which the 1959 procla-
mation substantially rested. I emphasized the damaging effects that
the proposed modification would have on many sensitive areas of
the world but particularly on Venezuela. I expanded on the difficult
internal situation in Venezuela and the key position which Betancourt
occupies in relation to our policy towards Castro. During the latter part
of the discussion I said that the State Department would accept the
responsibility for securing a delay in the issuance of a new proclama-
tion on this subject (since we would be blamed for it anyway) and that
it was our strong desire that no change be made in the procedures for
the first quarter of 1961.
Messrs. Seaton and Bennett argued vigorously on behalf of their
proposition. I received support from Paarlberg, Areeda, and to con-
siderable degree from Gerry Morgan. The upshot was that Secretary
Seaton’s proposal was not approved by the group.
Fred Seaton thereupon said that he was impelled to appeal this
decision to the President, and an appointment was made for this
and Tom Mann added to the group of representatives assembled this
morning.10

Editor’s Note: The references in this index are to document numbers.
Each document is numbered within each compilation with particular
prefixes. These prefixes are as follows: ETA: U.S. regional economic and
technical assistance policy; BL: Bolivia; CI: Chile; CO: Colombia; CR:
Costa Rica; DR: Dominican Republic; EC: Ecuador; ES: El Salvador; GT:
Guatemala; HA: Haiti; HO: Honduras; NI: Nicaragua; PM: Panama;
PA: Paraguay; PE: Peru; UR: Uruguay; and VE: Venezuela.
Abbes Garcia, John, DR–1
Acly, R. Austin, PM–13
Acosta, Eduardo, VE–11
Act of Bogotá. See Bogotá meeting under Organization of American
States: Committee of 21.
Adair, Charles W., Jr., ETA–17–18
Adams, Sherman, BL–10
Agriculture, U.S. Department of, ETA–49; CO–12
Aguilar Mawdsley, Andrés, VE–14
Aguiluz Orellana, Marcial, CR–28
Agurcia, Juan, HO–18
Aiken, George, CO–25
Alegria, Julio Cesar, NI–22
Algrant, Victor, CH–27
Allen, John, PM–39, 43
Allen, Ward P., EC–16
Alonso, Justo M., UR–9, 14
Alvarez Calderon, Alfredo, PE–11
Alvarez Restrepo, Antonio, CO–8, 12

1316  Index
Antarctica, CH–34
Aragon, Doris T., CR–21
Aramburu, Maj. Gen. Pedro Eugenio, DR–16
Arana, Col. Francisco, GT–24
Araujo, Manuel, EC–23
Arcaya Rivero, Ignacio Luis, HA–17; VE–30
Ardón Fernandez, Col. José Enrique, GT–1
Areeda, Phil, VE–53
Arenas, José Luis, GT–21, 25
Arey, Hawthorne, PE–45; UR–5
Arguello, Fernando, NI–22
Armfelt, Carl, DR–1
Army, U.S. Department of the, CR–10; PM–39
Arnold, Elting, ETA–8, 12
Arosemena, José, EC–23
Arosemena Monroy, Carlos Julio, EC–15
Arroyo Torres, Ledo, UR–14
Asensio-Wunderlich, Julio, GT–3–4
Ashworth, Jack, PE–39
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), PM–41, 43
Atterberry, Phil R., ETA–12
Aurand, Capt., PM–17
Austria, ETA–27, ES–34
Ayulo, Enrique, PE–11
Baguidy, Joseph, HA–28
Bailey, Frederick J., Jr., CR–29
Baker, Jasper, HO–17
HO–20; PA–11
Barfield, John D, DR–7

Index  1317
Barnes, Donald F., PE–48
Barnes, Robert G., EC–1
Baron, Sydney, DR–1
Barrau Pelaez, Manuel, BL–5
Barrios, Gonzalo, VE–28
Baruch, Bernard, EC–18
Battle, José, UR–9
Battle Ibáñez, Jorge, UR–13
Battle Pacheco, Cesar, UR–14
Beale, Wilson T.M., Jr., ETA–22; VE–48
Becker, Loftus E., ETA–5; VE–5
Belgium, ETA–27
Belize. See, British Honduras.
PM–15; PE–34
Belton, William, CH–1, 5
Bennett, Elmer F., VE–53
Benson, Ezra Taft, PM–43
Bernardo Flores, H.E., VE–27
Bernau, Phyllis D., DR–2
Bertens, Eugenio, CH–15
Bittermann, Henry J., ETA–8, 12
Blanchard, Louis F., HO–6; NI–11
Blanchet, Jules, HA–26
Blanchet, Paul, HA–26
Blau, Clarence I., ETA–12
Blowers, George A., UR–5
Boggs, Hale, HO–20

1318  Index
Bogley, Samuel, GT–10
Bogran, Luis, HO–3
Bolivia (see also Latin America), BL–32; CH–29
Inter-American Development Bank, ETA–15, 41
Grace & Co tax issue, BL–25
Political situation and, BL–1, 24
Bowles, Chester, PM–55
Boyd, Aquilino, PM–25
Boyer, Hervé, HA–26
Braden, Spruille, CO–10
Bragdon, Gen., PM–43
Breaux, Clarence, BL–6
Brewster, Robert C., PE–44
Brinsmade, Robert, VE–15
Brisco, Milo M., PE–21, 50
British Honduras, GT–4–8
Bryan, Malcom H., PE–35
Buchanan, Wiley T., Jr., GT–3

Index  1319
Budinger, John M., VE–20
Buitrago, Capt., ES–13, 26
Burgess, UR–5
Burke, Adm. Arleigh A., GT–39
Burns, Robert L., PM–15
Burr, Jorge, CH–24
Burroughs, Robert, PM–8
Butler, G., CH–5
Cake, Ralph, PM–8
Caldera, Raphael, VE–15
Calderon Guardia, Rafael Angel, CR–9–10
Calderon Moreno, Alfonso, EC–9
Callander, C.L., ETA–8, 12
Calle, Gen., EC–24
Campos, Manuel, CR–29
Canessa, Roberto E., ES–22
Capriles, Miguel Angel, VE–22
Carballo, Rafael Antonio, ES–22
Cardoñas, Gen. Lazaro, CR–21; NI–11
Cardona, Francisco, NI–22
CARE, CR–10; HO–10
Caribbean situation (see also Central America, Cuba, and
Dominican, Republic subheadings under other subjects;
Dominican Republic, Haiti, Honduras, individual countries),
Panama invasion, PM–14
Regional economic integration proposals and ETA–25
U.S. arms embargo, GT–26–27
Carrillo Batalla, VE–32

1320  Index
Carrillo Smith, Carlos, PE–43
Carson, HO–10; VE–11
Carson, Charles C., PA–7, 12
Carter, Albert E., PA–6
Carter, Maj. Gen William A., PM–50, 59
Castillero, Ernesto, PM–25
Castillo, Fabio, ES–27, 30
Castillo, Lt. Col. Miguel Angel, ES–27
Castillo Arreola, GT–24
Castro, Alvaro, CR–25
Castro, Hector David, ES–5–7
Castro León, Col Jesús Maria, VE–13, 40
Castro Moran, Maj., ES–30
Central America (see also Latin America; individual countries)
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI),
Inter-American Development Bank, ETA–18
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI), ETA–51,
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), DR–8
Chafardet Urbina, Luis, VE–32
Chaufournier, Roger, PE–7, 12
Chaves, Nuflo, BL–1
VE–13

Index  1321
Clulow, Carlos A., UR–15, 17
Latin America
Cohen, Alexander A., CR–21
Colmenares, Adolfo, GT–20
PM–48
Conger, Clement E., VE–1
Acts of:
Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954
Battle Act, CH–6–7
Buy American Act, ETA–40; VE–11
Cooley Amendment, See Agricultural Trade Development and
Assistance Act of 1954 above.
Export-Import Bank Act (P.L. 173), ETA–46
PM–13
Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act, 1951. See Battle Act
above.

1322  Index
Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, PM–8, VE–5
McClellan Committee see Permanent Subcommittee on Investi-
gations of the Senate Committee on Government Operations
below.
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Commit-
tee on Government Operations, BL–25
Connally, Tom, HO–22
Considine, Robert, PE–43
Constant, Victor Nevers, HA–2
Convention of Mexico City, CR–3
Cooley, Harold D., CR–26; DR–25
Corcoran, Thomas G., GT–29
Cordero Crespo, Gonzalo, EC–15
Cordova, Gen., ES–29
Cordovez, EC–7
Costanzo, C.A., BL–17
Costanzo, Gesualdo, PA–11

Index  1323
Council on Foreign Economic Policy, ETA–5
Crespo, Morales, VE–11
Croizat, Col. Victor, HA–9
Cuba (see also Caribbean situation; Cuba and Cuban subheadings, under
U.S. policy toward, CH–32; PE–43
Culley, Perry H., EC–1
D’Antoni, Thomas S., HO–20
Dalponte, Mario, ETA–50, 53
Darby, Harry, VE–20
Dasso, Andres, PE–7
Dávila, Céleo, HO–1, 6
De Arteaga, Diego, UR–15
De Galíndez, Jesus, DR–1
De Lavalle, Juan Bautista, PE–16–17
De Sola, René, VE–14
Declaration of Solidarity for the Preservation of the Political
Integrity of the American States Against the Intervention
of International Communism. See Caracas Resolution under
Organization of American States.
VE–12
Peru, PE–25, 33
Delgado, Enrique, NI–18
Delgado Barreucche, Rafael, CO–8
Delgado Chalbaud, Col., VE–31
Delgado Yrigoyen, Javier, PE–37
Déneke, Rolando, ES–25, 43

1324  Index
Denmark, ETA–27
Dennison, Adm., GT–36
Dennison, W. Ellery, HA–8, 27
Desinor, Clovis, HA–26
El Salvador, ES–1–2
Honduras, HO–3, 21
Inter-American Program for Social Development and, ETA–34,
Nicaragua, NI–22
Venezuela, VE–37
Dewey, Thomas E., VE–20
Diefenbaker, John G., PE–43; VE–26
Diez de Medina, Fernando, BL–32
Diez Delgado, Gustavo, EC–13
Diez, Julio, VE–16
Dihigo, Ernesto, HA–17
Agrarian reform and, CO–25
Disaster relief, CH–37
Inter-American Program for Social Development,

Index  1325
Political situation and, GT–34, 40
Regional economic integration proposals, ETA–51
PE–30; VE–12
Peru–Ecuador border guarantee, EC–17, 20
Doering, William F., ETA–8, 12
Dominican Republic (see also Caribbean situation; Latin America;
Dominican Republic subheadings under other subjects):
Trujillo trust proposal, DR–16–17
Donahue, ETA–26
Donalson, John, HO–21
Donhauser, Robert, HA–12, 16
Donnelly, Dixon, ETA–40–41
Dory, Robert J., CH–5
Dorticós Torrado, Osvaldo, PE–47
Douglas, James H., Jr., PM–32
Drake, K, CH–5
PM–14; PE–48
Dreyfuss, John T., EC–22, 25
Latin America
PM–2; PE-1

1326  Index
Duran, EC–7
Duran, Luis M., BL–6
Duruz, Willis F., BL–10
Duvall, BL–25
Duvigneaud, HA–5
Eakens, Robert, CH–5, 15
Echegoyen, Martin R., UR–9, 14
Cuba, EC–16, 23
Edwards, Lt. Col. Spencer P., Jr., CR–21, 29
Latin America
Military missions, HA–2, 18
Inter-American Program for Social Development,
PA–9
GT–4; PM–19

Index  1327
Eleta, Fernando, ETA–50
Eliécer Caitán, Jorge, CO–39
Eliot, Theodore I., Jr., ETA–40; HO–20
Ellis, Athol H., HA–9
Ernst, Morris, DR–1
Erráuriz, Juan, CH–36
Escalante Duran, Manuel G., CR–25–27
Escapini, ES–23
Espaillat, Arturo, DR–1, 6
Espinosa, EC–7
Espy, James, UR–2
Esquivel, ES–19, 23
Estep, Hunter L., CR–21
Eximbank see Export-Import Bank
Bolivia, BL–8
Honduras, HO–20
CH–30
Inter-American Program for Social Development and, ETA–34, 44,
Paraguay, PA–3, 4
Falla Caceres, Ricardo, ES–27, 30
Farfans, Lacayo, NI–17

1328  Index
VE–32
Farley, Philip J., PM–17
Fausto Fernandez, Julio, ES–20, 23
Feldman, Arthur W., CR–26, 29
Fernandes, Francisco, GT–30
Ferrero, Romulo, PE–12
Fignolé, Daniel, HA–11, 13
Fimbres, Rudy V., ETA–41
Finch, David, BL–17
Finkel, Jay, ETA–12
Fischer, Carlo L., UR–2
Fishburne, John I., ETA–26; EC–7
Fisher, Allan J., ETA–8
Fitch, Maj. Gen. Alva R., ES–41
Flemming, Arthur S., PM–17, 43
Floete, Franklin, PM–17
Flood, PM–49
Flores, Oscar, NI–2, 5
Foley, Emilio, PE–24
Folsom, Victor, HO–17
Foreign Operations Adminstration (FOA), ETA–54
Forero, Col. Hernando, CO–10
Fortin Magana, Rene, ES–27, 30
France, ETA–27
Franco Holguin, Jorge, CO–22
Frank, John Joseph, DR–1
Franklin, Albert B., III, HO–14
Frondizi, Arturo, CH–31; EC–20
Fuentes, Gen. Hugo, VF-13
Fuller, Col. Enrique, PE–51
Fullgraff, UR–5
Furth, J. Herbert, ETA–12
Gaither, Gen. Ridgeley, PM–49
Galich, GT–24
Gallegos, Romulo, VE–42
Gallo Porras, Luis, PE–12, 19

Index  1329
Garcia Bauer, Carlos, GT–3–4
Garcia Granados, Jorge, GT–6, 18
Garcia Salas, Julio Prado, GT–20
UR–1
Gerber, Anthony, HO–21
Giardino, Alfred, HO–17
Gil-Borges, José, VE–31
Glennan, PM–17
Glower, Rafael ETA–17–18
Golby, Ralph, HO–21
Gómez, Laureano, CO–10, 19
Gómez Arenas, Gen., CO–12
Gómez Flores, Manuel, NI–6
Gómez Millas, Juan, CH–36
Gonzalez, GT–10
Gonzalez, Alberto, CO–26
Gonzalez Segui, Carlos, GT–15, 18
Gonzalez Segui, Col. José Rubén, GT–18
Goodwin, Walter P., CH–27
Gorman, Kenneth H., HO–20
Grauert, Hector A., UR–14
Gray, William F., BL–29
Green, PM–51
Green, Howard Charles, PE–43
Grieve, PE–50
Guardia Herrero, Tomas Federico, CR–5

1330  Index
Guevara Serna, Ernesto (“Che”), PF-44
Gurney, C., CO–14
Gutiérrez Gómez, José, CO–3, 23
Haahr, ETA–52
Hadraba, ETA–26
Haider, Michael L., PE–21
Haight, H.W., VE–16–17
Haiti (see also Caribbean situation; Latin America)
Hammond, Henry S., HO–15, 17
Hanes, John W., Jr., VE–23
Hardy, Royce, PM–43
Harlow, PM–43
Harr, Karl G., PM–17, 43
Harrison, Faustino, UR–9, 14
Harrison, Harlan A., HA–25, 29
Hart, ETA–40
Harvey, Bartlett, ETA–8, 12

Index  1331
Havlik, Herbert, PE–7, 12
Hazelett, John C., ES–23
Hazera, Jorge, CR–5
Hearst, William Randolph, Jr., PE–43
Heath, Edward, VE–48
Heinl, Col., HA–17
Hemba, Alton, ETA–41
Henderson, Horace, CO–25
Henderson, Loy, PM–43; VE–41
Herbert, Raford, CH–15
Herman, Stewart, CO–17
Hernandez, Alfredo, ETA–53
Hernández Volio, Alfredo, CR–2, 5
Herndon, Richard M., NI–23
Herrera, Luis Alberto, UR–9
Herrera Báez, Porfirio, DR–4–6
Herron, Francies W., ETA–48
VE–40
Latin America
PE–48; VE–1
Inter-American Program for Social Development, ETA–33,
Hickenlooper, Bourke, ETA–49
Hidalgo, Carlos F., HO–1
Higgins, ETA–53
Higgins, Herbert N., HA–27

1332  Index
Hilbek, Federico, PE–7
Hilton, Ralph, PA–1
Hirschtritt, Ralph, ETA–8
Hoghland, John S., II, ETA–27; VE–1
Holcombe, John L., EC–1
Holland, Henry F., BL–1; PE–42
Holman, Eugene, VE–16, 18
Holt, Pat, CH–26
Home, Lord, VE–48
Honorat, Michel Lamartiniere, HA–26
Hooker, John S, ETA–12
Hoover, Herbert, DR–16
Howe, Walter, CH–1
Hoyas Osores, Guillermo, PE–18, 37
Hudson, William P., NI–1, 3
Hummel, J.I., EC–17–18
Hutchinson, Edmund C., ETA–8; HA–20
Institute of Inter-American Affairs (IIAA), ETA–40; EC–18
Inter-American Defense Board, CH–5; EC–9
Bolivia, BL–40, 43
Inter-American Program for Social Development and, ETA–34–37,
Operation Pan America proposal and, CH–30
Paraguay, PA–12

Index  1333
Inter-American Geodetic Survey, CR–10, 29
Inter-American Peace Committee. See under Organisation of American
States.
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty), 1947,
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD),
Bolivia, BL–5, 30
Chile, CH–17, 26
Ecuador, EC–8
Guatemala, GT–5
Haiti, HA–1
Honduras, HO–3
CH–30
Nicaragua, NI–12, 18
Paraguay, PA–8, 10
Uruguay, UR–1, 9
Venezuela, VE–28, 37
Chile, CH–10, 27
Colombia, CO–36, 37
Ecuador, EC–8, 18
Nicaragua, NI–8, 12
Peru, PE–13, 44
Venezuela, VE–36, 47

1334  Index
International Development Association, ETA–46
International Finance Corporation, ETA–6; VE–37
International Labor Organization (ILO), CR–10
Venezuela, VE–39, 47
International Tin Council (ITC), BL–12
Investment Guarantee Agreements, ETA–52
VE–48
Israel, ES–34
Italy, ETA–27
Ivovich, Esteban, ETA–26
Jacobsson, Per, PE–1
Jamieson, John K., PE–50
Japan, ETA–27
Jiménez de la Guardia, Adolfo, CR–9
Johnson, Gerald, PM–43
Johnson, Lyndon B., CO–18
Johnson, Robert H., ES–32
Johnston, James R., CR–21
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), DR–2; ES–36
Jones, Edgar, CH–15
Jones, Martin, PE–21
Jumelle, Clement, HA–4, 13
Jurgens, Carlos, PE–7
Justice, U.S. Department of, DR–1
Kalijarvi, Thorsten V.
El Salvador
Kannenberg, Hollis, VE–18–19

Index  1335
Katsainos, Charles, CH–27
Kearns, Henry, ETA–12
Kebreau, Gen., DR–1; HA–4
Keefe, Roger, HO–21
Kefauver, Capt. R., HA–16
Kendall, David W., PM–17, 43
Kennedy, John F., ETA–40
Kenworthy, E.W., ETA–29
Kerr, Peyton A., ETA–52
Kevorkian, Arthur G., ETA–8
Keyes, Cmdr. Thomas E., DR–1
Khrushchev, Nikita S., GT–24
Kimball, HA–8
Kimmel, Roy I., CR–21, 28
Kincaid, Grover, GT–10
Kirchhoff, D.J., HO–20
Kirlin, ETA–52
Koenig, PE–42
Kramer, Villagran, GT–24
Krebs, Max V., GT–42; PM–19
Kuchel, Thomas H., ETA–27
Kurdas, Kemal, PA–8, 11
Kybal, Milic, ETA–26
Labor, U.S. Department of, CH–21
Lacayo, Chester, NI–22
Láfer, Horácio, EC–20–21
Lainez, Francisco, NI–18
Land, Jay W., PE–37
Larrabure, Hipolito, PE–7, 12
Larsen, Roy E., CR–21
Lary, Hal, ETA–8, 12
Latin America (see also Caribbean situation; Central America;
individual countries)

1336  Index
Political situation, ETA–33; CO–12
United States, relations with
U.S. economic aid to (see also Inter-American Development Bank),
Inter-American Program for Social Development, ETA–33–40,
U.S. military aid to, CR–21; PE–22
Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., GT–42; VE–20
Lemus, Lt. Col. José Maria
Lennartson, Nils A., ETA–12
Lenzen, T.L., VE–18
León Valencia, Guillermo, CO–19
Lightner, E. Allan, VE–1
Lindsay, David, CR–4, 11
Linville, Francis A., PE–7, 12
Litsey, Weldon, CO–3
Lleras Restrepo, Carlos, CO–19
Lodge, Henry Cabot, CR–21

Index  1337
Lofton, Harry M., DR–7
Lombardo Toledano, Vicente, VE–28
López, Alfonsito, CO–19
López, Col. Oswaldo, HO–4
López Contreras, Gen., VE–13
López Henriquez, Gen. Josue, VE–13, 34
López Mateos, Adolfo, GT–14
López Pumarejo, Alfonso, CO–8, 19
Luongo, N., CH–5
Lyle, Vernon J., PE–37
Lyon, Cecil B., CH–1
Machado, Pino, NI–22
Mack, Victor A., ETA–8, 12
MacKenna, CH–12
Magnani, Gen. Enrique, UR–14
VE–25
International commodity agreements, CO–18, 23
Latin America
Economic situation, CO–8; VE–25
PE–48; VE–25

1338  Index
Inter-American Program for Social Development, ETA–34,
Panama, PM–56
Mansfield, Mike, ETA–26; CH–21
Marget, Arthur, ETA–8, 11
Mariaca, Enrique, BL–6
Markski, HA–29
Marroquin Rojas, Clemente, GT–18, 20
Martin, Edwin M., ETA–52; PE–44
Martin, William McC., Jr., ETA–8, 12
Martínez, Roberto, HO–4
Martínez Laenz, Alejandro, NI–22
Mason, Norman, PM–17
Matthews, Col., ES–30
Matthews, Herbert L., CR–21; PA–7
Maverick, Albert, HO–17
Mayne, Alvin, PM–3
McBride, Felix, GT–18
McCabe, Edward, PM–43, 51
McClellan, Andrew, HO–15, 17
McClellan, Chad, PM–17
McClintock, Robert M., VE–27
McCone, John A., PM–17, 43
McConkey, Dale, HO–17
McKibbin, John, PM–43
McLain, W. Douglas, Jr., ES–2
McLean, Allan F., Jr., PE–51; VE–52
McPhee, PM–17
Medina Angarita, Gen., VE–13
Mejia Salazar, Jorge, CO–12
Menapace, Robert B., ETA–30; PA–4
Mendivil, Mario, ETA–17

Index  1339
Latin America
Merida Sáenz, Marco Aurelio, GT–12
Migdail, Carl, CR–21
Milla Bermudes, NI–2, 5
Miller, BL–34
Miller, Edward G., UR–3
Mills, Edward K., Jr., PM–17
Minnich, L. Arthur, Jr., PM–17, 43
Miro, Rodrigo, PM–58
Mitchell, PM–43
Molina, Gen., ES–29
Montcalegro, ETA–18
Montenegro, Mario, BL–25
Montgomery, Joseph W., HO–17
Mora, José A., GT–35
Mora Valverda, CR–9
Morales Gomez, Luis, GT–18
Morató, Rafael, BL–6
Moreno Cordova, Hugo, BL–5, 28
Moreno Diaz, Samuel, CO–12
Morrison, Wilbur, DR–27
Morse, True D., PM–17
Morton, PM–43
Mueller, Frederick, PM–17
Mulliken, Jean H., ETA–5
Munn, Ian, GT–15
Munson, William H., DR–1
Murphy, Gerald L., DR–1

1340  Index
Venezuela, VE–4, 23
Murray, James E., BL–21
Murray, PM–35
Myers, Max, ETA–12
National Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs
(NA-COIAA), ETA–31–33
National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial
National Intelligence Estimates
National Security Council
Actions
No. 1550, ETA–54
No. 2212, DR–19
No. 2218, DR–19
No. 2273, DR–25
No. 2330, ES–32
El Salvador, ES–32, 36
Guatemala, GT–1
Haiti, HA–24
Panama, PM–33, 42
Navas Pardo, Gen. Rafael, CO–4
Navy, U.S. Department of the, CO–3
Neale, John R., PE–11
Nebot Velasco, Jaime, EC–17–18
Negrao de Lima, Francisco, ETA–48
Neidle, Alan, VE–31
Netherlands, ETA–27

Index  1341
Nicholson, Jorge, PE–51
Panama, PM–17, 43
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), HO–1
Norway, ETA–27
Nuñez Aguilar, Juan, ETA–50
O’Connell, James P., PM–17
O’Connor, Jeremiah J., BL–17
Odria y Amoretti, Manuel A., CH–31; PE–11
Oeschli, L. Paul, CH–27
Organización Regional Interamericana de Trabajadores (ORIT), CR–21; VE–28
Organization for Economic and Commercial Development, ETA–42
PE–43
Buenos Aires Economic Conference, 1957, Inter-American Devel-
HA–29; NI–11
Dominican Republic (see also San José Foreign Ministers meeting
Inter-American Economic and Social Council (IA-ECOSOC),

1342  Index
Inter-American Juridical Council, VE–25
San José Foreign Ministers meeting (see also Dominican Republic
Special Committee To Study the Formation of New Measures for
Economic Cooperation See Committee of 21 above.
Orpeza Castillo, Alejandro, VE–45
Ortega-Urbina, Alfonso, NI–2
Ortíz, Nestor C., ETA–4
Ortíz de Zevallos, Emilio, PE–39
Ortíz de Zevallos, Ortiz, PE–39
Ortúzar Escobar, Enrique, CH–36
Ospina Pérez, Mariano, CO–8, 19
Otto, Carlos, GT–18
Pacheco Vivas, Régulo, VE–13
Pádula, Eduardo, BL–6
Pamperrien, Rudolf, EC–7
Pan American Union, CH–5
Panama (see also Latin America; Panama Canal Zone), ETA–28; CO–12;
Language issue, PM–3
Parada, Gen. Alan, ES–1, 26
Parada, Martin, VE–13

Index  1343
Soviet bloc, relations with, PA–1, 7
Paris Club, ETA–27
Parra, Alirio, VE–11
Parra Velasco, Antonio, EC–15
Parrales, Ricardo, NI–18
Patterson, PM–17, 43
Pearson, Norman M., CH–27
Peña Prado, Max PE–11
Peñaloza, Luis, BL–13
Peralta, Col. Enrique, GT–20
Peralta Esquivel, José Joaquín, CR–29
Pérez, Pablo, CH–36
Pérez Chiriboga, EC–7
Pérez de la Cova, Carlos, VE–5, 11
Pérez Galeano, GT–16
Pérez Guerrero, Manuel, VE–38
Pérez Morales, Jesús Manuel, VE–13
Perkins, Milo R., ETA–34
Perón, Juan, CO–12
Perry, John M., EC–1
Soviet bloc, relations with, PE–16
Petersen, T.S., VE–18

1344  Index
Philippeaux, Gerard, HA–23, 26
Pichiotto, Edgar, PA–11
Pietri, Uslar, VE–22
Plate, Juan, PA–4, 7
Plaza Lasso, Galo, DR–16; EC–15
Ploeser, Walter C., PA–1, 8
Pollock, Seymour, CH–12, 17
Ponce Enriquez, Camillo, EC–3–5
Ponce Enriquez, Luis, EC–7
Ponce Luque, Alejandro T., EC–16
Porter, Charles O., DR–1
Powell, Oscar M., GT–10, 18
Prado Montano, Julio, ETA–50; BL–2
Prebisch, Raúl, ETA–26
Priále, Ramiro, PE–24
Price, J. Roy, CH–21
Prieto Laurens, VE–28
Prio Soccorás, Carlos, VE–3
Proudfit, VE–20, 25
Puga, Mariano, CH–2, 4
Quadros, Janio da Silva, VE–51
Quesada, Gen. E.R., PM–17
Quesada Guerra, Luis Miro, PE–24
Quinonez, ES–30
Quintana, Julio C., NI–20
Quintanilla, Gen., ES–13, 26
Radford, Richard A., PA–11
Ramírez, Roberto, ETA–53
Ramírez Amaya, Guillermo, CO–16

Index  1345
Ramsbotham, Peter, VE–48
Randall, PM–17
Raymond, Col. John M., ETA–52
Redington, Robert J., VE–44
Reid, Ralph, ETA–9, 45
Rengifo, Brig. Gen. Pioquinto, CO–1
Richardson, DR–6
Richardson, Adm., DR–1
Richardson, Ralph, CH–27
Riddleherger, James W., CO–25
Rio Treaty See Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
Robinson, H., CH–5; CR–11
Robinson, Col. James C., Jr., EC–1
Roche, Marcel, VE–22
Rockefeller, Nelson, ETA–40
Rodas Alvarado, Modesto, HO–8; NI–5
Rodríguez de la Vega, Adolfo, CO–35
Rodríguez Echazábal, Antonio, GT–24
Rogers, J.T., EC–17–18
Rojas, Armando, VE–31
Rojas Guevara, José, BL–32
Romualdi, Serafino, VE–20, 25
Rose, Victor, BL–3
Ross, Emerson A., ETA–8
Ross, Robert W., ETA–48; ES–7
Russell y Arellano, Marcel, GT–3
Rossi Chavarría, Jorge, CR–1, 5
Rountree, William M., VE–18
Rubio Rolando, José, PE–43

1346  Index
International commodity agreements, CO–18, 23
Latin America
Chinese People’s Republic, relations with, CH–24
Soviet bloc, relations with, CH–6; CO–3
Agrarian reform and, CO–25, 31
Peru-Ecuador border guarantee, EC–10
Rueda Teran, Brig. Gen. Alberto, CO–36
Ruíz Cortines, Adolfo, DR–16; GT–7
Ryan, Hewson A., CH–5, 27

Index  1347
Sáenz, GT–28
Salazar Rodezno, ES–26, 30
Sammons, Robert S., ETA–8
Sánchez, Francisco, PE–17
Sánchez Arango, Aureliano, NI–21
Sánchez Gavito, Vicente, PE–37
Sánchez Morales, Manuel, UR–14
Sanders, Terry B., Jr., VE–6
Sanjines, Juan, BL–1
Santaella, Hector, VE–10
Santiago Munoz, Col., GT–7
Santos, Eduardo, CO–19; DR–16
Sapena Pastor, Raúl, PA–7
Saravia, ES–23
Sauer, Walter C., ETA–8; UR–5
Saulnier, Raymond J., PM–17, 43
Sause, Oliver L., Jr., CH–5
Savage, Capt. Arthur M., CH–27
Sayre, Robert M., PE–24, 28
Schaedel, Richard P., PE–7
Schaffner, Philip, ETA–8, 12
Schmall, Horace William, DR–1
Schmidt, B.C., VE–18
Schneider, Jorge, CH–38
Scribner, Fred C., BL–17; CR–16
Secco Ellauri, Oscar, UR–2
Seignious, Col. George M., II, PM–39
Selden, Armistead I., Jr., PM–52
Sepulveda Contreras, Alberto, CH–7
Serrano Langlois, Antonio, ES–2
Sessions, Edson O., PM–17
Shaw, John, VE–19
Shenefield, Hale T., ETA–8, 12
Shepherd, Gen. Lemuel C., Jr., EC–9
Shields, BL–34
Shillock, John C., PM–18
Shohan, Charles J., CO–22
Shuckburgh, Evelyn, VE–48

1348  Index
Sicilianu, Rocco, PM–17, 20
Simo, Maj. Rodriguez, ES–30
Sinn, Melvin E., HA–25
Smith, Douglas, HO–21
Smith, Robert, HO–20
Snowdon, Henry T., CO–23
Solís, Galileo, PM–62
Somerford, Fred A., EC–16
Somota, Tacho, NI–4, 11
Soto, George B., GT–12
Soviet bloc (See also Soviet bloc subheadings under other subjects),
ETA–33; GT–24
Spain, ES–34
Special National Intelligence Estimates:
Spruks, Charles, HO–1
Staats, Elmer, PM–17, 43
Stambaugh, Lynn U., ETA–8
Stark, Craig M., VE–18, 28

Index  1349
Panama, PM–22, 39
Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., PM–51, 63
Storm, Gustavo, PA–8, 10
Strauss, Adm. Lewis L., ETA–12
Stredel, VE–32
Stutesman, John H., Jr., PM–44
Sullivan, Charles A., VE–48
Sunderland, HO–15
Swan Islands, HO–18, 22
Sweden, ETA–27
Swett, Jorge, CH–24
Switzerland, ETA–27
Szymczak, M.S., ETA–9, 12
Taboada, Diógenes, EC–20
Talamas, Shibley Jean, HA–1
Tannenbaum, Frank, CR–21
Tariff Commission, ETA–3–4
Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., DR–3
Taylor, Tom, UR–5
Teller, Edward, PM–43
Terra, Gabriel, UR–9
Thomasson, Larry F., ETA–12
Thomen, Luis F., NI–21
Thompson, Herbert B., BL–32; VE–11
Thornley, Colin Hardwick, GT–7
Tirado Lamb, Adm. Guillermo, PE–30, 33
CO–21; PE–44

1350  Index
Haiti, HA–3, 8
Trueheart, William C., VE–48
Trujillo y Molina, Generalissimo Rafael L. (See also Dominican
Trujillo y Molina, Rafael L., Jr. (Ramfis), DR–1, 3
Truman, Harry S, DR–16
U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
CR–10
U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization, CR–10
U.N. International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), CR–10;
HO–10
U.N. Technical Assistance Administration (UNTAA), HO–10
U.N. Technical Assistance Board, CR–10
Urrutia de Leon, Col. Luis, GT–14
Cuba, UR–13, 17
Valeriano, Col. Napoleon, CO–26
Van Oordt, Gen. Guillermo, PE–25
Van Reigersburg, Fernando A., UR–17
Vargas Gené, Joaquín, CR–5, 29
Vatican, CO–1
Veizaga, Miguel, BL–32
Velázquez, Juan O., DR–5

Index  1351
Velenzuela, Onessimo, DR–1
Vial Espantoso, Carlos, CH–14
Vial Infante, Carlos, CH–31–32
Vicente Gomez, Juan, VE–13
Villalba, Jóvito, VE–15–16
Villar, Fernando, HO–4
Villareal, CO–1
Vintinner, PE–17
Virgilio Vivas, Brig. Gen. Rafael, GT–24
Vivas, Pedro, NI–2
Voluntary Oil Import Program, FTA-4
Walker Linares, Francis, CH–36
Wallich, Henry C., CR–15
Walsh, Lawrence E., PM–43; VE–53
Warden, Charles, ETA–12
Washburn, Abbott M., PM–17
Watrous, Livingston D., UR–1, 4
Latin America

1352  Index
Stabilization programs and, HA–8; UR–5
State-­owned enterprises, BL–6
Wells, Milton K., CO–26, 37
Wheaton, Anne W., PM–17, 43
White, Dudley, NI–18
White, Paul Lincoln, EC–23
White, Gen. Thomas D., DR–3
Whiteford, W.K., BL–8, 16
Whitehouse, Charles S., ETA–1; UR–10
Whiteman, Marjorie M., ES–43; VE–1
Whitman, Ann C., ETA–19
Whitman, Merrill, PM–17, 43
Whitt, John S., ES–21
Wikeley, Thomas, GT–15
Wiley, Katherine, ETA–12
Williams, John, BL–16
Williams, William L.S., BL–32
Wilson, Simon N., ETA–48
World Bank. See International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development.
World Health Organization (WHO), CR–10; HO–10
Wright, Adm. Jerauld, GT–39
Wright, Kenneth, HA–1
Yabrudy, VE–32
Yanes Urías, Col. César, ES–27, 30
Yoe, HA–17, 23
Yriart, Juan F., UR–15
Zabalza, Pedro, UR–14
Zassenhaus, Herbert K., BL–12
Zayas, E., BL–17
Zook, Donovan Q., CH–5, 27
Zounini, Lino, DR–11
