Chapter 5, May–June 1990 705 — Nazarkin expressed agreement with the idea in the last paragraph of the U.S. draft. He noted that the joint statement should also make clear what the future negotiations would entail. Explaining that the Soviet text already constituted an attempt to incorporate U.S. views, Nazarkin admitted that he was having difficulty knowing on which text drafting efforts should now be focussed. Burt said he would prefer to use a merged text based on the two drafts which had been exchanged in Moscow. End Text. 4. Ambassador Burt did not have an opportunity to clear this cable before departing post. Matlock 126. Editorial Note On May 18, 1990, the 11:30 a.m.–12:45 p.m. meeting of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks Subgroup of the Arms Control Working Group (see Document 125) coincided with an 11 a.m.–4 p.m. meeting in the Kremlin among Secretary of State James Baker, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, during which they discussed the U.S.-Soviet relationship, German reunification, and unrest in the Baltic republics, among other topics, according to the memorandum of conversation drafted by Director of Policy Planning Staff Dennis Ross. Toward the end of that meeting, Gorbachev invited in members of the Arms Control Working Group for a one and one-­half hour discussion on START, during which Ross did not take notes. (Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, US/Soviet Memos of Conversation—1989/1990). The memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. In telegram SECTO 7015 from the Secretary’s Delegation in Moscow, May 19, Baker transmitted a memorandum for President George Bush in which he summarized the portion of his May 18 meeting with Gorbachev absent from the official memorandum of conversation: “At this point, we invited a larger group in to join us and turned to arms control. We closed—­or so I thought—­on ALCMs, agreeing to count as ‘actually equipped’ heavy bombers over our preferred number of 150, and a ‘grandfathering’ of Tacit Rainbow. We agreed on 880 for the SLCM numerical limit, and got them to drop their distinguishability requirement for SLCM in return for our reaffirming the language of the
