1956 759 have time to study these at some length before the following meeting. They are listed with brief identification below: 1. Paper on Chinese Communist Treatment of Imprisoned American Civilians. This is the projected “white paper” on maltreatment of jailed Americans by the Chinese Communists from 1949 to date. It has been prepared on a contingency basis for possible release to the press in the event of a break-­off at Geneva. The study is mainly the work of John Lindbeck of FE/P who has been working on it almost full time for ­several weeks. The individual case summaries which are to be attached as a sort of appendix are not completed yet and they are not being sent to you. There will be over a hundred of these. We would like the frank reaction of yourself and Dave Osborn to the general approach and the contingent of the study as it now stands. It is not firmed up yet and there is still time for amendments, either broad or of the nit-­picking variety. As you will see Lindbeck has taken a fairly restrained line while still seeking to get considerable impact. I believe it is objective and on a sound factual basis. Frank Harris the American from Hong Kong who used to run Rediffusion there and who has made himself quite an authority on the subject of imprisoned Americans, is reading over the material and making some helpful suggestions from the standpoint of an informed ­private American citizen. His comments are all the more helpful because he has recently talked to Harriett Mills and Malcolm Bersohn and other ex-­prisoners. We will welcome criticism of either the constructive or the destructive variety, from you and Dave. 2. DRF Intelligence Report entitled “Communist China’s Interest in a Foreign Ministers’ Conference with the United States”. This study by DRF is based on their full access to the Geneva reports and the presence of one of their men on your staff. Herman thinks it is a good job. He mentioned it to the Secretary at the meeting on the 11th. If you have any comments on this, both FE and R will be glad to have them. 3. Report of Secretary’s discussion with Selwyn Lloyd on China matters on Jan. 31 during Eden visit. This is the record of the China portion of the discussion with the British at the Foreign Minister level on the morning of Jan. 31. It is an excerpt from the full record of the Eden visit to Washington. It has not been officially cleared by the Secretary yet. I had to get special permis­ sion to send this to you and of course it should be very closely held by you. This meeting took place in the Department and practically all the chief participants on both sides were present except the President and the Prime Minister. You will be particularly interested in the Secretary’s
