which when made should be reported with recommendations as to acceptance, upon
which a law should be enacted, effecting a sale to the highest bidder who will agree to
carry out these purposes.
If anything were needed to demonstrate the almost utter incapacity of the National
Government to deal directly with an industrial and commercial problem, it has been
provided by our experience with this property. We have expended vast fortunes, we
have taxed everybody, but we are unable to secure results which benefit anybody. This
property ought to be transferred to private management under conditions which will
dedicate it to the public purpose for which it was conceived.
RECLAMATION
The National Government is committed to a policy of reclamation and irrigation which
it desires to establish on a sound basis and continue in the interest of the localities
concerned. Exhaustive studies have recently been made of Federal reclamation, which
have resulted in improving the projects and adjusting many difficulties. About one third
of the projects is in good financial condition, another third can probably be made
profitable, while the other third is under unfavorable conditions. The Congress has
already provided for a survey which will soon be embodied in a report. That ought to
suggest a method of relief which will make unnecessary further appeals to the
Congress. Unless this can be done, Federal reclamation will be considerably retarded.
With the greatly increased cost of construction and operation, it has become necessary
to plan in advance, by community organization and selective agriculture, methods
sufficient to repay these increasing outlays.
 
The human and economic interests of the farmer citizens suggest that the States should
be required to exert some effort and assume some responsibility, especially in the
intimate, detailed, and difficult work of securing settlers and developing farms which
directly profit them, but only indirectly and remotely can reimburse the Nation. It is
believed that the Federal Government should continue to be the agency for planning
and constructing the great undertakings needed to regulate and bring into use the rivers
of the West, many of which are interstate in character, but the detailed work of creating
agricultural communities and a rural civilization on the land made ready for
reclamation ought to be either transferred to the. State in its entirety or made a
cooperative effort of the State and Federal Government.
SHIPPING
The maintenance of a merchant marine is of the utmost importance for national defense
and the service of our commerce. We have a large number of ships engaged in that
service. We also have a surplus supply, costly to care for, which ought to be sold. All
