September 18–December 16, 1978 353 the status of Jerusalem, saying pointedly that he did not recall Egypt being mentioned at CD in this connection. 17. Question 7(b) rpt 7(b): He questioned what was meant by the holy places of each faith being under “the full authority of their representatives?” He said they already had these powers and mentioned a dispute between two Christian sects which the GOI had been asked to solve. Each religion already had full control over its holy places. He said he would like an explanation. 18. Question 8(b) rpt 8(b): Begin said that the question of settlements had been an issue of debate at CD and since. He said he had given a three-month commitment to the President but had said that Israel might establish three nahals which are part of Israel’s defense establishment. He had also told the President that there could be increases in the size of existing settlements by several hundred families on the West Bank during the three months. In this response, to Hussein he said he found a repetition of the US position on the Israeli commitment, Israel had not agreed. 19. Question 8(c) rpt 8(c): Begin took issue with the phrase “in each others territory” which had been deleted at CD at Israel’s insistence. This language is not in the Framework and Israel does not accept it. 20. Question 9(b) rpt 9(b): Begin drew attention to the phrase “whatever number (of Israeli settlements) that might remain” which was very “hurtful” because it would lead the Arabs to expect that not all of the settlements would remain after the transitional period. Some would be liquidated. He said he had never heard at Camp David that Israel might be asked to remove any of them. He added that he is being cursed literally for agreeing to remove settlements from Sinai and had the day before attended an angry demonstration of settlers from Yamit. And now the US promises Hussein that some settlements in Judea and Samaria will be removed. 21. Question 10(a) rpt 10(a): Begin said he could not understand how the term “ratify” could be applied in this context. Ratification is a concept in international law that applies to states. The word does not appear in the CDA and now it is used with Hussein. He also took exception to the description of “a strong local police force” which would assure the political process. He said he understood the function of the police to be the maintenance of law and order. 22. Question 11(a) rpt 11(a), para 3 rpt 3: Begin objected to the mention of “political institutions of self-government” maintaining that there was not one word at CD about institutions of self-government, which in his mind implied a political organization quite beyond the autonomy which he envisages. Israel means autonomy, he stressed, not a state.
