1955  625
our relations with Communist China. I think we have to carefully dis­
tinguish between a campaign bearing the official imprimatur of the 
Government and articles and stories appearing in private publications. 
An official campaign will probably be interpreted by our own people as 
well as other countries, and the Chinese Communists, as a prelude to a 
break in these talks. If such is the intent, a campaign of this nature would 
of course be well suited to the purpose. With regard to Henderson’s 
memo to Mr. Robertson, I think it would be completely idle to believe 
that such a campaign would result in expediting the release of impris­
oned Americans. It would certainly counter any impression that we 
are, as the memo phrases it, softening our attitude towards ­Communist 
China, and correspondingly reduce whatever capital I believe we have 
gained by our strong position in proposing these talks and our renun­
ciation of force position. As far as U.S. public opinion is concerned, my 
own feeling is that it is fully willing without any stimulation to follow 
and support whatever policies the administration believes best. It is 
only necessary for the administration clearly to enunciate its policies.
I want to make clear that the foregoing applies to an identified offi­
cial program, and does not imply that I think that we should sit on 
naturally generated news stories and articles. If Bersohn, for example, 
has a good story and some magazine desires to publish it, I certainly 
would not discourage it. In fact I am inclined to think that it would be 
useful all around. However, I believe entirely different considerations 
are involved in an official program and that before starting such a pro­
gram we should be absolutely clear as to our purposes and whether the 
means will accomplish the purpose.
If the situation in Prague permits, I want to take Pat and Jenifer 
down to Garmisch for a few days at the New Year and will let you 
know by telegram from Prague whether I am doing so. Someone will 
at all times be on watch here in Geneva and will be able to get in touch 
with me in a matter of hours at the most. It will also be possible for me 
to get from Garmisch down here by car in six or seven hours. I hope 
that you will, as in the past, send me at Prague anything you think I 
should see or have a chance to think about before the next meeting.
I hope that you are able to have a real vacation as you have cer­
tainly earned it.
Regards to all.
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
