January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1203 Prime Minister Begin said that Camp David actually says “during the transitional period,” but . . . Minister Burg suggested saying: “As the Camp David Accords say.” Secretary Vance said the words are “will constitute.” Mr. Nehushtan said that Ambassador Linowitz’ draft had said “will be established.” Prime Minister Begin suggested “in accordance with Camp David.” President Carter suggested “immediately.” Prime Minister Begin said that then they would have to repeat the names of the members. This would complicate matters. Perhaps we should just say “as soon as possible.” Or how about “without delay?” The President said he preferred to repeat Camp David exactly. Prime Minister Begin asked if this was with all the names. The President said he preferred this. Prime Minister Begin said he had no objection, and read: “During the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the self-Governing authority will constitute a continuing committee. The President and Secretary Vance concurred. Prime Minister Begin said that then we should have a semi-colon, followed by the rest. Secretary Vance concurred. Prime Minister Begin said that, with agreement, we can print it. The President said fine. (At this point, Ruth Lapidot and Robert Hunter left the room to work out the precise wording of the statement.7 They reentered at 10:36, in the midst of a discussion on a possible security committee). The President said that, in summary: if the Israelis accept his proposal, that would be fine. Security will be discussed soon at the plenary. Then advisors or some other sub-group will be established on issues of security. This committee will make recommendations back to the plenary and ultimately to the heads of state. He would like to be able to tell Sadat that, at an early plenary meeting, the issues of security 7 The text of the statement, as finally agreed, is attached to the memorandum of conversation as Attachment I. The text reads: “In accordance with the provisions of the Camp David Framework, during the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing committee to decide by agreement the modalities of admission of persons displaced from the West Bank and Gaza in 1967, together with necessary measures to prevent disruption and disorder. “The Committee may also deal with other matters of common concern; e.g., the development of water resources for the benefit of all concerned, economic cooperation, etc. The United States will be invited to participate in the Committee which will take its decisions on the basis of unanimity.”
