Human Rights
149
52.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to the Assistant Secretary of State for
International Organization Affairs (Maynes)1
Washington, May 30, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Policy on Human Rights: Actions to be Taken
I have sent the attached memorandum (Tab 1)2 to the Secretary
outlining a broadscale effort to implement our human rights policy as
effectively as possible. That effort, which involves all relevant bureaus
of the Department as well as AID, USIA and all U.S. posts abroad, is
premised upon the comprehensive statement of policy set forth in the
Secretary’s Law Day speech (Tab 2).3 That policy was recently ampli-
fied by the President in his speech at Notre Dame4 where he identified
our basic commitment to promote the cause of human rights as the first
of the cardinal premises on which our foreign policy rests.
In a related development an interagency policy review is under
way under the aegis of the Special Coordinating Committee (SCC) of
the NSC. I will chair the SCC for the purpose of this review, which is
designed to produce a concise paper and specific policy recommenda-
tions for the President. The review will further develop and refine the
policies already enunciated by the Administration. The May 20 memo-
randum from Dr. Brzezinski setting out the terms of reference for the
review is attached at Tab 3.5
As you will see from my memorandum to the Secretary, one of the
principal components of our effort is the development of an “Agenda
for U.S. Action on Human Rights at the United Nations.” I would like
you to undertake preparation of such an agenda for submission to the
Human Rights Coordinating Group.
The agenda should encompass consideration of at least the
following:
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 19, Human Rights—Tasking Memos.
Confidential. Copies of tasking memoranda sent by Christopher to T, PM, AID, PA,
USIA, EB, H, and CU are in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary:
Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 23, Human Rights—PRM I.
2 Not found attached. Reference is to Christopher’s May 3 memorandum to Vance.
See footnote 1, Document 48.
3 Not found attached. See Document 39.
4 See footnote 2, Document 51.
5 Not found attached. Reference is to PRM–28 (see Document 46).
