876
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
considering the timing and extent of such aid, the following factors
must be kept in mind:
a. Too long a delay in the institution of economic and social re-
forms in Iran may make it impossible to seize the opportunity pre-
sented by present circumstances to increase Iran’s political stability and
economic health.
b. Granting of other than emergency aid prior to an oil settlement
may make Iran less interested in coming to an early settlement and at
the same time harm our relations with the U.K.
c. The timing and extent of U.S. aid to Iran should not be such as to
encourage other nations to emulate Iran in nationalizing her oil
resources.
d. While the present Government of Iran has shown itself to be fa-
vorably disposed to seek an early settlement of the oil dispute, too great
or too obvious pressure from the outside may, because of internal polit-
ical reasons in Iran, have the opposite effect.
9. In addition to emergency aid, the United States has a limited
technical and economic assistance program for Iran of approximately
$23 million for FY 1954. Even when substantial oil revenues are real-
ized, it will be desirable to continue limited technical assistance to Iran
for a number of years. Insofar as such assistance may effectively be pro-
vided through international or private agencies, local fears of U.S. im-
perialism will be minimized.
Military Aid
10. Iran has thus far received approximately $46 million in military
aid from the U.S., and an additional $58 million is currently pro-
grammed. Inadequate training, maintenance and supply capabilities,
and low caliber personnel restrict Iran’s ability to absorb U.S. military
equipment, even at the present rate of delivery. At present, the Iranian
armed forces are capable of maintaining internal security against any
uprising short of a nation-wide tribal revolt. It is possible that Iran will,
in perhaps one or two years, be willing to move in the direction of re-
gional security arrangements, assuming: (a) an early oil settlement;
(b) continuation in power of a government friendly toward the West,
which has the Shah’s and widespread public support; and (c) a steady
increase in the capability of the Iranian Army. Iranian forces may be
able to improve their capability for guerrilla and limited mountain op-
erations, although it is unlikely that they could in themselves become
capable within the foreseeable future of effectively delaying a strong
Soviet thrust toward Iraq or the Persian Gulf. A long-range program of
improving the Iranian armed forces should be related to the progress
made toward effective regional defense plans which will provide Iran,
in case of attack, with military assistance from adjacent states.
