240
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
92.
Telegram From the Executive Assistant to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Oxman) to the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff)1
Lackland AFB, Texas, December 10, 1979, 0316Z
0553. For Tarnoff only from Oxman. Subject: Meeting With Shah,
Dec 9, 1979. (S)
1. (S) I just met with the Shah for 45 minutes and told him the
result of country number 1.2 He had not heard from Bill Jackson (and
was quite perturbed that he had not) and therefore I was breaking the
news to him. It appeared to be quite a blow to him. I stated the great
lengths to which we had gone to persuade the leader of country number
1. Citing Hal’s special trip, the fact that Jackson accompied him to that
country, and the over-arching high-level phone contact.
2. (S) I said that President Carter remained fully committed to the
proposition that it is essential to find an alternative country for the
Shah. I said we will continue to press at the highest levels and will
continue to need Shah’s assistance in these efforts.
3. (S) The Shah was or purported to be incredulous at the position
taken by the leader of country number 1. I said that that leader had,
from the first, feared for his standing in the Arab world and particularly
among the Palestinians, if he should accept the Shah. I said he had
sought the views of Arafat, among others, who had confirmed his
initial fears. “First Lopez-Portillo and then the leader of country number
1,” the Shah said. He claimed that this caving in to pressure meant
that the regime in Tehran was actually gaining something with its
outrageous tactics. “Where will this stop”? he asked.
4. (S) I said there are other possibilities and that it is essential to
focus on them. I said we would know more about country number 23
by mid-week and that setting it aside for the moment, it was important
to focus on possibilities in this hemisphere. He said, “like what?” I
mentioned country number 3,4 our new country number 5,5 and the
Bahamas. I also probed whether he had considered approaching Lopez-
Portillo about extending his visa on a temporary basis. He said the
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Briefing Book: The Shah
December 1979, Vol. IV. Secret.
2 Austria.
3 South Africa.
4 Country number 3 not identifiable.
5 Panama.
