Arms Control and DisarmamentвҖғ 1669
identification seismic events and recommendation of methods for 
improving these capabilities. Should point out US in such talks would 
answer any inquiries from other Dels re data submitted and would 
expect receive and consider any comparable data furnished by other 
Dels as background for recommendations. Purpose of talks would 
be reach agreed recommendations for improvements in instrumentaВӯ
tion initial system. Effect of these improvements would clearly be in 
interest all parties concerned since they would serve to limit need for 
on-Вӯsite inspection.
(5) The question of recommendations for specific technical criteria 
which must be satisfied by data from control system before an inspecВӯ
tion can be undertaken, USDEL should table working paper outlining 
US ideas of criteria that would be used in connection formula set forth 
US Annex I. Should state if USSR finds ideas expressed in working 
paper acceptable we see no necessity for technical working group. If 
not, however, would propose discuss and seek resolve any differences 
in technical working group.
(6) USDEL should point out technical data present both uncertainВӯ
ties as to detection capabilities that remain to be resolved and potenВӯ
tialities for significant improvement in the system. Uncertainties and 
potentialities point equally to fact that program of research and develВӯ
opment and provisions for results of such development to the incorpoВӯ
rated in system are of real importance. In this connection US welcomes 
statements of SOVDEL indicating willingness consider results of future 
scientific research in Control Commission. US will further elaborate 
views this question in subsequent meetings.
(7) Referring to US undertaking to consider carefully SOV proposal 
for quota inspections USDEL should state that while such considerВӯ
ation cannot be carried very far until clarification received on quesВӯ
tions posed earlier meetings USDEL observes, however, that USвҖ“ВӯUK 
proposal in Annex I wherein number inspections governed by number 
unidentified events deals far more realistically with existing uncerВӯ
tainties and potentialities for improvement than does Soviet proposal. 
USвҖ“ВӯUK formula is self-Вӯadjusting on basis experience, provides clear 
incentive for improvement of detection capabilities. Because of self-Вӯ
adjusting feature which percentage basis affords results of program of 
joint research and experimentation such as US proposal April 13 would 
be readily reflected in reduced level of inspections, which would not be 
case in quota approach.
(8) USDel should indicate that as a part of its review of questions 
before conference it has prepared revisions of draft Articles VI and IX 
which will be tabled in short time. Redrafts attempt define more clearly 
relationship between Commission and administrator, involve new
