852 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The President then said that he looked upon the Council and its machinery for the next few months as follows: First, he would like to keep the OCB and the Planning Board active in their respective roles. As for the OCB he wanted it to continue to study and review progress under our policies and to make a decision whether to recommend any change in the policies. On the other hand, he wished to keep OCB paper work at a minimum and OCB reports at a minimum, consistent with the guidelines he had previously established. As far as the Council itself, and the Planning Board are concerned he would like to devote a major portion of the time to an identification on what is going on and what we should be doing about it and a dis­ cussion of these problems. He felt that we should spend more time in discussion, and with respect to many topics discussed there need not necessarily be a Record of Actions. For example, he cited the changing face of war and what that means to us now and in the future. He said we were not adequately thinking of the great problem of the U.S. in sustaining itself in the free world which must grow in morale and economic strength. He said that we must address ourselves to those countries on the periphery of the Eurasian land mass which the USSR can destroy with­ out war. He said that with respect to whether the Council should be active or passive he had never allowed any of the members of the Council an excuse to be away from the meetings. This was one reason why he attended meetings regularly himself. If we were to drift toward atten­ dance by deputies and under secretaries there would be no point in his participating. He therefore continued to think of the Council as an active vigorous body and not as a passive one. I then summed up to the President, saying that on the basis of this discussion, it seemed to me that we would be dealing in the Council for the next few months with three main types of items: First, of course, would be the necessary new policy papers or revised policy papers. Second, the Council would devote itself more to the discussion of major problems and policies which might or might not result in a Record of Actions. Third, out of the Council meetings in the next 15 months would come some policy decisions but that there would also come, what the President has frequently referred to as “legacies of thought” for the next Administration. Gordon Gray Special Assistant to the President
