International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 473 rying out the provisions of this declaration and that we intend also in 1979 to have a similar meeting between ourselves. Giscard: We have not said this in the past. We do not want to institutionalize this. There are two advantages of announcing our intention to come together in the spring of ’79. If we announce today, people will not think that such a meeting when called is a signal of urgent danger. And there will not be such great expectations. Callaghan: I agree. I would like to institutionalize this body so that it meets every twelve months. It also reduces pressures from others to get in. Giscard: Let’s not be bureaucratic. Let’s keep some flexibility and say that we have decided to meet again when the situation seems appropriate. We can say we reflected on the invitation of Japan to meet next year. In the declaration we can say we envisage a similar meeting between ourselves at an appropriate time next year. We should also say that we instructed our representatives to, by the end of 1978, convene in order to review progress in carrying out this declaration. Schmidt: I think this was an excellent meeting. Let’s now adjourn and then we can go over to the press building.5 5 For the final text of the Bonn G–7 Summit Declaration issued on July 17, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1310–1315. Carter’s remarks to the press at the conclusion of the Summit are ibid., pp. 1309–1310. 149. Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen)1 Washington, July 19, 1978 SUBJECT International Economic Policy Balance Sheet Now that the Bonn Summit is history, we should take a look at how our international economic policy is doing. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 16, Economic Policy Group Executive Committee: 1/78–3/80. Confidential. Sent for information. A handwritten notation at the top of the page reads: “DA has seen. 7/21.”
