Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Dr. Brzezinski noted that there had been many changes in the world during the year since he had last been here in Riyadh. Prince Fahd said that he hoped the changes were in the interests of the free world. Dr. Brzezinski said not everything that happened last year was good; however, we were encouraged by the results of the Islamic Conference and hope that this part of the world has been encouraged by the President’s State of the Union address. Prince Fahd said nobody in his right mind would have expected the Soviet invasion in Afghanistan. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he had visited the refugee camps in Pakistan. Prince Fahd said that this was a heartbreaking sight. It was the results of the invasion. It was most unconscionable to resort to outright invasion as opposed to other means that were available. He wondered what news the United States had of the internal nationalistic resistance. Dr. Brzezinski said that every indication we have is that the resistance is growing steadily. Over the last few days there has been an increased number of clashes between the Soviets and Resistance Forces. The Afghan troops have largely been passive and disarmed but recently there have been direct clashes between Afghan soldiers and Soviet forces. Prince Fahd said this is a very significant development and will give a shot in the arm to the resistance. Dr. Brzezinski said that our present estimates show that there are 73,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan, perhaps up to 92,000. Prince Fahd said that these indications suggest that they really got in in force. Dr. Brzezinski said that some Soviet troop deployment suggests that they might be considering operations against northeastern Iran. Prince Fahd said that there is nothing that is not likely anymore. Dr. Brzezinski said we had a good talk with the leaders of Pakistan. The President asked us to lead a delegation there and tell them that if there was a threat to the territorial integrity of Pakistan, we would not let them stand alone. They understand this. We left a military team to examine their needs and we also discussed with the Pakistanis the best way to make certain that the Soviets are not able to consolidate their gains in Afghanistan. Prince Fahd said that is very good. Dr. Brzezinski continued I know that some of these matters were discussed with Prince Turki.2 We would also like to increase our psychological propaganda to the Muslims. 2 No record of this meeting was found.
