1008  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
202.	 Memorandum From Arnold Kanter of the National Security 
Council Staff to Florence Gantt of the National Security 
Council Staff1
Washington, February 22, 1991
SUBJECT
START update
Florence:
Please give the following message to Brent and Bob. Thanks.
—Arnie2
Brent:
Bessmertnykh has written to Baker saying that Obukov is com-
ing back to Geneva over the weekend to continue to work on START, 
and proposing that Bartholomew meet him there. Bessmertnykh makes 
clear, however, that Obukov can and will do business with Rick if Reg 
is unable to come to Geneva.
There is no enthusiasm among the Ungroup for getting back on 
a plane for Geneva. I agree. Assurances notwithstanding, it was clear 
that Obukov did not have the authority to engage in any meaningful 
give-­and-­take in our last outing. As a result, we all pretty much wasted 
our time and several became even sourer about START. There is no way 
to know whether Obukov will have anything new to say or any more 
authority to wheel and deal this time. If he does, Rick can engage him 
as well as can Reg (although Reg almost certainly would be tougher).
Unless I hear to the contrary from you, I will join in the emerging 
consensus to say home and “let Rick do it.”
There is, of course, no free lunch.
Rick will first try to reach agreement with Obukov on the remain-
ing second tier issues (e.g., terminating PPCM, remaining ALCM 
issues, size criteria for inspections). If they succeed, they will then 
turn to the “big three” end-­game issues: downloading/SS–N–18, defi-
nition of new types, and implementing the ban on data denial. Rick 
will see what (if anything) Obukov has to offer (or at least reveal) 
on these three subjects, and then get on a plane for Washington to 
confront us with the ultimate deal: Here is what the U.S. will have to 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01034–015, START—February 
1991 [1]. Secret. Copied to Hall, Uhl, Gordon, Kuehne, and Davis.
2 Printed from a copy bearing Kanter’s typed signature.
