110
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
44.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 20, 1979
SUBJECT
CIA Support to Rescue of Hostages in Iran [portion marking not declassified]
1. This Agency has been asked to undertake activities in support
of possible DOD Delta team efforts to rescue the hostages in Iran by
assisting in contingency planning and training and by furnishing cer-
tain supplies and support services. To date the only activities of this
Agency have been the provision of documentation for the members of
the Delta team. Now, however, we have been requested to provide
ammunition, communications equipment, travel arrangements and cer-
tain other supporting material and services to the Delta team. Because
these activities involve a not insubstantial expenditure of Agency funds,
they raise a serious question of legality under the Hughes/Ryan amend-
ment.2 [portion marking not declassified]
2. My General Counsel advised me that there are two bases on
which the Agency could proceed:
a. A possible interpretation of the Hughes/Ryan amendment is
that the amendment does not apply to covert CIA activities when
conducted in support of operations by another agency of the United
States Government that will not be conducted or designed in a fashion
intended to conceal the role of the United States Government. This
interpretation, while finding some support in the legislative history of
the amendment, is not entirely consistent with analyses of Hughes/
Ryan previously written by the Office of Legal Counsel of the Depart-
ment of Justice. Therefore, my General Counsel is not willing to render
an opinion that Hughes/Ryan is inapplicable without an opportunity
to consult with the Attorney General, although he is hopeful that the
Attorney General would accept the same interpretation of the statute.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
Box 30, Iran 11/17/79–11/20/79. Secret. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner.
2 The Hughes-Ryan Amendment, a section of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1974
(Public Law 93–559) amended the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961. Hughes-Ryan required
the President to issue a “finding” that a specific covert operation was essential to the
national security of the United States. Normally, the “finding” listed in general terms
the component parts of the operation. Specifically, each covert operation had to be
reported in a timely fashion to appropriate congressional committees. Hughes-Ryan was
amended in 1980 in the Intelligence Oversight Act. This act required all U.S. Government
agencies to report covert actions to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence
and to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
