February 1951–February 1952
173
8. The greatest assistance which could be rendered by the United
States in solving Iran’s oil problem would be for the United States to
immediately purchase some Iranian oil—even a small quantity—and
arrange delivery of it. This symbol would “open the door” and show to
the World that others can freely buy Iranian oil. The British blockade
would be broken.
9. Middle East Pan-Moslem Activities
I am concerned with Imperialistic activities throughout the Middle
East and Africa. I maintain intimate contacts throughout the Moslem
world and am kept informed about the imperialistic actions of the
French in Morocco and the Jezireh (Syria) and the British actions in
Egypt. I have contacts also in India and Pakistan. If the United States
persists in backing the British and French policy in these countries it
will lose the friendship of the Middle East. (Station Note: Other re-
marks made by Kashani on this subject clearly revealed that he hoped
for a Pan-Moslem Union, was working toward this goal, and had cer-
tain personal ambitions in this direction.)
10. American Contact
It is my desire that our contact be continued. It should be mutually
beneficial for the United States and Iran if our contact be carried on.
(Station Note: [3½ lines not declassified].)
Attachment 2
PERSONALITY SKETCHES
Kashani is unique amongst Persians insofar as he avoids couching
or disguising his remarks in flowery politeness. He is blunt, sometimes
to the point of rudeness, and is candid. His tactics, during the conversa-
tion in question at least, were to sharply criticise and attack Americans
at the beginning, then shift to a more soothing treatment—presumably
calculated to show that he is not a complete enemy of the United States.
He has a definite sense of humor, and a devilish glint in his expres-
sive eyes. But from the role of kindly old man he can abruptly switch to
a tyranical attitude of fierceness. His voice quavers when he talks
which fact does not however detract from his forcefulness.
He exhibits a definite megalomania, characterized not only by ob-
vious vanity but by his trying to monopolize the conversation, not al-
lowing others in a conversation to finish their sentences, disdain for the
words of others etc. He is a most difficult individual to talk with.
Kashani is not a logical or judicious thinker. He gives the appear-
ance of being greatly motivated by emotion but above all by personal
ambition. Kashani thinks in grandiose terms of Middle East crusades
