the United States in Behn Meyer & Company v. Miller, 266 U. S. 465 [457],
corporate entity is considered a person and its nationality that of the country
where it is organized and existing, irrespective of the nationality of the
stockholders therein. In that case, which concerned a British corporation,
the Supreme Court held that the seizure of the corporate assets in the United
States by the Alien Property Custodian on the ground that the shares were
owned by Germans was an erroneous construction of the law. Such
corporations are subject to the usual obligations imposed by the State and
are likewise entitled to the equal protection of the laws.
The proposed legislation now pending in the Senate provides in effect, in
paragraph 13, on page 27 thereof, that such neutral corporations, in order to
recover their property still held by the Alien Property Custodian, shall be
obliged, as provided in Section (m) of the proposed Bill, to file a consent
that 20% of their property may be retained by the United States, in other
words, Section 13 of the proposed legislation makes no distinction between
a corporation organized and existing within the countries with which the
United States was formerly at war and certain corporations organized and
existing under and by virtue of the laws of Switzerland.
If such proposed legislation is finally enacted into law, certain Swiss
corporations and in consequence Swiss shareholders therein, will suffer
substantial losses. The interested parties are entitled by international law to
demand a return of their possessions, and they have the right to expect an
immediate and full restitution, as no claims remain to be made as far as they
are concerned.
I consequently have the honor, by instruction of my Government and with
reference to the treaty of November 25, 1850, between Switzerland and the
United States of America,2 to request Your Excellency to take such steps as
may be appropriate to safeguard the rights of the Swiss corporations and
Swiss nationals, particularly with the view of assuring the complete release
of Swiss properties which are still held by the Alien Property Custodian.
Accept [etc.]
MARC PETER
