550  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
In the international field the problem is the Rio Protocol of 1942. 
This protocol, Chiriboga stated, was signed under strong pressure from 
the then Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles at a time when the 
Peruvian Army (which had invaded and destroyed Ecuador without 
reason) occupied a good part of the country. The Protocol met with 
strong opposition in Ecuador from the beginning. Nevertheless, the 
Ecuadorean Government attempted in good faith to carry it out but 
was prevented from doing this by the geographical facts, i.e., that no 
watershed existed, where called for by the treaty. Peru has since said 
in effect that the delimitation of the boundary should be completed 
by following “the spirit” of the Protocol which, in Ecuadorean eyes, is 
impossible. The Minister Designate pointed out that the “impossibil-
ity” of doing this has increased because of the gradual development of 
the spirit of justice throughout the hemisphere.”
Accordingly, President-elect Velasco a few days ago had declared 
with full public support that the Protocol is void. He said that Ecuador 
did not want to have any problem with Peru and hoped that the 
Guarantors would understand its position. He claimed that Peru is 
working hard to obtain a statement by the Guarantor Powers which 
Ecuador would strongly oppose and would interpret as an indication 
that the Guarantors do not fully understand and are not sympathetic 
with the position of Ecuador. The Guarantors should continue to seek 
ways of solving the problem in terms of justice and equality.
As an indication of its desire to improve relations with Peru, 
Ecuador is anxious to sign a bilateral trade agreement with its southern 
neighbor.
Chiriboga said Velasco was determined to hold the XI Inter-
American Conference in Quito in March 1961 in order to solve problems 
appropriate to it. Ecuador’s position is not that the boundary problem 
should be solved at the Conference but it only wishes to point out that 
the problem exists. He said he was certain the U.S. would continue to 
follow its objective policy with regard to the boundary problem. He did 
not expect the United States to take sides as between Ecuador and Peru.
In response to a question from the Under Secretary, the Minister-­
Designate said that the problem was not a question of the amount of 
land involved but a matter of blood and history. The Amazon was dis-
covered by Ecuador and is as important to Ecuador as is Quito. It is a 
natural boundary between Peru and Ecuador.
The Under Secretary asked about the present situation after Velasco’s 
declaration, including that the Guarantors’ responsibilities may have 
been modified. The Minister-Designate said that Ecuador was not trying 
to push the matter and that there was no hurry in solving it.
The Under Secretary thanked Chiriboga for his very useful state-
ment. The United States desires a mutually acceptable settlement.
