1956 827 judgment between positions of two sides. He had nothing further and if I had nothing further he had another matter to bring up. 50. Wang said their attention had again been called to fact that Chinese nationals being prevented from returning. At last meeting aggregate number Chinese nationals being prevented returning was 34 persons. Today he would like to raise cases three more persons. 51. Wang said case of Mr. Tan Wen, which he would later present to me, could serve as example to illustrate Chinese in U.S. Mr. Tan applied permission to return ever since 1950 but U.S. had refused permission. In August 1955, that is when our talks got underway, Tan again applied return and wrote his family after application that he expected permis­ sion to be granted end last year. However, wrote again last January that unable return in February and had to wait another two months. Mr. Tan said in letter that he was among first to apply to return and also handed in his applications most frequently, however he was unable to return up to present time. This specific case of Mr. Tan has increased their con­ cern over Chinese in U.S. who find selves in same situation. 52. Wang said during talks I had repeatedly assured him that ­Chinese in U.S. free to return and that U.S. was not offering obstructions to their departure and that no procedures of whatever sort have been set up to prevent their departure. However case of Tan Wen and latest facts about his failure to return had revealed situation that U.S. was not consistent in its actions and its words. From treatment of Tan, how could it be said that U.S. was carrying out its obligations under agreement? 53. Wang said it was clearly stated in agreement that parties to agreement would facilitate return of nationals and that no obstructions should be offered to their departure. Mr. Tan never violated any law of U.S. and what was reason he encountering repeated obstructions against his return? 54. Wang said in addition to case of Tan, and they had raised many similar cases recently, it was evident Chinese still encounter obstruction in their return. This situation necessitated that I give accounting in each these individual cases. 55. Wang said in addition to this category he had raised repeat­ edly question of Chinese who were in prison in U.S. and they were still awaiting reply from my side. (Handed over list, given in following telegram). 56. I said he seemed to have considerable detailed information on Mr. Tan. Wang’s statement here said that Tan again put in application in August 1955 and expected receive permission return at end of year. I would like to ask for details from his correspondence with Wang—to whom did he make application? I would also like ask what his cor­ respondence indicated he applied for—that is, he applied for what? I
