408  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
nature. They are declining in bridging, landing equipment and chang-
ing the location of our airforces. We are removing strike aircraft and 
putting defensive aircraft where the strike aircraft were located. We 
are not keeping these activities secret. Our military people are ready 
to meet with yours and to discuss certain suggestions for adopting and 
implementing defensive doctrine. (S)
Still, the U.S. is proceeding on the basis of flexible response which 
was in the past justified but now—­now that there are recognized 
changes at the political-­military level—­why isn’t the United States 
moving to change the posture of its own armed forces. This is very 
important. I have read the Brussels Statement (I think it is sixty pages) 
and there is no real change as yet. (S)
Another fundamental point. We have been discussing the dynam-
ics of negotiations. Let me point to one problem that I think is of great 
importance. Both of us recognized that both sides have created tre-
mendous military power and are becoming aware of catastrophic con-
sequences. We have shown political will to eliminate that threat. We 
signed the first treaty together—­the INF treaty. (S)
The President: Thanks for what you sent me by Dobrynin—­the 
piece of the SS–20. (S)
Chairman Gorbachev: This is the only realistic perspective. A lot has 
been done and the prospects from what you did yesterday are good. 
But something worries us. It is the naval issue which is still outside 
the process of negotiation. This is an emotional issue for previous 
Administrations and ours and to a certain extent we understand that 
the U.S. is a sea power whose lifeline is the sea and ocean. We know 
that the U.S. has a tradition of building these kinds of armed forces. (S)
It is not an easy issue but just look at the situation. As of the early 
1950s the U.S.S.R. was surrounded by naval bases—500,000 men, hun-
dreds of aircraft, huge fleets. The U.S. has aircraft carriers with about 
1500 aircraft. All that is deployed in waters adjacent to us. In this con-
text, I am not speaking about submarines. (S)
The Vienna talks will result in lowering the confrontation on land 
and the prospects are good on strategic arms. We believe that soon we 
are entitled to expect that the naval threat to us should be reduced. (S)
I will venture an initiative. I believe we should start talks on naval 
arms. Maybe through confidence building measures or reducing the 
level of naval activities we could do something. After we are finished at 
CFE and START we need to go over to naval issues. (S)
I know that the U.S. faces other potential problems than the Soviet 
Union but in the same way that the U.S. feels Europe is important we 
need security from any ocean threat. (S)
