1978 409 manpower and logistics for supporting operations. NIFTY NUGGET was partly inspired by the 2,000 deficiencies discovered two years ago in an Army exercise, MOBEX–76, and the 187 major issues still not settled in repairing the deficiencies. Although the exercise play is classified, the general nature and extent of NIFTY NUGGET has been announced to the press. 95. Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, October 11, 1978 SUBJECT Comprehensive Net Assessment 1978 The assessment update of PRM–10 is now complete and available for whatever use you choose to make of it. Fritz Ermarth has reviewed it and has several ideas which he is working out. In the interim, however, I believe it would be most useful if you read the Overview (attached at Tab A) which was prepared largely by Sam Huntington with some assistance by Putnam and me. It will give you a good sense for what is in the much larger supporting papers. It is a rather concise statement of “how we have been doing vis-­a-­vis the Soviets” over the past two years. It provides a significant amount of graphic information to facilitate interpretation. Finally, in the section on implications, it specifies what needs to be done on the East-West front. I personally think that the Overview and selected papers from assessment would make excellent pre-­summit reading for the President. Fritz has some objections to the present form of the Overview. The charts do not enamour him. He believes that it treats the “objective” and “subjective” factors in the East-West relationship on an equal basis, giving insufficient emphasis to the objective factors. Sam believes that some of the upbeat aspects of the diplomatic balance must be kept in the forefront in order to get the President to take the objective factors more seriously. Fritz proposes to resolve this difference of opinion by 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 14, PD–18 [4]. Top Secret. Outside the System. At the bottom of the page, an unknown hand wrote: “DA has seen.
