338
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Iran and assured the world that the oil dispute would soon be ended on
reasonable terms. There was an immediate public reaction to this an-
nouncement which approximated a revolt in Tehran. The Shah’s inde-
cisiveness and communist agitators contributed measurably to the vio-
lent outbreak of July 21 against Qavam but reflective reports from the
Embassy ascribe to nationalist, predominantly middle-class, organiza-
tions the main force in the anti-Qavam demonstrations. The utter
failure of the Qavam government has been taken as evidence that no
Iranian politician can hope in present circumstances successfully to
moderate extreme nationalist demands. Apparently the British Gov-
ernment, observing the rise and fall of the Qavam government, realized
that its policy should no longer be based upon the expectation that a
“more reasonable” government would arise to settle the oil dispute.
American policy toward Iran was also reviewed following the res-
toration of Dr. Mosadeq and his nationalist colleagues to unquestioned
dominance in Iranian affairs. It had been generally assumed that Dr.
Mosadeq would welcome settlement of the oil dispute if certain legiti-
mate Iranian national aspirations were taken into consideration. The
United States had maintained, since nationalization of the British oil
concession in Iran, a position as moderator, constantly seeking to bring
both disputants forward to some middle ground. After the events of
July 21, it was recognized that the Iranians could not realistically be ex-
pected to move far forward from their rigid adherence to the terms of
the Iranian nationalization law. The U.S. Government, therefore, felt it
advisable to join the British who were willing to make substantial con-
cessions in the dispute to present proposals which appeared to meet
the outstanding objections of the other side.
On July 31, an Aide-Me´moire3 was handed by the Secretary of
State to the British Ambassador suggesting that the United States Gov-
ernment would be willing to join in a joint approach to settle the oil dis-
pute along the following lines:
1. The United States will make an immediate grant of $10 million
to the Iranian Government.
2. The AIOC or some other agency designated by the British Gov-
ernment will purchase from Iran all of the oil products presently held
in storage by the NIOC at commercial Persian Gulf prices less an ap-
propriate discount.
3. On the basis of the proposal discussed between Dr. Mosadeq
and the British Charge´ in Tehran on July 25, it would be agreed that an
arbitral commission consisting of three persons should be set up imme-
diately to consider the question of compensation. Neither the American
3 Ibid., p. 429–430 (Document 194).
