1122
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
clusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. Because serious work was in
progress when that deadline came, it was possible to keep going and
conclude the negotiations three months later. It seems to me that the
issue is not whether we can conclude the negotiations by May 25 but
whether we can say with conviction that serious work is still going on
with a prospect of achieving a reasonable agreement. But we need an
early understanding with Sadat and Khalil on our longer term strategy
so that we may maintain flexibility about the target date.
We can probably assume that Sadat is pressing the May 25 dead-
line and hinting at suspending the negotiation in order to get us more
fully engaged. The choice we will need to discuss with him is whether
he will play ball with us in conducting the negotiations our way or
whether we should agree on suspension until 1981 with promise of a
big push then. Proceeding with the negotiation will require more coop-
eration from Sadat and Khalil than we have at the moment. Khalil has
never understood why we have to negotiate in detail, yet not to do so is
to prevent our making a serious effort to get to the tough issues in ways
that would enable the Israelis to deal with them. Sadat seems to be on
the brink of calling the negotiations at an end without letting us get to
the end. So the immediate need is an agreement with both Sadat and
Khalil that wins their cooperation on negotiating strategy without
making them look as if they have made unacceptable concessions on
Palestinian interests. To have that exchange with Sadat, we must de-
cide on our own long-term strategy.
On the Israeli side, as I suggested above, the approach has to be on
the basis of fulfilling the Camp David commitments. We can show un-
derstanding of Begin’s political (including economic) problems and
concentrate on asking him to tell us how he can conclude the talks on a
fair basis. In this context, we need to know how we would suspend the
talks if that happens because the greatest pressure on Begin will not be
anything we say but rather his assessment of the situation he will face
in the light of how the issues will be positioned if and when the talks
are suspended.
As we move toward decisions on how to deal with Begin and
Sadat looking toward May 25, a central issue will be how to state our
objectives so as to avoid politically unsustainable confrontations and to
describe an achievable outcome. We will also want to give careful at-
tention to sharpening the issues in such a way as to allow them to be the
main sources of continuing pressure if negotiations are suspended.
The Situation Ahead: Managing Other Initiatives
In addition to the imperative exchanges with Begin and Sadat
through a variety of channels, we will have to deal in the next three
months with the following initiatives from other quarters:
