stifled. He asked therefore for a concrete definition of likin and Mr. Stewart
supported the request, reading an extract from the treaty of 1902 between
Great Britain and China, as follows:99
“The Chinese Government recognizing that the system of levying
likin and other goods taxes [dues on goods’] at the place of
production, in transit and at destination, impeded [impedes] the
free circulation of commodities.”
He said that this recognized the fact that the whole system of multiple taxes
on goods was one that was not considered proper in well-organized
countries. He cited particularly the case of a province in China in which a
20 per cent consumption tax was being charged on cigarettes and inquired
whether that would be regarded as a legal tax in the future. The chairman
replied that China was not the only country that imposed a consumption tax.
Mr. Stewart said that it was not customary and he feared that if the tax on
cigarettes should be considered legal it might be assessed on other goods.
The chairman replied that it was not their intention to do so. A discussion
ensued concerning various kinds of taxes and the method of assessing and
collecting them, and the question of discriminatory practices also arose.
This discussion brought out the fact that discriminations, either in rates or
otherwise, in favor of one commodity as against another, both foreign and
domestic, would not be countenanced. A Chinese member (Mr. Wei)
pointed out that the “destination taxes” were really outside the scope of the
subcommittee to which view Sir Ronald Macleay dissented. Mr. Strawn
stated that the Delegates did not wish to invade the province of China by
discussing internal taxation matters, but in discussing likin they wanted to
know what the term embraced and this might bring in other matters
incidentally. Mr. Wei described in great detail the origin of the “lo-ti-shui”
tax1 and an extended debate took place on the question of defining “likin”
every effort being made but without success, to obtain from the Chinese a
concrete definition of the word. Various phases of the tariff system were
discussed, Mr. MacMurray detailing his first experience with the “lo-ti-
shui” tax, and observing that it seemed to him that a proper definition of
“likin” should take into account the principle that no taxation should be
levied in connection with the movement of goods, whether it be levied
while the goods were still in transit or after they had surrendered the transit
