268
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
98.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, December 27, 1979, 1101Z
8623. Subj: (LOU) Soviet Airlift Could Have Repercussions Beyond
Afghan Borders. Ref: Kabul 8566.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary: The unprecedented Christmas airlift of Soviet combat
units into Kabul underscores the qualitative change in political develop-
ments here. The ramifications of the Soviet move are chilling, both as
regards the future of Afghanistan itself and the region as a whole.
Internally, we may soon see Soviet divisions operating side by side with
loyal DRA troops to suppress the insurgency—despite the likelihood
of widespread genocide. Externally, the success of the Soviets will have
an unsettling effect on the region, more likely to lead to a general
posture of accommodation than of defiance.
3. On the local scene, the airlift is likely to have as much political
as strictly military objectives. Moscow now has its own forces close to
the political heart of the country, thereby perhaps insuring that it will
have a loud voice should further internal tensions tear the Khalqis’
political fabric.
4. Any semblance of Afghan political independence has virtually
been eliminated by this massive airlift, and it could well be years, if
ever, before a Communist revolutionary regime is sufficiently secure
that Soviet troops can be withdrawn. Reaction of those Afghans willing
to express their views has been one of despair, as they believe Soviet
troops will now guarantee the survival of the hated Amin regime. Even
if inaccurate in some respects, one Afghan merchant sadly claimed
that “Afghanistan has now become a second Czechoslovakia.” End
of summary.
5. Massive airlift underscores the qualitative change in events that
has taken place here. The injection of Soviet combat forces into Afghani-
stan to prop up a regime that may not have survived without such
help, and the unabashedly public manner in which these forces were
deployed, underscore the depth of the qualitative change which has
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 4–12/79. Secret; Immediate. Sent for information to Ankara,
Athens, Islamabad, Beijing, Jidda, London, Moscow, USNATO, New Delhi, Paris, CINC-
PAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD). Printed from a copy received
in the White House Situation Room. In the top right corner of the telegram, Carter wrote:
“Cy—Get our allies & others to complain officially—J.” See footnote 3, Document 99.
2 See Document 90.
