992  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
238.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, February 5, 1960
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretaries Herter, Douglas, Generals Cabell, Twining, Dr. York, Mr. Charyk, 
Dr. Kistiakowsky, Mr. Gordon Gray, General Goodpaster
This group met with the President in the Cabinet Room to con­
sider questions relating to military space reconnaissance, surveillance, 
detection and inspection. Before taking up this subject, General Cabell 
commented that the intelligence community has as yet not been able to 
identify the “dark object,” believed to be a Soviet satellite, picked up a few 
days ago. Dr. York said that it may be a Soviet satellite, but might also be 
material from a satellite of ours. General Cabell also reported on a recent 
successful special reconnaissance mission conducted by the British.
[text not declassified] He mentioned in particular that this project 
is planned to terminate with the end of this year, and suggested that 
this point needs further consideration. He then followed with presenta­
tions on the Samos reconnaissance satellite program, which is planned 
to include both “readout” and recoverable capsule versions. He ended 
with a description of the Midas early warning satellite.
Dr. Kistiakowsky said that, as spokesman for Dr. Land, who 
has taken a great interest in this matter, he would like to voice con­
cern about the “readout” satellite. This is an apparatus of very great 
complexity. It will be very valuable when obtained, and should be the 
ultimate objective. It will provide a resolution of 20 feet. Since an inter­
preter can identify an object about two and one-­half times as large as 
this, it will give an ability to recognize objects of fifty feet in dimension. 
He thought there would be a danger of putting undue confidence in 
the readout system, and thought that maximum effort should be put 
into the recovery system. Dr. York said that about three months ago the 
Air Force was put on to the recovery system as the top priority effort. 
The readout system is apparently not interfering with or delaying the 
development of the recovery system.
Assistant Secretary Charyk then described a possible space sur­
veillance system. This is a project under ARPA which has been assigned 
to the Air Force. The key element is a space surveillance and control 
center, into which information is fed from all sources, including the U.S. 
space tracking network. For the project, consideration is being given 
1 Source: Military space reconnaissance. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman 
File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on February 8.
