Arms Control and Disarmament 1415 356. Letter From Kistiakowsky to McElroy1 August 15, 1958 Dear Mr. Secretary: On July 14 the President sent a memorandum to the Secretary of State suggesting that he join with the Secretary of Defense and Dr. Kil­ lian in having a careful study made “to further our preparations for possible negotiations on measures to detect and discourage surprise attack.” He further directed that this study should be made after appro­ priate consultation with other government agencies and officials, that the Working Group actually charged with the study be kept quite small, and that it take “full advantage of the analyses and studies of a techni­ cal nature bearing on this matter that are being developed within Dr. Killian’s scientific and technical group.” The Inter-­Agency Group that was brought together in accordance with these instructions to you herewith presents its report with appen­ dices 1 to 4 attached. In addition there is included a J.C.S. document referred to in the report and a memorandum from the Chairman of the Watch Committee. The Working Group functioned as individuals, rather than as rep­ resentatives of their agendcies. The Group confined itself to an analysis of the problem and to conclusions about what further studies could most effectively be undertaken in order to prepare adequately in the time available for discussions with the Soviet which may open during the first week in October. The Working Group wishes to stress the fact that it is not making any recommendations in regard to positions which should be taken by the United States in these proposed discussions. We do venture, however, to add to the conclusions and comments in our report our conviction that the U.S. Government faces a task of great complexity and difficulty in preparing adequately for the discus­ sions, and that the time available is very short. Yours sincerely, G.B. Kistiakowsky Chairman Inter-­Agency Group on Surprise Attack 1 Source: Conveys report of Inter-­Agency Group on Surprise Attack (not included). Top Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Panel, Surprise Attack.
