the Proceeds from the Surtaxes, Necessity for Higher Taxes, Early Enforcement of the Washington Treaty, Surtaxes, and Reciprocal Treaties. Sir Ronald Macleay laid before the Committee what he described as a “scheme of agenda”, in order that various points raised in the Committee might be discussed in orderly sequence (See pp. 25, 26 and 27 of Minutes of November 13, 1925). Some question arose as to the need of supplementing the Agenda which had already been adopted and Mr. Oudendijk reviewed the work of the Conference up to November 3. In the course of this review he remarked that a certain laxness in parliamentary procedure had prevailed, stating that things had been declared adopted, which, he was sure, had not been adopted. He cited particularly the question of surtaxes, stating that the Delegates had agreed only in a general way that the 2½% surtax could be instituted at once, but that so far as the interim surtaxes were concerned no Delegation, with the exception of the American Delegation, had even intimated a view on the subject. The same was true concerning the question of the allocation of these funds as well as of other subjects. At this point Count de Martel made formal reservation on several points in the Chinese proposal. His statement may be found on pages 32, et seq., Minutes of November 13. The Swedish Delegate, Mr. Ewerlöf, and the Danish Delegate, Mr. Kauffmann, made reservations, protesting that they had not committed their Governments to the extent claimed by the Chinese Government. Mr. MacMurray took occasion to say, in behalf of the American Delegation and in order that there might be no misunderstanding, that his Delegation could not go beyond the immediate provisions of the Washington Treaty and that there was therefore nothing to which they could agree with finality except after approval and ratification by his Government. He stated that he wished to make it clear that in the case of the American Delegation they had agreed only tentatively and provisionally in those matters which went beyond the terms of the Washington Treaty. With reference to such provisional and tentative agreement he said that he should point out that, apart from the recognition of certain general principles, there was nothing to which they had agreed, or could agree, other than a general agreement upon some homogeneous, coherent plan that covered not only simply certain principles but the details for the working out of those principles. It was therefore
