Human Rights
231
with respect to the first and second groups of rights than with respect
to the third.
An important aspect of our policy should be to ensure that our re-
lations with countries that continually violate human rights are correct,
in keeping with our other interests, but not close. The tone we set in our
relations is important to the credibility and thus to the success of our
overall policy.
3. Communist States.
With respect to the communist countries, our human rights effort
should remain firm and consistent but non-polemical. We should rec-
ognize that major changes in communist regimes and their human
rights practices will not take place in the short term; they are only likely
to occur, if at all, gradually as the basic political and social structures of
these countries change. On the other hand, we believe that U.S. and
world opinion and U.S. actions can positively influence trends in the
long term and encourage improvements in limited but important areas
in the short term. We should make it clear that our commitment to
human rights is basic to our foreign policy. This view should be com-
municated to the people of these countries as well as their gov-
ernments. We should emphasize implementation of the Helsinki Final
Act.
Because of its pivotal importance, the Soviet Union is a special case
meriting a separate word. Soviet governmental response to our em-
phasis on human rights has been negative and increasingly sharp, ex-
plicitly suggesting that de´tente is threatened by our policy. To what ex-
tent the Soviet leadership truly feels their system and their hold in
Eastern Europe is endangered is unclear; but their objective appears to
be to bring about a significant decrease in our public advocacy of
human rights, thus reducing its most embarrassing aspects for them, on
the pretext that a “one-sided” U.S. advocacy of human rights and re-
spect for state sovereignty cannot co-exist.
There is no evidence that the U.S. human rights policy has affected
Soviet bargaining positions in important negotiations, even if the
atmosphere surrounding negotiations is tense. Our substantive posi-
tion on arms control has and likely will continue to determine the So-
viet response on this critical issue. Similarly, we believe that the Soviet
Union will continue to pursue its perceived interests in arms control,
trade, scientific and cultural exchanges and other areas of our bilateral
relations, regardless of our advocacy of human rights. The inevitable
strain of a massive arms race, the need to take increasing consumer de-
mands into account, and the potential for unrest in Eastern Europe
means the Soviet Union cannot easily pull away from MBFR or SALT
negotiations, technological transfer agreements or commercial credit
arrangements.
