January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1335
—a possible Begin-Sadat Summit (late September/early October),
with high-level participation from here, where in my judgment Ed
Muskie would be the ideal person. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the scenario presented in the memorandum
from Christopher at Tab A, and provide comments on the draft letter to
Sadat at Tab B.5
Tab A
Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State
(Christopher) to President Carter6
Washington, August 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Working Toward a Resumption of the Autonomy Negotiations
Attached is a draft letter to Sadat, along the lines you requested. It
has the concurrence of Sol and Zbig. I am sending a copy of the draft
letter to Ed Muskie in New York, together with this memorandum.
Sol, Zbig and I feel that the letter would be most effective if it came
at a time after some preliminary work had been done in the capitals by
our Ambassadors. The following sequence of steps appears to us to be
the one offering the best prospects for success.
1. As an immediate first step, Roy Atherton will make it clear in
Cairo that before the Egyptians send a further letter to Begin, he wishes
to meet with Sadat. He will urge Sadat not to engage in further po-
lemics but rather to use his reply to try to open doors for an eventual
resumption of the talks. Our second objective with Sadat on this occa-
sion would be to give him a sense of the timing of the sequence of steps
that we have in mind as outlined below. In doing so, Roy would make
it clear that while we were not pressing for an immediate resumption of
formal trilateral negotiations, we want to continue work on the Heads
of Agreement through publicly announced bilateral meetings with
each side, and perhaps some technical-level trilateral meetings if Sadat
will agree to them, until formal negotiations are resumed. Because of
5 Carter approved the recommendation and added a handwritten note: “But hold
the letter text until I approve it later. J.”
6 Secret. Christopher was acting for Muskie who was in Maine.
