Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 224. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, April 4, 1980 SUBJECT Romanian Interest in Military Supply Relationship (U) As you know, the Romanians recently raised with our air attache in Bucharest the question of establishing a military supply relationship with us (Tab A).2 With an eye to an eventual mini-SCC, I met with Barry and Siena the other day to discuss our response and to get a sense of the views of the various agencies and services. (S) There was general agreement that the initiation of a military supply relationship with Bucharest would be a sticky wicket and that we should proceed very cautiously. While Romania and Yugoslavia share similar views on many issues, especially resistance to Soviet hegemony, there are significant differences which make the establishment of a military relationship with Romania more difficult—and more risky: —Romania remains a member of the Warsaw Pact, albeit a reluctant one; the danger of technology transfer therefore is higher. —The bulk of the Romanian officer corps was trained in the Soviet Union and unlike Yugoslavia, they have no familiarity with U.S. weapons systems or procurement procedures. —The political situation in Romania is shaky. While Ceausescu has a firm hand on the reigns of power at the moment, there is considerable latent disenchantment with his increasingly capricious and irrational rule—as well as the deterioration of the economy over the last few years. Should Ceausescu die or be removed, a return to a more orthodox foreign policy, one more closely attuned to Soviet interests, cannot be entirely excluded. —Romania maintains a harsh internal system and has a poor human rights record (in comparison to Yugoslavia’s), a fact which would provoke opposition in Congress. (C) At the same time there was a general consensus that we have an interest in encouraging the Romanians to diversify their arms supply and reduce their dependence on Moscow. The group felt that we should 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, President’s
