First Responses 85 nated those elements most likely to be troublesome in achieving his own vision of an Islamic Republic. Khomeini’s Position Khomeini now has a tiger by the tail, but he is playing for high stakes and is willing to risk all. By placing himself at the visible center of authority, he becomes directly responsible for government actions. Since he and his people are largely incapable of administering the country, this will work against him in time. However, by seizing the initiative in a bold way, he assures that all factions remain cautious. Groups may get together and complain, but as long as he is unyielding and winning, they will probably do little but talk. The stakes have been increased, however, since Khomeini cannot allow himself to be perceived to be out maneuvered or defeated in this latest test of wills. I suspect that his confidence at present is based on several assumptions: —The United States will take no direct action for fear of losing the hostages. —He can wait longer than we can, and eventually he will be able to drive a bargain that makes him appear the winner. —If the U.S. should strike, the U.S. moral position will be undermined and his own position strengthened. He does not mind losing even large numbers of lives. —He is the glue holding the country together, and especially in a time of great threat, Iranians will stick behind him as the only alternative to total chaos and dismemberment of the country. —Although he cannot ride this wave forever, it should be enough to get him through the announcement of the constitution and the referendum now scheduled for December 2. In the meantime, he will attempt to shift the burden of proof to the United States by conducting spy trials. —Celebration of Ashura on November 28–29 assures that religious frenzy and emotional commitment will increase, rather than decrease, in the short run. Nevertheless, Khomeini is not in full control. His control over the students is less than complete. Unrest is growing in the military and probably in other areas of society. He is losing in Kurdistan. Azerbaijan is on the verge of revolt and would require only the smallest signal from Shariat-Madari to move against him. The oil fields are increasingly anarchic. Iraq is sending threatening military signals. The Bazargan group is looking for an opportunity to reestablish itself. And the average Iranian is probably far more apprehensive about a direct clash with the U.S. than Khomeini himself.
