North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1027
Although we have made some advances on multilateral issues,
namely the common fund, we are still short of final agreement in that
negotiation, and we have taken a relatively hard line with regard to
technology, the MTN, and specific commodity negotiations with devel-
oping countries. These factors must be added to the publicity given to
shortfalls in our aid; Jack Gilligan has pointed out to the President that
on present indications the Carter Administration’s aid performance
will be worse than that of the Nixon/Ford years. In this context, the
failure to attend the Manley Summit, an unwillingness to receive a spe-
cially designated emissary from the Summit, and the Guadeloupe
meeting will have a very negative impact. Developing countries could
conclude justifiably that we are backing away from the Administra-
tion’s commitment to forthcoming North-South policies, just as prepa-
rations begin for the UNCTAD V in Manila next May. (C)
We really want to stress that we view this choice as a possible
turning point in the Carter Administration’s attempt to formulate a
North-South policy. Rejection of a North-South Summit in favor of a
“rich man’s club” in Guadeloupe and down-grading our aid levels will
symbolize a significant change of policy direction. (C)
We therefore request that you reconsider the guidance you pro-
vided on Guy Erb’s memo of December 2nd regarding an emissary
from the Jamaica Summit. That memo and Henry Owen’s comments
are attached at Tab B.6 (C)
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve one of the following alternative courses of
action:
(1) That we inform the Jamaicans that the President could meet an
emissary chosen by participants in the Jamaica Summit, either in Wash-
ington or in Guadeloupe itself, if the participants designated either
Schmidt, Callaghan, Manley, or someone else, who could travel di-
rectly from Jamaica to Guadeloupe.7
(2) That the President write a letter to Manley informing him that
he will have an opportunity to speak with both Fraser and Schmidt fol-
lowing the Manley Summit but that he would welcome a letter from
Manley on the result of North-South Summit.8
Thornton concurs.9
6 Tab B was not attached. For Owen’s comments, see footnote 4 above.
7 Brzezinski indicated his disapproval of this recommendation.
8 Inderfurth wrote “My suggestion” in the margin adjacent to this recommenda-
tion. Brzezinski indicated his disapproval of the recommendation.
9 A handwritten notation next to this sentence reads: “and still leans toward
Option 2.”
