Peru 1027 that this credit, the largest single military credit extended to any Latin American government, was arranged at the request of the Peruvian Government at a time when the U.S. was unable to agree to the loan or sale of any naval vessels from its Reserve Fleet. He also pointed out that the U.S., at the request of the Peruvian Government, recently agreed to the postponement of payments on the principal of this loan for three years in order to ease Peru’s balance of payments problems.4 Mr. Rubottom said that, for the purpose of developing Latin American anti-­submarine warfare capability, two destroyers are earmarked for Peru under the pending naval ship loan bill. Under the same program, Chile is scheduled to receive two destroyers and two submarines, so that it can improve its ability to defend its long sea lines of communications. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that this information had long been known to Peru and had been the subject of discussions between Prime Minister Cisneros and Ambassador Achilles a year ago. With regard to the maintenance work being done on the two Chilean cruisers in U.S. shipyards under the Mutual Security Program, Mr. Rubottom said that it would cost not $10 million but approximately $4 million. He also pointed out that we similarly assist Peru in the maintenance of units of its Navy—for example, the three destroyer escorts it obtained from the U.S. in 1951. He said that the Chilean cruisers had been brought to the U.S. because the maintenance could best be done here, whereas the maintenance of Peruvian vessels could be done in Peruvian shipyards with spare parts furnished by the U.S. He said that it would seem to be advantageous to Peru to have maintenance work on its vessels done in Peru rather than in the U.S., thus providing additional work for its shipyards. Referring to the rumors that Chile might be obtaining an aircraft carrier, Mr. Rubottom said he could assure the Ambassador that Chile was not getting one from the U.S. and that, so far as he knew, was not obtaining one elsewhere either. As for the cancellation of arrangements for Peru to purchase destroyers from the UK, Mr. Rubottom said that the Peruvians themselves had informed the U.S. that they had decided not to buy the vessels. He pointed out that Admiral Llosa had given Admiral Peterson this information on August 5, 1957, and Ambassador Berckemeyer acknowledged that this was correct. Mr. Rubottom said that, if the Peruvians had agreed to buy the destroyers from the UK, he felt sure that the latter would have sold them, whether the U.S. felt it to be desirable or not. 4 The agreement under reference was concluded by a note of January 9 from Finance Minister Thorndike to Ambassador Achilles in Peru. A copy of that note was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 508 from Lima, January 15. (103. XMS/1–1558)
