1978 237 Northern arms exporters will mean even greater latitude for arms recipients in choosing among exporters. A buyers market will, in short, continue to exist. —The dominent impulse of developing nations’ arms plans for the coming decade is toward arms independence. More nations will be able to achieve weapons independence by indigenous production, although most countries will likely remain dependent on the superpowers for front-­line weapons platforms such as high performance combat aircraft. —The availability of precision-­guided munitions (PGMs) will represent the most notable change in conventional weaponry from the 1970’s. Perhaps 15 to 20 nations will become capable of producing their own PGMs. —The international demand for high cost, low attrition combat aircraft such as the F–14 will diminish significantly in the 1980’s. This reduced demand will result in part because these aircraft are too costly to risk in combat against PGMs. —There may be a greater willingness on the part of many producing nations to sell weapons abroad, particularly if they see their reluctance as only serving the benefit of other less scrupulous suppliers. The “high-­ technology, high-­morality” nations, such as Germany and Japan, may well become more actively involved in the arms trade in the future. But this development is not inevitable. The Swedes appear steadfast in their high-­morality posture. —The 1980’s will probably see more trade in “threshhold” items that will further blur the already vague distinction between offense and defense, strategic and tactical, nuclear and conventional, e.g., the cruise missile. —There will be a proliferation of “second-­tier” producers, such as Italy, Yugoslavia, Israel and growth of co-­producers. —The 1980’s will see a further weakening of autonomous European production lines for combat aircraft. European industries will turn more and more to co-­production and licensing arrangements with American aircraft industries. NATO standardization in the 1980’s is likely to be, therefore, two-­tiered, with the U.S. taking the lead in major weapons platforms and increasing European collaboration in tactical missiles and other armaments. I think you will be pleased to know that most of the recommendations contained in Controlling Future Arms Trade are found either in PD–135 or the guidelines you have adopted for our discussions with 5 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977– August 1978, Document 33.
