92 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI No arms control agreement will allow perfect verification, regardless of the effectiveness of our NTM assets or the on-­site inspection regimes. In developing the currently proposed on-­site verification provisions, the U.S. has attempted to balance the requirements for high-­ confidence monitoring against the necessity to safeguard vital U.S. national security assets. Monitoring (S) Monitoring is the process of collecting, analyzing and reporting information gained on Soviet activities relative to the agreement. Monitoring judgments are a measure of our ability to monitor Soviet activities related to the terms of the agreement. Military Risk (S) An assessment of military risk requires a judgment on the extent to which Soviet cheating would alter the strategic balance. The effect of uncertainty about Soviet compliance at levels less than would be considered to be militarily significant would also need to be considered to the extent that such violations undermine the viability of the treaty. In conducting these assessments, potential cheating scenarios must be examined for their likelihood, their military (and political) implications, and our ability to detect cheating on a timely basis. Safeguards and Countermeasures (S) An assessment of the availability of safeguards and countermeasures is a judgment of the ease and speed with which it would be possible to deny the benefits gained from Soviet violations through diplomatic and military countermeasures; the military or political difficulties which might inhibit effective response; and the constraints which might be imposed by the need to protect sensitive intelligence sources and methods. [1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified] [2 paragraphs (23 lines) not declassified] An alternative view is that non-­deployed missiles in greater numbers than the U.S. will require under the Treaty provide the Soviets no meaningful increase in target coverage and thus no incentive to cheat. Whether changes to verification provisions or numerical limits can ameliorate these risks is open to question, both because such measures may not be identifiable, or because such measures may prove unacceptable to the U.S. [1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified] (S/NF) Another view is that current provisions are sufficient, either because the Soviets would not exceed RV limits without a series of flight tests which would be detectable by NTM or because U.S. requirements for operational flexibility supersede monitoring concerns.
