Options Identified
269
100.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Status of Hostages
[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
1. The following conclusions about the condition of the hostages
held in the American Embassy in Tehran are based on psychiatric
debriefings of released hostages as well as general knowledge about
how individuals react to similar captive situations.
2. Although bound, occasionally blindfolded, and kept in semi-
isolation, the hostages on the whole are likely to feel they have been
fairly well treated. They have been fed regularly, kept clean and warm,
and most importantly have not been killed. Since this treatment com-
pares favorably to their probable expectations and/or fears, their per-
ception is therefore one of good treatment.
3. The actual mental or physical condition of any one hostage will
vary depending on his prior mental and physical state, his character,
and his individual idiosyncrasies. The captive experience is extremely
traumatic, and each individual will respond to this trauma according
to his own resources. After over a month of captivity, these hostages
have probably developed rather stable adaptive mechanisms, so that
as time goes by one would expect relatively little change from their
current behavior.
4. During any hostage-taking incident one can expect the adaptive
mechanisms of both the hostage and hostage taker to lead to what may
initially appear to be a paradoxical alliance between them. When people
are together, especially under stress, relationships develop among
them; similarly, hostages and hostage takers begin to form relationships
that tend to unify them into a group. The interests of both the hostage
takers and the hostages are served by giving in to the hostage takers’
demands; therefore, the hostage takers and hostages are natural allies.
Also, as a means of coping with his helplessness, the hostage often
unconsciously identifies with the more powerful hostage taker.
5. In this particular incident, there is inferential evidence that the
captors are attempting to systematically influence their captives.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 31, Subject File, Iran 12/8/79–12/18/79. Secret. Sent under a December 16 covering
memorandum from Turner to Vance, Brown, Jones, and Brzezinski, on which Turner
wrote: “I commend it as one basis for planning for the return of the hostages.”
