50 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI SLBM warheads. Given our heavy reliance on SLBM warheads, we rejected the idea. — Linkage with ABM. Arguing that deep cuts in offensive forces would be destabilizing if large-­scale ABM deployments are permitted, Soviets condition START on agreement not to withdraw from ABM treaty for agreed period. We’ve been willing to negotiate such a “defense and space” (D&S) agreement, but said completion of START treaty should not be linked to it. Criticism of Emerging START Treaty Although polls show over 75% of Americans support START, some influential figures such as Kissinger, Nixon, and Scowcroft have argued that START reductions could make our deterrent more vulnerable by concentrating U.S. forces on too few ICBMs and submarines. In one key respect, the critics are right—­our proposed ban on mobile ICBMs does conflict with survivability. But in general they incorrectly hold START responsible for potential problems in our strategic posture that would exist even without START, problems that could, in fact, be dealt with more effectively under a START agreement. — Critics say START would make our silo-­based ICBMs more vulnerable than today because, under the treaty, we would deploy mostly MIRVed ICBMs in a reduced number of silos, thus increasing the ratio of Soviet warheads to U.S. “targets.” But START would let us deploy many oneor two-­warhead ICBMs in a much larger number of silos, thus reducing the ratio. Still, our silo-­based ICBMs will be targetable with or without START (even if START can marginally reduce Soviet incentives for attacking them). If START permits mobile ICBMs, it can contribute substantially to survivability by severely limiting Soviet capabilities to threaten our mobile deployments. — It is true, as critics assert, that our missile-­carrying submarines (SSBNs) will decrease from 35 to 18–20. But this results not from START but from our decision to replace 16-­missile POSEIDONs with quieter, less detectable 24-­missile TRIDENTs. With or without START we’d deploy only about 20. Fortunately, we expect TRIDENTs at sea to remain invulnerable for the foreseeable future. But if we became concerned about reduced numbers, START would allow us to pursue a variety of options for dispersing our warheads over additional boats. Preparing for Resumption of the Geneva START Talks Defense Review. Several results will influence START: — ICBM modernization decisions will affect whether we drop our mobile ICBM ban and, if so, what sublimit for mobile ICBM warheads and what mobile verification measures we propose. — SDI decisions could affect prospects for either reaching a D&S agreement or getting the Soviets to de-­link D&S from START, both of
