I have not in my possession full data concerning the restrictive
measures which the French Government either has made effective
or contemplates and I cannot therefore hold views of value
concerning the importance of this letter to our trade. I have
requested Dr. Lyon, Commercial Attaché, to communicate with
the Commercial Attaché attached to the Embassy at Paris and to
request him to furnish us with material both as to the restrictive
measures now in force and as to those contemplated by the
French Government. On receipt of such material I will
supplement this despatch.10
(11) In the course of the debates in the sessions of the Diplomatic
Conference, the question was raised as to what procedure should
be followed in the July conference relative to voting on
reservations submitted by states between November 8th and
February 1st. No clear cut decision was reached and I have
subsequently talked over the matter with interested members of
the Secretariat. They themselves are much troubled by the
situation, pointing out that as matters now stand, any state which
votes against a reservation introduced by another state, if that
reservation is accepted, will be free to withdraw from the
Convention. This would naturally create great uncertainty and
cause many states to delay ratification awaiting action by their
neighbors. Since I have discussed this matter with the Secretariat,
the Legal Section has been instructed to consider the situation
thoroughly and to give advice as to what should be proposed. I
shall not fail to communicate further on this point as soon as I
hear the result of the deliberations of the Section.
(12) Finally, I venture to call the Department’s attention to the
fact that both Austria and Germany in formal communications,
and other states in the course of the plenary sessions, declared
that they must hold themselves free to request certain exceptions
provided such exceptions were requested and obtained by other
states. It will be, I believe, essential for our representation to bear’
in mind this very important point, namely, that by granting an
exception to one state, even though it looks of very little
