3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
310
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
SUMMARY: During a brief meeting on April 12, the Secretary and
Dobrynin discussed SALT and other matters that will come up during
the Secretary’s visit to Moscow; the Shevchenko case; and the problem
of delays in providing accommodations for our Embassy personnel in
Moscow
Ambassador Dobrynin came to the Department April 12 to discuss
subjects related to the Secretary’s trip to Moscow April 20–22.
I. SALT: The Secretary told Dobrynin that the President would be
signing instructions for the trip within the next 24 hours, and that
Warnke would convey to Dobrynin elements of the positions to be dis-
cussed that would help Soviet authorities to prepare for the meeting.
Warnke said he would also be sending information to the SALT delega-
tion at Geneva, and Dobrynin replied that this would be good; Sem-
enov, he said, was fully au courant.
The Secretary said that the President wished him to stress the need
for Soviet understanding of the political importance of bridging the gap
on the Backfire issue. Dobrynin replied that it was not a problem of un-
derstanding, but the unacceptability to the Soviet Union of the repeated
new demands since Gromyko’s efforts to meet US needs last Sep-
tember. At that time, he said, Gromyko had gotten approval from the
Politburo to go as far as he did on the strength of his assurance that this
would remove the Backfire obstacle to a SALT agreement.
In the course of the discussion, Dobrynin agreed that new systems
and modernization would be the key issue. In response to a question,
the Secretary said that he proposed to start with a discussion of SALT,
and then take up the Middle East (at Soviet request) and Africa, and
then return to SALT, CTB, and MBFR. Dobrynin agreed, and asked if
the Secretary were prepared to continue the discussions into Saturday
if necessary. The Secretary replied affirmatively. It was agreed that so-
cial functions should be held to a minimum, in order to maximize
working time during the visit.
II. Shevchenko: The Secretary told Dobrynin we had no objection to
Soviet doctors examining Shevchenko if he agreed. He added that we
had passed the Soviet request to his attorney. Dobrynin asked if we
would compel him to submit to examination, and the Secretary said no.
The Secretary said we had also passed on Dobrynin’s request for an-
other meeting with Shevchenko. The Secretary and Shulman then took
Dobrynin to task for the intemperate statement issued by the Soviet UN
Mission yesterday. Dobrynin disclaimed responsibility for it.
III. Embassy Moscow Housing: Dobrynin raised the question of
apartments for Embassy Moscow and our decision to close the con-
struction site of the Soviet Embassy at Mt. Alto, stating that he under-
stood the housing problem was starting to be solved. He was told that
pending clarification of discussions on housing in Moscow, we were
