March 1952–February 1953
401
Enclosure
Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of
Defense Lovett
October 31, 1952.
SUBJECT
Iran
1. Reference is made to paragraph 3 of the memorandum by the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, dated 5 September 1952, on the above subject.2 The
studies referred to have proceeded sufficiently to produce tentative
conclusions which are forwarded herewith for such use as may be ap-
propriate in considering the revision of NSC 107/2. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff will reexamine the courses of action noted below and initiate plan-
ning as appropriate to implement any course(s) of action which the re-
vision may indicate.
2. If the United States national policy requires the retention of the
Middle East within the free world, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize
that one action which might contribute to the security of the Middle
East would be to provide positive U.S. military support to that area in
collaboration with the British, the Turks, and the Middle East countries
involved. It is believed that U.S. armed forces can be deployed to the
Middle East with the sympathy and cooperation of the indigenous gov-
ernments. An active indication of positive U.S. military action in the
Middle East would demonstrate both to the Communists and to the
free world that the United States is not going to permit Soviet domina-
tion of the Middle East.
3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff desire to emphasize that the United
States cannot deploy forces to Iran without a grave risk of inciting the
USSR to invoke, with or without Iranian consent, the Soviet-Iranian
Mutual Defense Pact of 1921.3
4. Studies were made to determine whether or not, under present
conditions, there are feasible U.S. military courses of action which
would strengthen the Western orientation of Iran and to determine
what military courses of action are feasible in the event of an appeal by
the Iranian Government to the United States for direct military assist-
ance. The conclusions in this regard are:
2 Not found.
3 See footnote 5, Document 145.
