440
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
They asked for four things:
1. A history of how the Crown was acquired (Bob Murphy was
the intermediary)—which they believe could help them for juridical
reasons, if it was not war booty. We said we would try, but that in
any event a promise made like that 30 years ago was not really relevant.
2. To see the text of the cultural agreement with Hungary. We said
we would send it.
3. To have a simple statement from the Administration that it is
not our intention to give back the Crown. We said that we could not
pledge that, and would have to refer it.
4. Representative Oakar also wants Administration backing for
her bill requiring the approval of Congress before the Crown could be
given back.3 We temporized, but she may come back again.
We therefore refer the issue back to you for guidance. Do you
want to put out such a statement? Would you be willing to have the
Administration support her bill?4
We do not support either course of action: but it will be hard to
get out of the first one.
Could we have your further thoughts before proceeding?
(Hyland thinks it is senseless to play around with the Crown:
raising the issue of returning it would just do political harm, and
actually doing so would gain us nothing with the Hungarians.)
RECOMMENDATION
1. That you approve the memorandum at Tab I5 asking State for
a history of the Crown’s acquisition and an accounting; and
2. That you give us your views on how to proceed.
3 On April 26, Oakar introduced H.R. 6634, a bill “to require that the Hungarian
Crown of Saint Stephen and other relics of the Hungarian royalty remain in the custody
of the United States Government and that they not be transported out of the United
States, unless the Congress provides otherwise by legislation.” The bill was discussed
in subcommittee, but was never submitted to a vote on the House floor.
4 Brzezinski marked the paragraph and wrote at the bottom of the page, “No—
there’s no point in blanket, timeless negative commitments of ‘I’ll never beat my
wife’ variety!”
5 Not attached. Brzezinski signed the memorandum to Vance on May 2, requesting
that the Office of the Historian at the Department of State prepare an unclassified
memorandum on the manner by which the Crown of St. Stephen came into U.S. posses-
sion at the end of World War II. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St.
Stephen: 4–6/77). The Department forwarded to Brzezinski a study prepared in the
Office of the Historian on May 24. (Ibid.)
