888
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
and a substantial increase in the discretionary authority of party
professionals.
28. However, the Yugoslav military is not politically monolithic,
and a political demarche or coup would almost certainly deepen its
internal divisions. Furthermore, any expansion in the military’s politi-
cal role would undoubtedly alienate Croats, Slovenes, Albanians, and
other non-Serbs. Although the regime has made substantial efforts to
dilute the historic Serbian dominance of the officer corps, non-Serbs
still view the military as a predominantly Serbian institution with a
centralist bias that threatens their national interests and identities.5
29. Accordingly, while a military intervention might temporarily
stabilize a crisis situation, the longer term prospect would remain
one of potential instability and unrest, with an appreciable chance of
ultimate civil war.
B. More Stable Alternatives
30. This readily apparent prospect of such a disastrous outcome
provides the best hope that Tito’s successors will do everything possible
to avert it. This hope is strengthened by the fact that all of Tito’s present
top lieutenants played important supportive roles in the eventual reso-
lution of the leadership deadlock of 1968–72. Furthermore, some of the
personal and factional antagonisms that have arisen within the present
party Presidium are likely to be muted by future changes in member-
ship, including a number of changes that are scheduled for the immedi-
ate future and others that could well occur before Tito’s departure. In
consequence, it is possible that the post-Tito Presidium will adopt less
strictly collegial decisionmaking procedures and that a majority of its
members can be organized into a more or less stable ruling coalition.
31. In broad terms, two such coalitions, with potentially overlap-
ping memberships, seem feasible in the light of current and emergent
Yugoslav political realities. One, more likely in the event of an early
succession, might be headed by old Titoists such as Vladimir Bakaric,
Milos Minic, and Nikola Ljubicic, and would be characterized by a
strong commitment to the perpetuation of the status quo ante. It would
do everything possible to preserve the present distribution of authority
between the center and the republics, to maintain a “self-managing”
socialist-market economy, to foster the growth of independent Commu-
nist and nonaligned forces in world affairs, and to guard against too
Westward a tilt in Yugoslav domestic and foreign policy. The other
grouping, more likely in the event of a delayed succession, would
5 For a discussion of the Yugoslav military establishment and ethnic attitudes toward
its role, see volume II, annex D, “The Yugoslav Military.” [Footnote is in the original.]
