Options Identified
207
• Venezuela, the only non-Arab OPEC member with large foreign
holdings, has expressed concern that the flare-up might create a rift in
OPEC. [portion marking not declassified]
Only a few oil producers, notably the radical states of Algeria and
Libya, sharpened their public anti-US stance in response to the US
financial action. The Libyan delegation to the Arab Foreign Ministers
meeting in Tunis called for joint Arab reprisals against the United
States. The Libyan initiative received only mild support from Syria
and was soundly rejected by the conference. [8 lines not declassified]
Little OPEC Support for Iranian Initiatives
[1 paragraph (10½ lines) not declassified]
The Iranians have received no support for their request that OPEC
discontinue the use of the dollar as the means of payment for oil
exports. Acting in their self interest, the oil exporting countries seem
unlikely to reject the dollar as a vehicle currency as long as it remains
a principal currency for transactions by the rest of the world; they will
need dollars to pay for their imports. Some would be especially reluc-
tant to take actions that might be thought to have a long-term, adverse
effect on the dollar, because more than half of their assets are dollar-
denominated. [portion marking not declassified]
Longer-Term Implications of the Iranian-US Flareup
The following is our preliminary reaction to the longer-term impact
of the Iranian crisis.
Impact on Iran
The financial and governmental confusion generated by the US-
blocking of Iranian assets and by the threats of the Iranians to default
on their external debts is having a seriously adverse effect on trade
and other external relationships that will be felt for many months
to come. In addition, skepticism about the government’s ability and
willingness to ensure personal security will slow the return of foreign
contractors and technicians who are leaving the country. Overall, spin-
off from the current crisis is undermining Iran’s ability to supply itself
while making imports more difficult. Hence, worsening economic con-
ditions—including spot shortages of critical commodities such as
food—are certainly in the cards. The worst of these problems, however,
are a few months off. [portion marking not declassified]
While the economic downturn being brewed by the current crisis
is not apt to change the Ayatollah’s mind set in the short run, its
political impact will be felt in the longer term. Most Iranians are willing
to pay some price to ensure the success of the revolution, and for the
time being many find the United States a handy scapegoat for most
of Iran’s problems. Nevertheless, before the current flareup in US-
