January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1321
nual grant. This will be done with the approval of the Knesset Finance
Committee. Jerusalem will be given special preference in the activities
of national bodies [rashuyot] in the development of Jerusalem in eco-
nomic and financial areas, as well as in other areas. The government
will establish a special body—or bodies—to carry out this article.”
(Documents and Statements on Middle East Peace, 1979–82, page 89)
Writing the following day in his diary, Carter commented that the vote
“almost puts the final nail in the coffin of the Camp David negotiations
between Israel and Egypt.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 452)
395.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to Secretary
of State Muskie1
Washington, July 31, 1980
SUBJECT
Negotiating a Facility at Ras Banas (U)
(S) Given the President’s approval2 in principle of seeking access to
Ras Banas, I propose the following negotiating strategy, on which I re-
quest your agreement so that we can submit it promptly to the Presi-
dent. I regard this as a matter of urgency.
(S) Rationale. Early access to a facility into which we could stage up
to a division and air wing in the relatively early phases of a crisis
would: (a) enable us to move larger forces significantly closer to the
Persian Gulf in response to warning, thereby greatly reducing closure
time; (b) help to deter aggression against Persian Gulf states without
having to position US forces in these states themselves; and (c) allow us
to pre-position certain stocks, thus enhancing logistical support in the
initial stages of a regional conflict.
(S) In order to support even the baseline RDF, (i.e. 31⁄3 division
ground force, plus corresponding air and sea forces), we also need a
rear support base complex far enough from the area of combat to be
safe from easy air interdiction yet close enough to be within unrefueled
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–82–0217B,
Egypt (May–July) 1980. Secret. A copy of the memorandum was sent to Brzezinski.
2 Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East
Region; Arabian Peninsula.
