September 1953–December 1954
781
power. Simultaneously, there has appeared some evidence that the in-
creasingly isolated position in which Mosadeq’s policies had placed
Iran during the past two years had not been to the taste of most edu-
cated Iranians. Xenophobic though they may be, on occasion, Iranians
are as anxious as any other nationalistically inclined people that their
nation be a fully accepted member of the family of nations. The press
has recently made repeated criticisms of the Mosadeq regime for
having “alienated” Iran’s neighbors and other countries.
Relations with Great Britain—Although it would still be suicidal for
an Iranian to espouse friendship with the British openly, a desire to
“normalize” relations with the United Kingdom, at least at the diplo-
matic level, has been frankly expressed in the pro-Government press.
Iranians now feel free to declare that Mosadeq’s anti-British policy was
too radical, and even to question the reasonableness of having broken
diplomatic relations. The sense of insecurity developed during the past
two years will not be entirely erased until Iran’s long-run relationship
with Britain has been defined. The pro-Government press has frankly
admitted that the initiative in seeking this definition should come from
the Iranian side. The majority of Iranian observers believe, however,
that this initiative might better await the settlement of the oil problem,
or at least substantial progress toward such a solution.
These attitudes do not mean that Iranians generally are willing to
“give in” to the British, or that the majority of Iranians would welcome
a return to the former degree of British influence. The public seems
more concerned at the moment with the personal capabilities of their
leaders than with the extent to which they may be subject to British
influence.
Although the underlying anti-British sentiment of the Iranian
people remains, it has become more passive since the futility of blindly
anti-British policies has been widely recognized. Since August 19, con-
comitantly with the improvement of the American position in Iran,
British prestige has risen somewhat. This has taken place in a country
where prestige has long been a reasonably satisfactory substitute for fa-
vorable regard. In any case, Britain may have to continue indefinitely to
rely on prestige rather than affection as the basis for achieving a satis-
factory modus vivendi with Iran. Her prestige could depend largely on
the extent to which she appears to Iranians to be successful in reas-
serting her influence in Iran.
The Oil Question—Public interest in a settlement of the oil dispute
with Great Britain continues to be high. This interest appears to rest pri-
marily on the belief that major oil revenues would of themselves offer
promise of general economic betterment, although more sophisticated
Iranians recognize that the problem has far wider implications. The be-
lief that Mosadeq mishandled the oil question is widespread, and there
