622
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
good enough, it will feed the rumor mill and put the Ayatollah on
the defensive.
9. Institute visible, spot surveillance of Iranian diplomats.
New Sanctions
Many of the above suggestions would also be useful in building
an atmosphere of uncertainty in Tehran even if we go through with
the sanctions. The following are some additional steps we can take if
we decide to openly resort to graduated pressure tactics. The key word
is graduated, since any package we invoke is going to be more effective
if it is seen only as the first step and if there is real concern in Tehran
that more stringent measures are seriously being considered.
1. Tighten up Immigration. We probably should do this anyway.
Exactly what are the guidelines which INS is using to screen Iranians
coming into the country?
2. Students. Can/should we toughen the limitations on renewal of
Iranian student visas after this semester is over? Could we require
written statements by school officials about political activities of Iranian
students? Can we simply require that all student visas be formally
renewed prior to beginning a new semester?
3. Spot Interrogation of Merchant Shipping. This would be a first step.
It could be stepped up if desired, but a limited program could raise
fears while being portrayed as normal maritime activity.
4. Economic Transactions. Can we ask the allies to privately ask their
companies to deliberately slow down all financial and commercial
transactions with the Iranians? This would not require legal steps, and
each country could do it in its own fashion. It might even be attractive
to them as an alternative to more severe measures.
5. UN. Any attempted new action against Iran at the UN is a two-
edged sword. However, my guess is that the Iranians are not any
happier about relying on the Soviet veto than we are—it shows how
low they have sunk in world opinion. Merely undertaking some kind
of effort will be seen as threatening by them, although it has a down
side for us as well if we fail to gain as many votes as last time or force
a new Soviet veto.
6. ICJ. Are we totally on hold at the World Court? Can we ask for
them to accelerate their consideration of the case on the grounds that
danger is increasing? When do we expect a final judgment? Will the
judgment increase our ability to press the allies for sanctions?
7. Diplomatic Representation. We could renew pressure on our allies
and others to reduce their diplomatic presence in Tehran, or, at a
minimum, to communicate to the Iranians the fact that they see a
dangerous situation developing which could require them to reduce
