482  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the question was: were the Soviets prepared to agree to these points 
regarding the nature of the declaration if, for the U.S. part, we were pre-
pared to accept an amendment to our declaration which would refer to 
nuclear-­armed SLCMs with a range greater than 600 km? (Note: Shortly 
after making this proposal, the U.S. corrected its proposal to be an offer 
of a range cut-­off of 300 km).
The Secretary said he would like to summarize this proposal 
more succinctly. If the U.S. were to meet Soviet objections as raised by 
Mr. Gorbachev by including a range cut-­off, could the Soviets accept 
the proposal we put on the table yesterday4 regarding a declaratory 
approach to SLCMs?
Shevardnadze asked Nazarkin to respond. Ambassador Nazarkin 
said that, in addition to the problem of a range cut-­off, there was also a 
number of other problems with the U.S. approach to SLCMs. First was 
the very nature of the obligations that would be assumed by the sides. 
The Soviet Union could not accept declarations which would not be 
mandatory.
The Secretary asked what he meant. Nazarkin explained that the 
U.S. approach was not binding. The Secretary asked whether the con-
cern was that it was not subject to verification or that it was not a bind-
ing limit within the treaty.
Nazarkin replied that the Soviets believed the declarations to be 
exchanged did not need to be legally binding, but they had to be polit-
ically binding. This would entail a requirement that some means be 
provided to assure the other side that the other’s declaration was being 
complied with. The Soviets had expressed this idea in their own unof-
ficial draft declaration.5
Burt said that, while the two sides’ declarations differed, they both 
used similar language regarding “levels will not exceed.” Therefore, 
there was no difference in terms of how binding they were. The only dif-
ference was that the Soviet declaration called for verification measures.
Nazarkin said another difference was that the U.S. draft only 
involved a declaration for three years, whereas the Soviet side would 
require that a side’s plans be declared for the duration of the treaty. This 
would establish a definite limit that the sides could not overstep.
Bartholomew asked whether the Soviets had in mind a single num-
ber for the coming 15 years to be declared at the time of entry into force 
of the treaty. Nazarkin said this was, indeed, the Soviet idea.
The Secretary remarked that even under the Soviet formula, the U.S. 
could list the figure two million and it would be all right.
4 See footnote 3, Document 72.
5 Not found.
