668 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX effect. The same thing applies to less sensitive areas of economic life, particularly in a country devoted to the suppression of economic facts, and thus to the creation of myth, rumor and unhealthy ignorance. The effects of a policy effectively denying the general populace much hard information on economic reality is at least two sided: Untutored pessimism concerning the future is chronic in the Romanian masses; on the other hand, and illustrative of a general advantage of manipulation of news, the GOR, through clever publicity of the Pitesti refinery accident, has induced savings in consumption well beyond those merited by the magnitude of the accident. This raises a general point about the ability of anyone to engage in effective disinformation activities: Overuse and abuse, the effect of any increase in the level of any campaign would be hard to predict. Romanian’s since [sense?] of truth and language has been brutalized to such a degree that the utility of further brutalization of fact or language might well be triflingly marginal. This observation also would bear on any disinformation campaign launched by other Socialist states: having criticized Romania’s system of economic development and management so severely (albeit privately) and for so long, credibility is low. The vast and even hopeless mismanagement of their own economic affairs also tends to make listeners rather skeptical. C. Joint Action The possibility of inducing other COMECON members to join in economic sanctions, whether so labelled or not, does not seem very real at this point. It should be noted, however, that the effect of serious cuts in trade between all members of COMECON and Romania would be positively devastating. The notion that it is not a realistic possibility is based in logic, not information. There is no doubt that the lack of symmetry in relations between members of COMECON, particularly between the USSR and all other members, collectively or individually, is gross, increasing and constitutes a most difficult and sensitive issue. Illustration: Poland’s reaction to a suggestion or directive that it cut coal supplies to Romania is highly unpredictable. It would run into political imponderables, such as are involved in all relations between super and small powers, as well as bump up against one of the inherent weaknesses of the non-market economy system, i.e., the system is turgid, slow to react and in general inflexible. Poland could certainly place the coal elsewhere, but how well could it get along without the Romanian imports it currently receives in return? While Bulgaria might go along with trade cuts, total or selective, the reaction of all other states, who may frequently have been “silent partners” in Romanian dissenting positions within COMECON and WP conferences, might be nastier than generally imagined and begin a process of unravelling of intra-COMECON bilateral trade arrangements and balances that
