1977  133
Each of these strategies has a specific rationale for linking building 
blocks into coherent AIMS, as summarized below.
AIMS E—This AIMS is based on the premise that US objectives can 
be achieved with somewhat reduced reliance on military force, but the 
US still would retain the capability to wage a major conventional war of 
short duration with the USSR. US strategic nuclear capabilities would 
be somewhat reduced; not all US advantages would be maintained, nor 
would an extensive, efficient hard-­target kill capability be pursued. The 
nuclear threshold would be about the same as it is currently. In conjunc-
tion with NATO Allies, the US would plan to have the conventional 
capability to hold a determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack at the 
Weser-Lech River line for about 30 days. (A defense which stabilizes 
along the Weser-Lech line yields to Pact forces about a quarter to a third 
of the FRG territory east of the Rhine River). In addition, the US would 
maintain a limited capability to confront the Soviets worldwide in the 
event of European war. A reduced presence in East Asia (no US forces 
in Korea or the Philippines) would reduce the potential for certain 
regional involvements and would reduce, but not negate, the US abil-
ity to influence great power relationships there. Other global interests 
would be advanced primarily by diplomatic and economic efforts, and 
any limited military intervention would require drawing down forces 
dedicated to other purposes.
AIMS F—This AIMS is based on the premise that US objectives can 
be met through a strategy achievable by approximately the current US 
military forces, but with a capability for sustained combat comparable 
to that of our NATO Allies. US nuclear capabilities would be somewhat 
enhanced; all present US advantages in strategic nuclear force balance 
indices would be retained, with the expectation of a hard-­target kill 
capability against all Soviet silos. The nuclear threshold would be about 
the same as it is currently. As in AIMS E, the US, in conjunction with 
NATO Allies, would plan to have the conventional capability to hold a 
determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack at the Weser-Lech River 
line for about 30 days, thus involving loss of NATO territory. In addi-
tion, the US would maintain a limited capability to confront the Soviets 
worldwide in the event of European war. In contrast to AIMS E, the cur-
rent programmed military deployments in East Asia, less land forces in 
Korea, would be retained. Other global interests would be advanced by 
a moderate capability for unilateral military action without drawing 
down on forces dedicated to other purposes.
AIMS F Variant—This AIMS is based on the premise that US objec-
tives can be met by a modest increase in US military capability and a 
substantial increase in sustainability by our NATO Allies. This strategy 
is identical to AIMS F except that in a European war, sustainability is 
commensurate with that currently programmed for US forces, with a
