Afghanistan
37
we should proceed in a cautious manner with respect to economic
assistance.3
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 Subsequent Embassy reports also noted the challenges of maintaining economic
assistance programs with Afghanistan. For example, in telegram 5982 from Kabul, July
24, the Embassy reported that while the DRA wanted the U.S. aid program “to continue
in all the areas which were involved before the revolution,” this would have to proceed
slowly because the new government “did not have its act together.” The Embassy further
explained that among the new government officials there was a deficit of experience
and reliability required to manage assistance programs, an assessment shared by other
Western powers and international aid organizations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780303–1012)
16.
Letter From Pakistani General Zia to President Carter1
Islamabad, May 9, 1978
Dear Mr. President,
Your interest in the possible implications of the recent coup in
Afghanistan and in my personal assessment of this event, has been
conveyed to me by Ambassador Hummel.2 The correct assessment of
the change of regime in Kabul and of its wider ramifications is, indeed,
essential to enable us to determine our response to it. Your personal
awareness of the importance of the new situation that has arisen and
your keenness to have the right answers, are most welcome.
As soon as the events began to unfold in Kabul, we took the
initiative to consult Ambassador Hummel and have remained in close
touch with him ever since. We have in the course of these consultations
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders, Box 15, Pakistan: President Zia-ul-Haq, 2/78–
7/79. No classification marking.
2 In telegram 4264 from Islamabad, May 1, Hummel outlined a proposed Presidential
message to Zia regarding the situation in Afghanistan. The message emphasized that
the United States remained committed to the stability of South Asia and recognized the
centrality of Pakistan toward that end. In telegram 112361 to Islamabad, May 3, Vance
authorized Hummel to deliver the message orally on the basis that a letter from Carter
“might enhance Pakistan’s concerns, as well as raise unrealistic expectations.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780188–0749 and D780185–0567,
respectively)
