3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
285
84.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
February 27, 1978
Dear Mr. President,
Your latest letter transmitted through the US Embassy in Moscow
on January 30,2 has evoked, I will put it straight, mixed feelings and
some reflections which I consider necessary to share with you in the
spirit of frankness inherent in our correspondence.
As it follows from the letter, you share our assessment of the pre-
dominant trend and main direction of Soviet-US relations at present
and for the future. This cannot but cause satisfaction. Agreement on the
basic approach, it would seem, should facilitate to a considerable extent
the solution of specific issues which are on the agenda of our relations.
In its turn, an active advance in those issues would not only be a logical
continuation of all the positive things that have already been done
through efforts of both sides in recent years, but would also open new
prospects for fruitful cooperation in the interests of both our countries
and the entire world.
We generally consider that the central task of international rela-
tions of today—if we do not want the world to be again overflowed by
the wave of mutual fears, suspicions, by uncurbed arms race—is ex-
actly to take, and without any delay, practical steps which would
deepen emerging relaxation of international tension, consolidate what
is new in relationship among nations, which constitutes the only alter-
native to returning to the “cold war”.
For understandable reasons the most important role here belongs
to our two countries, to their ability to find mutually acceptable solu-
tions based on the account of each other’s legitimate interests, on the
understanding of actual realities of the developments. This, of course,
requires constructive political will, determination to act proceeding
from broad interests and long-term perspective of the world develop-
ment, and not under the influence of some or other momentary factors.
I say all this only because the current situation in relations between
our countries prompts me to do so. Indeed, one cannot fail to see that in
specific and, for that matter, major problems of these relations a
progress is either hardly noticeable or is not there at all.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev–Carter Correspondence: 1–12/78. No classifica-
tion marking. Printed from an unofficial translation. Carter initialed the letter indicating
he saw it. Dobrynin delivered the letter to Vance on February 28; see Document 85.
2 See Document 77.
