872 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 328. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the Deputy Director for the National Foreign Assessment Center, Central Intelligence Agency (Clarke), and the Deputy Director for Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (McMahon)1 Washington, July 29, 1980 SUBJECT Possible Policy Options: Iran 1. I have your respective submissions on possible policy options in Iran [document numbers not declassified] as requested by Dr. Brzezinski on 17 July.2 First, we have to put this into context. We submitted a paper outlining possible policy options in Iran that we would be willing to develop for Brzezinski if he wanted.3 He responded by ignoring that general request but asking for papers on two specific areas. I’m afraid I don’t think that either of the papers we have developed is fully responsive to his request for a survey of the options that are available to us. Such a survey really should include (as he asked for) both the costs and the benefits of these actions. [portion marking not declassified] 2. With respect to the DDO paper [less than 1 line not declassified] we really are primarily giving him an inventory of what we have done or will do. Much of this is fine, but what he wants to know is what we could do against either of these and what the costs and benefits would be. I think he really wants to help us. If we give him three or four covert actions that we could do [less than 1 line not declassified] and what they might produce at what risk, he might help sell those. In short, I think we should have a rather short paper on each which says that we can continue with the present kind of propaganda operations (and a list of those we have done and are planning to do as appended), but that we also could undertake more forceful actions against Khomeini. [4 lines not declassified] 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 13, Folder 1: C–372 Iran 01 Aug 80–31 Aug 80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. 2 Brzezinski had asked Turner to provide him with two assessments. The first request was for a fresh look at the options and potential costs and benefits for an analysis of “covert and other pressures” [text not declassified] against Khomeini. The second request was for an evaluation of the “mining, blockade and other possible non-lethal options for intensifying pressure against Iran,” including costs, benefits, and domestic and international reactions. (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Turner, July 17; ibid.) 3 The undated paper, “Possible Policy Options: Iran,” is an itemized outline of possible U.S. relations options with the Khomeini regime and possible U.S. policy at the Shah’s death. (Ibid.)
