Negotiating Channels
379
meetings and read from them to me, saying that “Ghotbzadeh said
. . .” and “the Foreign Minister told me . . .”
Instead of trying to retrace chronologically what was said at each
meeting, I will try to relate the essence of their meetings and discussions
with the Foreign Minister. I made comments throughout the presenta-
tion in an attempt to clarify different things that were said to the
Panamanians and also to draw Marcel out.
Marcel said that at the beginning of the first meeting the Foreign
Minister said that he wanted to explain to them the background on
the embassy takeover. He said that the plot to overthrow the American
Embassy was an “American conspiracy” involving Rockefeller, Kissin-
ger and others who had a dual purpose: First, to create an international
crisis that would undermine the Ayatollah’s efforts to establish an
effective and strong Islamic Republic; and second, to create a crisis of
great magnitude for President Carter that would lead to his political
defeat and would result in the election of a Republican that was con-
trolled by Kissinger and Rockefeller who would work to have the Shah
reinstated as the leader of the Iranian people.
The Foreign Minister said that because of the “American plot”,
everyone was now in a very difficult position. He said that the Panama-
nians were respected throughout Latin America and the Third World,
but their acceptance of the “criminal Shah” at the insistence of the
United States had done great damage to their image in the world. He
said that President Carter was in danger of losing his Presidency if he
did not successfully resolve the hostage situation. He said that the
Ayatollah was in a very difficult position in Iran—he said that while
he and Khomeini had no hope or desire to recover the Shah, that the
students had become an increasingly powerful and difficult group with
which to deal and that some way had to be found to resolve the crisis
that did not make it appear that Khomeini had given in to U.S. pressure.
He said that the Ayatollah had resorted to trying to substitute students
totally loyal to him for the “regulars” holding the hostages, but that
once inside the compound they all behaved the same way.
Ghotbzadeh talked quite frankly about his own political plans, but
often invoked Khomeini’s name to suggest that the future of the Islamic
Republic was in the hands of both men, not just Khomeini. He said
the greatest threat to their “moderate” position was the sanctions vote
which was presently before the Security Council. He said that if the
vote was taken and the United States was successful in obtaining the
necessary nine votes, that this would make it much more difficult to
resolve the hostage situation at an early date. Also, he said that the
Soviet veto which was anticipated on the sanctions vote would be
a tremendous propaganda victory for “Communist elements in the
compound and in Iran”. (I interrupted here to point out to Marcel that
