Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 16. The U.S. Government can be in no doubt, Gromyko continued, that Afghanistan was subjected to outside aggression. It was in that connection that it called for assistance. In accordance with the UN Charter and the Soviet-Afghan treaty it had a firm legal basis and every right to appeal for help, including that of a military character in the struggle against external aggression. Washington, he said, does not like to touch on that question; it pretends not to see how things really are, to be aware of the aggression from the territory of Pakistan. Perhaps, he said, I could advise Washington to pay more attention to that question so it could see the situation better. He then referred to camps in Pakistan where thousands of people were being armed and trained and being sent to struggle against the people and Government of Afghanistan. In answering the President’s message sent on the hot line, Brezhnev had stated that there was a great deal the U.S. could do to stop those armed incursions from Pakistan.5 But this was not and is not being done. 17. The Soviet military contingents are in Afghanistan, Gromyko continued, and there is no basis for them to be withdrawn. They will remain there until such time as there is no external aggression and the U.S. Government must realize that. The Soviets pointed out in their initial statement to certain governments—without waiting for any propaganda campaigns to develop—that their contingents would be withdrawn if the external aggression ceased. The Soviet Union does not need Afghanistan—its territory or its riches. The U.S. Government and the President are aware of that. And the deeds and the words of the Soviets—unlike those of some others—do not diverge. 18. What Gromyko numbered example no. 8 was that Washington continued to repeat one false thesis, which had also been mentioned albeit softly in my earlier statement. This was that the Soviet Union was somehow involved in the changes in the leadership of Afghanistan. Nyet. That is an invention of Washington’s. The Soviet Union was not involved. The change was brought about by the Afghanis themselves. The present Afghan leaders did not come from the moon. The Afghanis formed their government and it is general knowledge that it is not doing badly. For example, tens of thousands of prisoners have been set free, including large numbers of Muslim clergy. Washington likes to speak of human rights. It should welcome this move, even if it does not applaud it. But it does not do so because this does not interest the administration; it is only interested in “pinching the foot” of the Soviet Union.
