The Pan American Union inquired of the States, members of the Union, whether there were any proposals relative to these subjects which they desired to submit to the governing board of the Pan American Union for study as provided by the resolution. No proposals were received by the Union, and therefore no action was taken in accordance with this resolution. It is improbable that the Uruguayan plan for the creation of an association of American nations will be brought up at the Sixth Pan American Conference in the form in which it was to have been proposed at Santiago. Nevertheless, it is not improbable that an effort will be made to promote discussion of this subject and some more or less detailed project may be submitted to the Conference. The United States would not view with favor the inclusion of this subject in the agenda and should such a proposal be made, you are instructed to vote against it. However, if it should be included by a two-thirds vote you will be guided in any discussion which results by the following views of the Department, included in the instructions to the American delegates to the Fifth Conference: “A proposal to establish an American League of Nations with a formal organization and specific guaranties would probably encounter in this country difficulties similar to those that were met when the proposal to participate in the League of Nations was submitted. Even if it were possible to obtain an agreement which would embody such a plan, it is not probable that it would be ratified by this Government. “On the other hand, the Government of the United States is most hospitable to the consideration of measures tending to the maintenance of peace and stability in Latin America and ensuring a basis for beneficent cooperation. This end can be attained most readily and without engendering a futile controversy over a proposal for an organization similar to that of the League of Nations, if attention be directed to the fundamental purposes of international institutions of the sort contemplated. These may be said to be: “First. Judicial settlement of justiciable disputes;
