1977  127
—Roles, capabilities, and vulnerabilities of theater nuclear forces;
—The forces and mechanisms appropriate for crisis management 
and potential local conflicts (with particular attention on potential cri-
ses in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf);
—The characteristics of a US Navy appropriate for its contribution 
in effective competition with the Soviet Union and management of US 
global interests in the future;
—Warsaw Pact capabilities, doctrine, and vulnerabilities associ-
ated with sustaining conventional conflict in Europe;
—Measures NATO could pre-­plan to exploit various amounts of 
warning time which might be available; and
—Soviet doctrine, capabilities, and vulnerabilities associated with 
our taking initiatives outside Europe during a war in Europe.
(C) Beyond PRM–10
I believe our efforts to date have served to provide the essential 
framework for identifying the major military strategy issues on which 
your guidance will set the course for our future actions. There are now 
being set in motion the necessary activities along the lines outlined ear-
lier in this memorandum to address those areas requiring greater study 
before decisions on a comprehensive national military strategy can be 
made.
I am prepared to discuss with you in further detail the consider-
ations and implications of each of the military strategy issues.
Harold Brown
	
Attachment
	
Final Report of the Ad Hoc Group on Military Force Posture2
Washington, July 7, 1977
[Omitted here are the title page and table of contents.]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Purpose. The purpose of the PRM–10 Force Postures Study is to 
elicit policy guidance from the President on key issues pertaining to 
national military strategy. The scope of this study is intentionally broad. 
It partakes of most, but exhausts none, of the numerous topics and fac-
tors which enter into the determination of national military strategy. It 
is designed to provide a solid basis for further detailed work on defense 
force structure and program issues, using either the interagency pro-
cess or the normal PPBS decision process, as appropriate.
2 Secret.
