March–August 1953
721
maintain friendly relations with other members of the family of nations
and that it will pursue a policy of eliminating such differences as may
exist or which may develop with other countries in a spirit of friend-
liness and in accordance with accepted principles of international
intercourse.
In an effort to assist you in dealing with your immediate problems,
I have authorized my Ambassador to Iran to consult with you re-
garding the development of our aid programs there. I recognize that
your needs are pressing. Your request will receive our sympathetic
consideration and I can assure you that we stand ready to assist you in
achieving the aspirations for your country which you have outlined.2
Please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, the assurances of my highest
consideration.
Dwight D. Eisenhower3
2 The White House announced on September 5 that $45 million would be made
available for immediate economic assistance to Iran, in addition to the existing military
and technical assistance programs. (Ibid., p. 581)
3 Printed from a copy with this typed signature and an indication that the President
signed the original.
303.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, August 26, 1953, 3 p.m.
489. 1. I saw Shah again last evening at my request in order discuss
various matters, particularly exchange of letters re financial, economic
aid and Qashqai problem. Both these matters being discussed in sepa-
rate telegrams.2 This telegram limited to exchanges which might be of
interest to Department between Shah and myself on other subjects.
2. Shah again said he not happy re Cabinet. He thought it had not
made very good impression. Changes might be necessary very soon. I
said Cabinet not yet completed, if selections to fill vacancies should be
wise it could be materially strengthened. Shah would be deluged with
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/8–2653. Top Se-
cret; Security Information. Received at 11:22 a.m.
2 Not found.
