808 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX program, which the Yugoslavs value highly. As soon as I have their proposal, I shall forward it to you for approval.10 Demonstrations. As you know, the Yugoslavs are very much concerned about the prospect of demonstrations during Tito’s visit. Two permits have been granted: one to a small group of Serbs, and another to a larger group of Croats. Justice and State continue to work on the problem, but at time of writing no way had been found to shift the demonstrations from in front of the White House. I will continue to pursue this issue; in any event, everyone is on notice that there can be no repeat of the incident when the Shah was here. North Korea. The Yugoslavs have reported that President Tito continues to be interested in a possible role as go-between us and Pyongyang. In addition to the material in Cy’s memo, I believe you should know that: —North Korean intransigence is responsible for the current diplomatic impasse. It is Pyongyang that maintains it is the “only legal sovereign government” on the Peninsula, insists that its friends and allies foreswear all contact with Seoul, rejects a renewal of serious, substantive discussions with the Republic of Korea, and refuses to contemplate the wider involvement of both Koreas in the international community through dual membership in the UN on a provisional basis, pending progress toward reunification. —Pyongyang’s position is increasingly out of phase with international realities. More than 50 countries recognize both Koreas—54 to be exact. Both Koreas sit alongside each other in a growing number of UN Specialized Agencies, despite the North’s refusal to countenance dual membership in the UN itself. Though Pyongyang seeks to keep alive the fiction that South Korea is illegitimate, it must come to terms with the fact that the ROK is not merely a going concern, but has become a major world trading power which in a few years time will qualify for membership in the OECD on the basis of its industrial prowess. —Some of the Communist countries—most notably the East Germans—have apparently acknowledged that any long-term movement toward reunification must progress through a prolonged period of 10 In a March 6 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski informed the President that OMB, the Department of the Treasury, and the Department of State disagreed on the possible way forward for the Science and Technology program. While OMB recommended allowing the various agencies to seek funding based on their own priorities, the Department of State recommended seeking a $7 million appropriation to fund the program for another five years, an option Brzezinski also supported. Carter approved the appropriation, noting in the margin that it should be a “regular budget item—no special budget request.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 15, Yugoslavia: President Tito, 3/6–9/78: Cables and Memos)
