806
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Vance: An attachment would be sufficient.
Begin: No, it must be an integral part of the joint letter. I am willing
to write a footnote in my own handwriting underneath my signature.
Brzezinski: proposed in that case maybe Sadat should write in a
footnote in his own handwriting disagreeing with Begin.
The President: proposed that he himself write in the footnote as a
compromise.
Begin and Dayan accept.
The President then cites some gestures that Sadat will make for
Begin when Begin visits Cairo—Synagogue, scholars, Jewish community.
Begin seems genuinely touched.
Begin then asked the President to intercede with Brezhnev to agree
to direct flights from the Soviet Union to Israel.
Begin then asks that the $800 million grant—$2.2 billion loan ratio
be changed to 50–50 as a personal gift to his wife. He really stresses the
personal gift idea.
The President laughs but says he cannot grant this. I cannot give
you any encouragement.
Begin responds by saying that we hope you will consider it. At
least you are not discouraging me.
The President repeats that he cannot offer any encouragement. The
President then says he wishes to raise a couple of sensitive issues. Sadat
is a man of impulse and generosity. You, Mr. Begin, are also a man of
great generosity and bravery (the idea of bravery is then embellished). I
want you to be sensitive to the fact that settlements pose a key problem
for the future. I hope that your statements and actions will recognize
the importance and sensitivity of this issue. The second matter involves
Jerusalem. I understand your position, but if in your public statements
you could refer to the role of the three great religions, if you could use
or quote somehow from the Koran, and with your erudition you could
find some appropriate words, it would really be helpful.
Begin responds by saying that as far as Jerusalem is concerned
there are some self-evident truths which he need not reiterate all the
time (that it is the capital of Israel, etc., etc.), and then reiterates his
usual line on the settlements.
Dayan adds that it is a matter of proportion—what we do and how
we do it.
The rest of the discussion involves the signing ceremony and mu-
tual expressions of admiration and recognition.
