764  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
2. Wang said in course these talks US side asked that both sides 
make announcement renouncing use force and threats. PRC side agreed 
to this idea of making announcement and took initiative in presenting 
draft announcement, which PRC side later amended after considering 
US views.
3. Wang said thus problem confronting us evidently nothing else 
but how desire for peaceful settlement disputes, as specified in pro­
posed announcement, can be realized. As US already used force and 
threats against China, desire for peaceful settlement disputes cannot be 
realized unless practical feasible means are sought for.
4. Wang said if US side genuinely sincere in desiring peaceful set­
tlement disputes between two countries, should make honest effort fol­
low announcement of declaration by seeking practical feasible means 
realize this. Foreign Ministers conference is precisely such practical and 
feasible means.
5. Wang said secondly it out of question for US to talk about any sort 
of self-­defense rights on China’s territory Taiwan and coastal islands. 
No amount of arguments such as put forward at last meeting, alleging 
Taiwan and coastal islands never been their territory could alter facts.
6. Wang said aggressive acts of US in seizure of Taiwan and inter­
vention in internal affairs of China could in no way be turned into 
self-­defensive acts by treaties between US and Chiang clique, which 
long been overthrown by Chinese people. China absolutely would not 
renounce its sovereign right over Taiwan and coastal islands. To require 
their side in making this announcement to give recognition to US right 
self-­defense on China’s territory, to give recognition to Chiang treaty, 
to give recognition to American seizure Taiwan, is asking impossible.
7. Wang said thirdly as to by what means China would accomplish 
liberation Taiwan, that entirely internal matter of China in which US 
has no right whatsoever interfere. Desire expressed by China to strive 
for peaceful liberation Taiwan if circumstances permit has nothing to 
do with US.
8. Wang said at last meeting US side asked that China undertake 
to use peaceful means for liberating Taiwan. Such is unscrupulous 
intervention in China’s internal affairs which China absolutely will not 
tolerate.
9. Wang said I had repeatedly indicated that US had no intention 
prejudicing position PRC side regarding our disputes. As matter fact 
ever since discussion on making this announcement began US side 
all along has clung to demand that China renounce its claims. US side 
has never indicated slightest change in its position. US side has even 
demanded PRC recognition seizure Taiwan by US. How could I explain 
this as other than demanding their side renounce its position?
