608  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
would do real harm to Soviet relations with the uncommitted nations. 
However, the USSR will continue its attempts to discredit Yugoslav for­
eign policy, particularly in the Middle East and Asia, and will try to link 
Tito with the colonial powers in the minds of Afro-Asian leaders.
Relations with Communist China
209. Communist China over the past several years has emerged as 
a nearly-­equal partner of the USSR within the Communist world. The 
preponderant influence is still in Moscow, but this appears to operate 
through discussion and persuasion rather than by the exercise of author­
ity or control. The foundations of the alliance remain unimpaired: a com­
mon ideology, which charts the broad course of domestic developments 
and posits hostility toward the capitalist enemy; a mutual dependence, 
economic and military in the case of China, political and strategic in the 
case of the USSR; and a shared realization that any major disruption 
of the alliance would probably have catastrophic effects on the future 
of the entire Communist movement. We thus believe that the bases for 
the Sino-­Soviet partnership are compelling, that the two regimes will 
remain closely allied over the period of this estimate, and, indeed, that 
neither regime is likely to believe that it could afford a break even if 
serious divergencies arose.
210. We also believe, however, that there are certain differences 
between them which have perforce led to compromises or which have 
been glossed over. Such divergences are more likely to grow than to 
diminish over the next few years and we believe that because of them, 
and because of its growing power and prestige, the Peiping regime 
poses a potential threat to the kind of Sino-Soviet Bloc which the Soviet 
leaders would like to envisage for the future. Although the USSR will 
retain its senior position, it is possible that the process of reconciling 
differences between the two may increasingly involve compromises on 
the part of the USSR, with corresponding adjustments in Soviet policy.
211. Possible Chinese Communist differences with the USSR in 
policy or tactical approach—­but not ultimate goals—­have included the 
doctrinal innovations of 1956 and 1957 concerning the “100 flowers” 
concept and the possibility of “contradictions” between the party and 
the masses; and the apparent sentiment in 1956 that the USSR had over­
played its role of Bloc leader and was, in fact, guilty of “great power 
chauvinism.” At present Peiping and Moscow may view relations with 
the West somewhat differently; the Chinese Communists appear to be 
more militant than the Soviets and less fearful of the consequences of 
a “high risk” policy. In addition, there have been differences at least in 
propaganda emphasis concerning various international questions.
212. In the future, areas of friction may arise from the general ques­
tion of Communist China’s influence as an ideological and political force 
within the Bloc as a whole. The unprecedented Chinese organization
