816 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement concentrated effort to improve the efficiency of its operations in this field and to eliminate activities which are found to be no longer necessary or practicable. One new project has been proposed for FY 1961, a program of technical assistance in warehousing and marketing for farmers. Public Health requirements in Honduras are very great. In terms of human needs, as well as impact on public opinion, the MSP health programs are extremely important. In the past, this program has been directed largely toward the building of community water supply and sewage projects and environmental sanitation, in general. The largest single element of the program is currently the malaria eradication campaign, which is part of a regional, and indeed a world-­wide campaign, to eliminate the disease. Honduras is cooperating very satisfactorily in the technical aspects of this program, though unable to contribute financially to any significant extent. The USOM, through the Health Services, has carried out numerous engineering projects, which included the use of $1.25 million Smather’s Loan Funds for community water supplies, which are nearing completion. These projects have been conducted without sufficient supervision, with the consequent errors and dangers to U.S. prestige. Strong corrective measures are now being taken, and, upon completion of these jobs, USOM will turn its attention away from this type of work and place more emphasis on health education and training, on the development of health centers, and on the creation of an adequately-­ trained nursing profession. The MSP in Honduras also embraces projects in the field of transportation, both air and ground. The development of Honduras has been seriously handicapped by the mountainous terrain, and the majority of the towns and communities are relatively isolated, being served only by trails, unimproved roads, or light planes. A civil aviation project has been in existence for some years, providing technical assistance to the national civil air agency; with the use of the USOM air personnel it has also been possible to establish an electronics training program and a regional flight information center serving all of Central America. These activities are continued in FY 1961 and are related to a regional ICAO air traffic control program supported by all of the Central American Republics and making use of the Tegucigalpa Training Center facilities, which were established with ICA help. In recent years Honduras has received considerable financial assistance for economic stabilization and public works. In January 1959 Honduras obtained a standby loan for $4.5 million from the IMF for currency stabilization and is complying with stipulations covering governmental fiscal management practices.
