Chapter 2, January–June 1989 187 — Option 3A—Continue to allow operational dispersals without geographic limit, with post-­notification and a stated national security rationale. — Option 3B—Do not allow any dispersals beyond the Deployment Area. Rail Mobile ICBM Basing Mode. The U.S. approach to verification of rail-­mobile ICBMs parallels the approach taken for road-­mobile ICBMs, except that there is no provision for a Deployment Area for constraining exercise dispersals. Thus, rail mobiles would be confined to rail garrisons no larger than a specified size (yet to be determined), and would be allowed to leave the garrison for training, maintenance and testing, as well as for dispersals. There are no geographic or other operational limitations on rail-­mobile ICBMs when they are taking part in exercise or operational dispersals. In addition, the U.S. position contains provisions which require trains with rail-­mobile launchers to be in a standard configuration while located in rail garrison but no requirement to be in any standard configuration outside the garrison (although configuration changes for routine movements must be notified). The U.S. approach to rail-­mobile verification is consistent with the rail-­mobile Peacekeeper, allowing Peacekeeper trains to have access to most of the U.S. rail network. The President’s ICBM modernization decision of April 22, 1989 is consistent with this approach. However, some are concerned that under the current U.S. proposal, which allows geographically unlimited dispersals from small garrisons. [2 lines not declassified] They also believe that our current approach may detract from stability because it would require dispersal of the force during a crisis for survivability. They believe that the need for such dispersal could be a factor toward inducing a Soviet first strike. Those who favor revising the current position believe that measures to address these concerns include the following: — A geographically limited Deployment Area to mitigate the verification problem by restricting the area of legal deployment and setting boundaries beyond which any deployment would be illegal. — A Deployment Area partitioning scheme is not inconsistent with preserving mobile ICBM survivability, provided that the areas are sufficiently large so that the Soviets cannot destroy the mobile force with a barrage attack without an unacceptably high exchange ratio. — It is highly unlikely that Peacekeeper trains will have the time for dispersal to any point in the U.S. during a crisis situation. In addition, they believe Peacekeeper trains do not require unlimited access to the civilian rail network during peacetime for purposes of training.
