December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 647 meeting that Egypt should assume the Arab role in the negotiations. Dayan objected to this, and one of us suggested that Egypt could assume the Jordanian role. There was no Israeli objection and that is the reason it is there. Prime Minister Begin: This was ad referendum to the Cabinet. Secretary Vance: We were trying to draft a letter so that the Cabinet could consider it. On the question of Egyptian liaison officers, this was also discussed, and Dayan said that it would have to be taken to the Cabinet. He said that it was an interesting idea in the context of the Gaza first option. It would help to bring about early elections. This was fully discussed. Mr. Rosenne: From the second day of the Blair House talks,21 the Egyptians raised the possibility of separating Gaza from the West Bank in all of their proposals. They said that there should be an Egyptian police force and Egyptian liaison officers. This was rejected by the Israeli delegation. At the second Camp David talks, the idea of Egyptian liaison officers was raised again. This is in the seventh draft,22 although the Israelis have not gotten copies of all the drafts. Reports were sent by Dayan after each of the meetings, and it is clear on this question of liaison officer that Dayan rejected the idea in discussions. If we look at the Camp David Agreements, there was a difference concerning liaison with local police forces. Secretary Vance: The idea of liaison officers has been in every draft. Dayan did point out that the idea of liaison officers from the start of the negotiations was new, and he said that it should be discussed in the Cabinet. Ambassador Evron: All I can say is that when Dayan met with us he said that we should stick to the Camp David language and we suggest using Camp David language on the question of liaison. Prime Minister Begin: The Cabinet has read the draft letter and took a decision against Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza. President Carter: I have talked to Sadat . . . Prime Minister Begin: We accept the Camp David Accords. President Carter: I have talked to Sadat about the idea of separating Gaza from the West Bank. He thinks that this could help to break the present deadlock and might encourage the Palestinians in Gaza to participate. Egypt and Israel could use their influence. This sounds reasonable to me. There could be 1, 2, 3, 5, or 10 officers, not to govern in Gaza, or to work against Israeli interests, but to help carry out the Camp David agreements. They would not constitute any threat against Israel. 21 See Documents 84, 86–87, 90, and 94. 22 See footnote 5, Document 182.
