Yugoslavia
813
252.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
State Visit to the United States by President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia,
March 7–9, 1978
I. OBJECTIVES
President Tito is paying his third visit to the United States—proba-
bly his last. Our objectives are to honor him as one of the towering
figures of his era; to build stronger and broader ties with Yugoslavia
which will carry us through the post-Tito transition period; to discuss
a wide range of global issues in hopes of reaching closer understanding;
to discuss a few bilateral issues in hopes of resolving them. There are
no crises in our relationship at present.
During the talks, we should reaffirm our steadfast support for
Yugoslavia’s independence from Soviet domination and for its unity
and territorial integrity. We should indicate that we respect Yugo-
slavia’s policy of nonalignment and Tito as a founder of that movement.
We should also encourage further the process of bilateral consultations
at the highest level as well as more active contacts at every level.
Tito will want to discuss mainly global issues: East-West relations,
detente, the Belgrade CSCE meeting, disarmament, Eurocommunism,
nonalignment and world economic issues. He will also wish to discuss
the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, China, Korea, and perhaps other
world trouble spots. On bilateral matters, he may raise the nuclear
fuel export license for Krsko (KERSH-ko) power station, ExIm Bank
financing, bilateral military exchanges including progress in our new
arms transfer relationship.
II. SETTING
Defying generalization, Yugoslavia is Balkan, Mediterranean and
Middle European in essence; with a history going back through the
Roman era but a state only in this century; Roman Catholic, Orthodox
and Moslem; bearing the marks of both the Turkish and Austro-Hun-
garian Empires, as well as indigenous kings and despots; a contempo-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit
File, Box 15, Yugoslavia: President Tito, 3/6–9/78: Briefing Book. Secret; Nodis. Carter
underlined scattered words and phrases throughout the memorandum. The memoran-
dum was attached as Tab A to Brzezinski’s March 3 memorandum; see Document 251.
