the people. I said this seemed to be rather a technical point. The phrase had no constitutional or legal meaning for us and I did not see how any such signification could really be attributed to it. He replied that the Privy Council of Japan, which had been considering the treaty, comprised a good many lawyers, and that they were probably viewing the situation in a technical light. I told him that in our consideration of this treaty we would not be disposed to listen very much to jurists. This was not that kind of treaty. On the whole, I thought we should like to keep the phrase in question, and expressed the hope that on reflection Japan would agree with us that it was good material. However, I said we would also take into consideration this second suggestion. The Chargé again reserved the right to make further suggestions in case the Cabinet of his Government desired to make them. Pie thought it improbable that any further suggestions would be made. Mr. Sawada concluded by referring to the arbitration and conciliation treaties.79 He said that his Government was inclined to suspend action on them until some conclusion was reached on the multilateral treaty. I expressed some surprise at this, and said that we had not thought there was any such connection between the two operations as to make one at all contingent upon the other. We were quite ready to go ahead with the arbitration and conciliation treaties and were doing so with all other Governments. We saw no reason why this should not be done. He said he would be glad to convey that view to his Government. He agreed that it would he desirable to complete the arbitration treaty before next August when the existing treaty expires. He wanted to know if I thought the multilateral treaty would be signed soon. I said I could not make any forecast on that, but that we were hopeful of an early termination of the negotiations. R[OBERT] E. O[LDS] 78 William R. Castle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State. 79 See vol. III, pp. 135 ff.
