198 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI constraints, such as: restrictions on the ability to modernize existing forces; restrictions on the research and development of strategic defensive systems (SDI); capture of existing and future nonstrategic systems; restrictions on ballistic missile reliability testing; and possible unacceptable inspections, intrusions and operational constraints in order to verify STOF capabilities (or the absence of such capabilities) of a missile system. 5. (SNF) With available missile technology, the existing generation of SLBMs could be adopted to fly in STOF regimes of 10–15 minutes. Significant penalties in terms of accuracy, payload, and R&D costs would be required to develop STOF SLBMs to fly in regimes less than 10 minutes. Even with a developed STOF capability it would be difficult for the Soviets to execute with confidence a coordinated attack using a combination of STOF SLBMs and ICBMs in a manner that precludes a US retaliatory strike. The Soviets would have to consider that the first nuclear detonations of a STOF SLBM attack would trigger a prompt US retaliatory launch. 6. (SNF) A ban on STOF SLBM testing has many ramifications. Regardless of the method chosen to accomplish such a ban, as in most arms control initiatives, uncertainties will exist as to the impact on future systems development and monitorability for both the US and the Soviets. Moreover, a ban on STOF SLBMs, even if monitorable, cannot preclude Soviet use of high-­altitude, “burst on ascent” nuclear detonations delivered by SLBMs that could degrade US tactical warning of ballistic missile attack. The drawbacks of such a ban could be minimized by limiting the ban to future types of SLBMs tested from submarine platforms and by proper selection of the parameters (range, time of flight, re-­entry angle, apogee, etc.) used to formulate the ban. If doubts persist as to whether a ban on STOF SLBM testing is necessary and/or desired, as an interim measure, a proposal similar in nature to a STOF SLBM testing ban could be pursued as a confidence building measure. (SNF) Options available to address a STOF SLBM testing ban. Option 1—Decide not to pursue the issue further. Option 2—Decide to seek a STOF SLBM testing ban with the Soviets in the START negotiations. Those who support Option 1, and thus do not support Option 2, hold that: • There is a lack of substantive evidence that the Soviets are pursuing the development of a STOF SLBM, thus there is no potential threat other than that of existing shorter range (less than about 2000 Km) SLBMs, which we can offset by operational readiness and basing measures. There is no reason to open complex negotiations to counter a threat that does not exist.
