198  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
constraints, such as: restrictions on the ability to modernize existing 
forces; restrictions on the research and development of strategic defen-
sive systems (SDI); capture of existing and future nonstrategic systems; 
restrictions on ballistic missile reliability testing; and possible unac-
ceptable inspections, intrusions and operational constraints in order to 
verify STOF capabilities (or the absence of such capabilities) of a missile 
system.
5. (SNF) With available missile technology, the existing generation 
of SLBMs could be adopted to fly in STOF regimes of 10–15 minutes. 
Significant penalties in terms of accuracy, payload, and R&D costs 
would be required to develop STOF SLBMs to fly in regimes less than 
10 minutes. Even with a developed STOF capability it would be dif-
ficult for the Soviets to execute with confidence a coordinated attack 
using a combination of STOF SLBMs and ICBMs in a manner that pre-
cludes a US retaliatory strike. The Soviets would have to consider that 
the first nuclear detonations of a STOF SLBM attack would trigger a 
prompt US retaliatory launch.
6. (SNF) A ban on STOF SLBM testing has many ramifications. 
Regardless of the method chosen to accomplish such a ban, as in most 
arms control initiatives, uncertainties will exist as to the impact on 
future systems development and monitorability for both the US and 
the Soviets. Moreover, a ban on STOF SLBMs, even if monitorable, can-
not preclude Soviet use of high-­altitude, “burst on ascent” nuclear det-
onations delivered by SLBMs that could degrade US tactical warning 
of ballistic missile attack. The drawbacks of such a ban could be mini-
mized by limiting the ban to future types of SLBMs tested from subma-
rine platforms and by proper selection of the parameters (range, time of 
flight, re-­entry angle, apogee, etc.) used to formulate the ban. If doubts 
persist as to whether a ban on STOF SLBM testing is necessary and/or 
desired, as an interim measure, a proposal similar in nature to a STOF 
SLBM testing ban could be pursued as a confidence building measure.
(SNF) Options available to address a STOF SLBM testing ban.
Option 1—Decide not to pursue the issue further.
Option 2—Decide to seek a STOF SLBM testing ban with the Soviets 
in the START negotiations.
Those who support Option 1, and thus do not support Option 2, 
hold that:
• There is a lack of substantive evidence that the Soviets are pur-
suing the development of a STOF SLBM, thus there is no potential 
threat other than that of existing shorter range (less than about 2000 
Km) SLBMs, which we can offset by operational readiness and basing 
measures. There is no reason to open complex negotiations to counter a 
threat that does not exist.
