180
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
It is my own contention that this confluence of foreign policy ini-
tiatives and decisions will require a comprehensive and well coordi-
nated domestic political strategy if our policies are to gain the under-
standing and support of the American people and the Congress.
It is important that we understand the political dimensions of the
challenges we face on these specific issues:
1. There is a limited public understanding of most foreign policy issues.
This is certainly the case with SALT II and the Middle East. This is not
altogether bad as it provides us an opportunity to present these issues
to the public in a politically advantageous way. At the same time, most
of these issues assume a simplistic political coloration. If you favor nor-
malization of relations with Cuba or Vietnam, you are a “liberal”; if you
oppose
normalization
with
these
same
countries,
you
are
“conservative”.
2. To the extent that the issues we are dealing with have a “liberal” or
“conservative” connotation, our position on these particular issues is consist-
ently “liberal”. We must do what we can to present these issues to the
public in a non-ideological way and not allow them to undermine your
own image as a moderate-conservative.3
3. Congressional support in some form is needed to accomplish most of
your foreign policy objectives. A modest amount of time invested in con-
sultation with key members of Congress will go a long way toward
winning the support of Congress on many issues. Whereas members of
Congress do not mind—and sometimes relish—a confrontation with
the President on some local project or matter of obvious direct benefit
to their district or state, very few wish to differ publicly with the Presi-
dent on a foreign policy matter.
4. We have very little control over the schedule and time-frame in which
most of these foreign policy issues will be resolved. Consequently, a contin-
uing problem and challenge will be to attempt to separate out the key
foreign policy issues from domestic programs so the two will not be-
come politically entwined in the Congress. This dictates a continuing
focus on the historical bipartisan nature of U.S. foreign policy so the Re-
publican members of Congress will be less tempted to demagogue
these issues during the 1978 elections.
5. Conservatives are much better organized than liberals and will gener-
ally oppose our foreign policy initiatives. To effectively counter conserva-
tive opposition, we will have to take the initiative in providing coordi-
nation of our resources and political leadership. Our resources at
present are considerable, but they are scattered among a variety of
3 Immediately following this point, the President wrote: “To challenge Soviets for
influence is ‘conservative.’”
