September 18–December 16, 1978 253 2. Noting Prime Minister’s unbending statement on this issue at yesterday’s Knesset debate (septel),5 I asked Dayan to explain Israeli position. Dayan said he had spoken to Begin this morning, and letter to the President had been drafted but had not yet been signed. It would be sent today or tomorrow. After his return from the U.S., Begin had checked carefully with Barak and was now “absolutely determined” that he had agreed at Camp David only to a freeze on settlements during the three months of the negotiations for the peace treaty with Egypt. According to Barak’s notes on the night meeting September 16, Begin had twice, once in the middle of the conversation and again at its conclusion, said that he wanted to think about the President’s formulation overnight. Dayan said that the next day Begin had sent his letter to the President via Barak with the language which contained his position—a three-month freeze on settlements during the Sinai negotiation. The Prime Minister felt strongly that his memory was correct, Dayan continued, and Barak’s notes confirmed it. Therefore, Begin would in his letter to the President commit himself at this time to nothing further than a three-month freeze on West Bank/Gaza settlements. 3. More than somewhat taken aback, I said I had the clear impression from earlier conversations that both he and Barak agreed that the negotiations referred to in Begin’s talk with the President concerned the West Bank and Gaza and that the only difference between the Israeli record and our own was the reference to Begin’s saying he would have to think about our language overnight. I said I had thought Dayan and Barak had agreed that the settlements freeze had not been mentioned in context of Sinai negotiations. 4. Not answering me directly, and obviously trying to put the best face on Begin’s position, Dayan argued that in practical terms it made little difference whether the freeze was tied to the Sinai or the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. He said that the latter talks should last no more than three months. In any event, he stressed, Begin had certainly made no commitment to freeze settlements for the five-year interim period. 5. I then repeated to Dayan what I had told him several times since my return to Israel. It was the President’s strong conviction that the 5 On September 25, Begin stated to the Knesset: “As regards Judea, Samaria and Gaza, I had no doubts whatsoever: I promised President Carter that during the period of the negotiations for the signing of a peace treaty; . . . during the estimated three-month period we [Israel] would not establish new civilian settlements.” “This matter,” Begin continued, “caused misunderstanding. Therefore, even though I had absolutely no doubts concerning the substance of this assurance (and this was the only one given), on Saturday night, we examined, with the Foreign Minister, the Defense Minister and Prof. Barak, all the notes and documents, and they showed that this is how it was.” The full text of this statement is in telegram 13271 from Tel Aviv, September 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780393–0491)
