893.00/7411: Telegram
[Document 573]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 23, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received May 23—10: 30 a.m.]
226. 1. Department’s 104, May 21, 1 p.m., greatly appreciated, I shall
inform the press that Mayer is proceeding to Canton under instructions from
the Secretary of State of the United States to consult with the American
consulates in South China in regard to the situation in that region where a
number of recent outrages against Americans and their interests have
caused increasing concern to the American Government.
2. [Paraphrase.] I also think Mayer should be instructed, but not for
publication, that, although his mission is chiefly for the purpose of personal
contact between the Legation and the consuls general at Canton and
Hongkong, he should use any opportunity that seems favorable to tell the
Canton officials that we cannot understand their attitude regarding
foreigners in general and Americans in particular, which we believe to be
inexcusable from the point of view of justice and international friendship.
Should there be an appropriate opportunity I think that Mayer could, with
advantage, try to impress upon the Canton officials the unfortunate effect
upon public opinion in the United States which their treatment of American
citizens is having, pointing out that American sentiment has hitherto been
very favorable to the Chinese and particularly to the Cantonese who
comprise the greater part of the Chinese residents in America.
3. To avoid possible misinterpretations, Mayer will go to Canton without
stopping at Hongkong on the way, but will stop there for several days on his
way back, giving an opportunity for him to have informal conversations
with Hongkong officials. I suggest that Tredwell be given instructions to
cooperate in every way with Mayer and to go to Canton to confer with
Mayer and Jenkins, if and when Mayer so requests him. It would be well to
have Chamberlain8 also present at any such conference and I request that he
