International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
13
with the EC, which is already hypersensitive to the existence of the
complaints, but which is slow in working toward solutions.
The Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN)
The MTN was conceived as a means to further reduce barriers to
international trade and improve the rules and procedures that make up
the framework for the conduct of world trade. The understandable pre-
occupation abroad with domestic economic recovery, and with current
trade deficits, has prevented dedication of the necessary political will to
move the current trade negotiations toward a successful conclusion.
There has also been a major obstacle within the MTN to further
progress. This has been the deadlock between the U.S. and the EC over
what can be accomplished in these negotiations with respect to agricul-
tural trade.
There had been general agreement on an end of 1977 target date
for completion of the MTN, but both France and the United Kingdom,
neither of which are enthusiastic about a negotiation having substantial
results, have emphasized that the deadline can be met, provided that
the MTN is downgraded into a mini-negotiation. This position is not
justified by European economic difficulties as the MTN will not require
any substantial near-term economic adjustments by any participant.
Further movement in the MTN will be dependent upon strong U.S.
leadership, and upon our reaching a basic political level understanding
with the major participants on what this negotiation is to accomplish.
Trade Relations with Developing Countries
Increased coordination among developed countries of their pol-
icies towards developing countries (LDC’s) is necessary in order to
avoid developed countries damaging each others’ trade interests. The
developing countries seek primarily stabilization of earnings on their
exports of commodities, preferential market access in developed coun-
tries for manufactured products, and international recognition of their
right to more favorable trade treatment from developed countries.
The United States and other developed countries have differed in
their approaches to the LDC’s. The U.S. has been more wary of com-
modity agreements. We have not been willing to negotiate preferential
access for LDC’s to the U.S. market (nor to extend discriminatory pref-
erences to individual LDC’s). We have also insisted on receiving some
concessions for the more favorable market access that we are willing to
commit to in the trade negotiations. The LDC’s recognize, however,
that we are more willing to consider making specific concessions than
are other developed countries. Detailed consultations with Europe and
Japan on LDC policy should be an early priority.
