474
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
166.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 14, 1980
BRIEFS AND COMMENTS
USSR: Brezhnev’s “Interview” on Afghanistan
Brezhnev’s “interview” yesterday in Pravda is the most comprehensive
denunciation of the US by a Soviet leader in many years and signals Moscow’s
conviction that it cannot reach a modus vivendi with the Carter administration,
at least in the near future. ([classification marking not declassified])
In condemning the “latest irresponsible actions” and “the extremist
position” of the US, Brezhnev warned his Soviet audience to expect
further US efforts to “poison” Soviet-American relations. Although
Brezhnev did not announce any Soviet countermeasures, he further
warned that US actions would, “like a boomerang,” come back to
hit the US, “if not today, then tomorrow.”2 ([classification marking not
declassified])
Brezhnev’s efforts to separate the US from its West European allies
continues a trend in Soviet policy that has been especially prominent
since the Afghan crisis erupted. In alleging that the US has shown itself
to be “an absolutely unreliable partner” and in assuring the West
European governments of Moscow’s desire to continue political and
military detente, Brezhnev hoped to provide incentives to the West
Europeans to dissociate themselves from US actions and to continue
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified].
The full version of this National Intelligence Daily was not filed with this collection.
The article printed here was found in this form.
2 In telegram 789 from Moscow, January 16, the Embassy argued that Brezhnev’s
remarks in Pravda provided an opportunity for the United States to challenge the Krem-
lin’s attempts to assure Soviet citizenry and world opinion that the intervention in
Afghanistan was the right decision. This endeavor would include demonstrating that
the Soviet Union had not acted in a way befitting a “responsible superpower and a fit
partner for negotiating major arms issues and for mutually advantageous coopera-
tion;” that the intervention “gravely damaged” Soviet efforts to stymie U.S.-Chinese
cooperation, to “pacify” Western Europe, and to continue “neutralizing” regional powers
such as Turkey and Iran; that only a significant change in Soviet behavior could prevent
a “major new arms race with the U.S.;” and, finally, “to get across that Moscow cannot
have it both ways and will have to give up its ideological aspirations to support ‘national
liberation’ if it wants to advance other important Soviet interests.” The Embassy further
argued that this message should come in the form of a Presidential speech. (National
Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary
on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, untitled folder) The text of Brezhnev’s interview
is printed in full in Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XXXII, no. 2 (February 13, 1980),
pp. 1–10. Excerpts were printed in the New York Times January 13, 1980, p. 16.
