5. This attitude on the part of the Chinese disappoints the hope that they
would regard as a conciliatory gesture an offer to have them participate in the
inquiry: and I am afraid that if the powers were not committed to such a
course of action in consequence of publicity given the assurances, I should
now be disposed to recommend that we abandon a course which under
present circumstances seems likely to aggravate rather than diminish the
feeling among the Chinese. It is doubtless too late now to do that; and our
problem is to relieve the tense situation as best we can despite the further
difficulty that has arisen.
6. Japanese Minister has now stated that his Government assented on two
conditions to the British proposal for the inquiry: First, that it should not
stand in the way of early acceptance of the offered resignation of McEuen,
the Shanghai police chief whom the Chinese generally regard as responsible
for the shooting; and, second, that negotiations for the settlement of Shanghai
matters be undertaken as promptly as possible. It is the view of the Japanese
Government that pending the result of judicial inquiry into the facts of
shooting we might at once take up with the Chinese negotiations concerning
indirectly related questions of rendition of Mixed Court and of Chinese
representations on Municipal Council.
7. The British Government has telegraphed to its Legation here a draft of a
document by which it is proposed the diplomatic body should constitute the
commission of inquiry. This draft contemplates not merely that the
commission shall be a fact-finding body, but provides further that they shall
“make such recommendations as they may think proper as to action which is
called for in the circumstances as established by them and as to any steps
which should in their opinion be taken by authorities ultimately responsible
for administration at International Settlement at Shanghai with a view to
preventing similar occurrences in future.” This seems to me to go far beyond
the purposes of a judicial inquiry and to confuse the functions of the inquiry
with political considerations. Assuming that the Chinese will not participate,
the so-called judicial conference would in fact be scarcely more than new
foreign agency to reconsider the conclusions already reached by the
diplomatic body and now held in abeyance.
8. While the subject of a judicial inquiry is thus beclouded, no progress is
being made towards a settlement of Shanghai affairs, the agitations continue,
and the more responsible elements among Chinese find themselves
increasingly embarrassed in dealing with agitators by reason of what appears
to them the evasiveness and lack of candor of the foreign powers in dealing
with the present crisis. The situation is drifting dangerously, and it seems to
me important that we should try to bring about some solution of the present
