Chapter 2, January–June 1989 197 Tab C Paper Prepared by the Joint Staff31 Washington, undated Short-Time-­of-Flight (STOF) Threats and Arms Control (Revision 1) Executive Summary 1. (SNF) The attached paper examines the threat posed to strategic systems (weapons; command, control, and communication (C3), and tactical warning and attack assessment (TW/AA) by short-­time-­of-­ flight (STOF) SLBMs and the impact of banning or limiting their testing in a START treaty. 2. (SNF) Several proposals were examined during SALT II negotiations to enhance stability by attempting to reduce the threat posed by STOF SLBMs. Most of the methods examined called for banning all testing of SLBMs in a depressed trajectory (DT) mode. In addition to banning depressed trajectory SLBM testing, another method of limiting the STOF threat considered was the use of SSBN stand-­off zones. All approaches had problems related to circumvention scenarios and monitorability. None of the approaches were included in the SALT II agreement. 3. (SNFWN) There are two issues which must be considered in limiting STOF SLBM development. First, SLBMs fired to very short ranges can travel standard trajectories and therefore no special testing is required. A technical ban cannot circumscribe the tactical deployment of Soviet SLBMs very close to our coasts, only an SSBN exclusion zone can address this threat. For longer range firings (2000 Km or more), the principal question in limiting STOF SLBM development is whether it is necessary to demonstrate a STOF trajectory on an end-­to-­end test, or whether individual component testing and or computer simulation would supply adequate confidence in missile performance and reliability. The belief that Soviet missile programs require end-­to-­end system demonstration has been challenged and is subject to debate. 4. (SNF) Concern exists regarding the potential impact that introducing restrictions on STOF SLBM testing could have on the development of future US strategic offensive and defensive weapon systems. Banning STOF SLBM testing could introduce problems and possible 31 Secret; Noforn; Wnintel.
