656  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
interjected that he thought that pursuing such a system was a pipe 
dream and that the environmentalists would simply never let it hap-
pen. Bill Perry responded that the governors of these states had been 
asked about the acceptability of an MPS system with 4–5,000 shelters 
and point security. Such a system would involve fencing off 4–5,000 
small areas of about four acres apiece, and the governors had said it 
would be acceptable. Perry noted that the covered trench system he had 
in mind would result in the same sort of situation. A fairly large num-
ber of small areas fenced off, but the bulk of the deployment area open 
for public use. (C)
The President said that you are coming close to convincing me. He 
then asked: if the Soviets were to do the same thing, what would we 
want them to do for us to allow for adequate verification. (U)
Dr. Perry said that he would ask for two things: first, he would 
want them to use a large enough transporter system so that there was 
little possibility that it could roam freely outside the nominal deploy-
ment area; second, he would want the Soviets to open their trench sys-
tem every several months to allow for verification. (At this point there 
were a number of joking comments about the possibility of allowing 
the Soviets to walk through a U.S. trench system or having a JCS repre-
sentative walk through Soviet trenches.) Bill Perry continued there were 
three possibilities for connecting our shelters. We could leave the con-
nectors completely open, we could close them with some sort of heavy 
structure, or we might use some sort of effectively transparent covers. 
Of the three, Dr. Perry felt that only the open trench was a non-­starter 
because it would restrict so much land from public use. He said that he 
had very high confidence that we could get the covered trench accepted 
by the people of the states where we would hope to deploy it, certainly 
by their governors. (C)
The President asked if it wouldn’t be possible to use an arrangement 
of shelters and connectors like spokes, radiating from a hub. He won-
dered if such an arrangement might reduce land requirements. He was 
told that the constraints of the rough topography in Nevada and Utah 
implied that the spoke arrangement would require more land rather 
than less. (C)
Frank Press asked Stan Turner for his view on the verifiability of the 
trench concept. Admiral Turner responded that the concept had evolved 
fairly rapidly, and that he had not yet had time to carry out a thorough 
study of its verifiability. He said that he expected that it would be more 
verifiable than the vertical MPS system. He went on to note, however, 
that our arms control efforts will eventually require cooperative mea-
sures and on-­site inspection. He suggested that the verification require-
ments of the systems being considered now might actually be a good
