Uruguay 1149 he was talking with Mr. Waugh of the Eximbank. He noted that this subject had been raised when Mr. Waugh was in Montevideo, at which time it had been discussed in terms of loan with full gold collateral. The Uruguayan Government now felt, however, that for political reasons it would be impossible to offer this collateral, and he was exploring the possibility of an unbacked loan such as he understood had been granted other, including Latin American, countries. He pointed out that Uruguay’s financial affairs were in the hands of responsible people, and that Uruguay’s reputation for the payment of obligations was excellent. Moreover, he said, he hoped that the present period of exchange stringency would be resolved toward the end of this year, at which time Uruguay would have for sale abroad a full year’s wool clip plus one half of this year’s currently unsold clip. The Ambassador mentioned also that he was holding discussions on the possible financing of different proposals with the Development Loan Fund, and indicated that he thought some of those discussions might bear fruit. He added that Uruguay was also currently hoping for some U.S. actions which would permit increased U.S. imports of certain Uruguayan products, such as wool tops, canned meat, and woolen textiles. These items, he said, would in due course be the subject of communications to the Department. In conclusion, the Ambassador again stressed the friendly atmosphere engendered by the Vice President’s visit to Uruguay, and said that he believed that this atmosphere was an excellent one in which to proceed to greater U.S.–Uruguayan cooperation. The Secretary commented that he could not, of course, give immediate answers to the questions raised by the Ambassador. If the answers could come from the heart, he said, it would be simple enough, but the questions raised had of course to be considered thoroughly from a financial viewpoint by various U.S. Government agencies. He said that, as he had mentioned in an OAS meeting recently, the U.S. Government was aware of the marketing problems faced by countries producing a few basic commodities, and that he was also aware of the evident Communist intention of making capital out of these difficulties. Moreover, he continued, this awareness ante-­dated some of the less pleasant incidents which took place during Mr. Nixon’s tour of South America. He mentioned that the free world had experienced cycles of prosperity and depression for a long time, and commented that some governmental attempts to counteract depression conditions, as in the case of agriculture in the U.S., had raised additional problems. Now, however, there was the added danger that the Communists, who could implement their policies without regard to factors such as costs and profits, were obviously endeavoring to take advantage of cycles of depression to destroy both the economic and political structures of free world countries. Finding a solution to this problem was not as easy as
