982
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Strauss said he could say he is getting their thoughts.
The problem is not to see the others. If he goes to Israel, he has to say
why he is doing so.
Dr. Brzezinski said that if the approach is quieter, why would Israel
be interested. It will see the U.S. inching towards the PLO, whatever we
do. One they stop; second they will stick it to us here.
Secretary Vance said this might be right. But Israel sees damage
from past Lebanon actions, and will again if the cease-fire breaks down.
Dr. Brzezinski said that there is a trade-off. It is after Cambodia, it is
an ugly situation, and politically and morally something should be
done. There would be an impact in the Arab world if we did nothing.
Ambassador Strauss agreed.
Secretary Vance raised the question of how to do something, and
stick to it, on the PLO. It is up to Lebanon, Syria, and the UN to affect
the PLO.
Dr. Brzezinski suggested the UN.
David Aaron said he had thought the PLO was interested in getting
legitimacy.
Secretary Vance said that if we can’t do that, how do we do some-
thing. Maybe we can go part way on a truce plan; then in time go on.
David Aaron asked why the situation is calmer now. Is it because
we have this initiative going? Israel is worried that something might
happen. Then should we just let it simmer, and keep the effort moving
to keep the situation quiet?
Ambassador Habib said that this is a good point. Therefore we
should move on a gradual, phased basis.
Secretary Vance said that we need movement on a phased basis—
e.g., how can we get movement on Tyre? How can we get the LAF into
Tyre? Therefore we need some understanding on how to do it. Pieces
like that can be moved. Maybe we can do that without being incon-
sistent and without dealing with the PLO.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how great the U.S. role should be.
Secretary Vance said that we should first move to talk with the Is-
raelis—and not see it slide past them.
Ambassador Strauss said we have to go to Begin first, and get him as
a co-conspirator.
Secretary Vance said that second we should go to Lebanon and say
that it must do more. Therefore, we should ask them what they will do.
We should go to Syria and ask them what they will do—e.g., pulling
some forces out of Beirut and the airport.
Robert Hunter asked what the incentives would be for the PLO to
cooperate.
