1100 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 677. Telegram 23 from Geneva1 Geneva, July 10, 1956, 6 p.m. 23. From Johnson. 1. Comments today’s meeting: Do not believe Wang’s “suggestion” we turn to trade embargo presages any early break but is rather renewed attempt bring pressure on us. Also, their thought may well be that in absence any success this will demonstrate lack any advantage to them from talks and thus pre­ pare ground if they eventually decide carry out break. They may also estimate that now is propitious time focus public attention on trade and will in talks here attempt lay basis for public position which will accelerate present trends other countries lower restrictions on trade with them and weaken international position US this question. In view of current dearth of public interest in renunciation topic, CHICOMS may also feel further concentration on this would be less productive of embarrassment to US and GRC than shifting focus to trade, with attend­ant possibility of exploiting US support of GRC “piracy.” This was hinted at in Chou’s NPC speech. 2. At next meeting he will undoubtedly query as to whether I have any “new constructive proposal” with respect renunciation and in absence any new draft my part renew “suggestion” move to trade embargo. Suggest my best tactic at that point would be refer my ­November 3 statement (para 75 Mytel 1056), copy of which was given him, on interrelation two items but in accordance that statement express willingness listen to what he has to say. I would avoid any direct reply at that meeting and restate position on renunciation as appropriate asking they reconsider their position that regard. 3. Reference June 29 letter from Purdue to Department note Tseng Kuang Chih’s name was included list Wang gave me February 9 or two months before he placed under observation. Must expect Wang will eventually learn of this case from returning students or other means. If authorities determine Tseng not competent make decision on return suggest desirability Indians being informed facts. Gowen 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–1056. Secret; Limit Distribution.
