Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1105 234. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, July 18, 1991, 1412Z 7944. Subject: START: Irregular Sitrep #1, July 17, 1991 1. Secret–Entire Text. 2. As I discussed during the ungroup meeting on July 15, I will, from time to time, be sending you personal sitreps on progress in Geneva. This is the first, as of close of business July 17. 3. Obukhov and Koltunov have not returned and there is no firm date for them to do so. Nazarkin claims Koltunov’s absence will not preclude working throw-weight and telemetry. I am skeptical. Peresypkin and Ashratov did return, apparently bringing elements of common ground and instructions. 4. I agreed to drop the exchange of draft site diagrams due to workload. 5. I’ve told the Soviets that we want to kick the can on hard currency since they rejected our deal. Nazarkin says he lacks authority to remove the paragraph requiring such payment. Since, in theory, we agreed to kick the can on this months ago, I smell a rat. If the provision isn’t dropped by early next week, I will recommend a demarche in Moscow. 6. I have agreed to have both sides make the following identical statements in our final plenary. Begin text: For the purpose of contributing to the implementation of the agreements under the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics/the United States of America undertakes to refrain, on the basis of reciprocity, from any acts which would defeat the object and purpose of the treaty, beginning from the date of its signature and until its entry into force or until one of the parties shall have informed the other party of its intention not to ratify the treaty. End text. I will probably suggest changing “undertakes to refrain, on the basis of reciprocity to “affirms that it will, as required by international law and on the basis of reciprocity”, but will live with the statement as is if necessary. The statement simply restates the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and is similar to statements we have made in the past. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910687–0119. Secret; Immediate.
