Romania 645 Andrei concluded by stating that Ceausescu told him to reiterate the full strength of the Romanian President’s desire for a political decision to continue to strengthen the cooperation between our two countries, and to find means to deal with the Pacepa matter in a way that does not do harm to our foreign relations or those of Romania. Andrei then made the following personal comments: —Without specifically mentioning the Soviet Union, Andrei left no doubt that the Romanians believe Pacepa is serving Soviet interests and was probably directed to defect by the Soviets. ([2 lines not declassified] This is a typical Eastern European reaction to discredit officials who defect.) —He repeated several times that Pacepa had been in charge of security for Ceausescu on many official visits. Pacepa could, and would, seek to embarrass Ceausescu and harm Romanian interests with many countries. —Andrei emphasized his and Ceausescu’s shock that the United States would give sanctuary to this traitor, given the excellent relations developed by the two Presidents and the improved relationship between the two governments. A way should be found to get him out of the United States. [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified] Secretary Vance will tell Andrei in New York next week that Ceausescu’s message has been passed to the White House and will reiterate our belief that the Pacepa case should be put behind us so that our relations with Romania may continue to expand and improve.5 In addition, with Pacepa’s consent, we will explore with the Romanians an arrangement whereby Pacepa would voluntarily leave the United States. [1 line not declassified] In return, the Romanians would 5 See footnote 5, Document 208. The meeting between Vance and Andrei scheduled for September 29 was canceled and apparently rescheduled for October 2; see Document 209. On September 29, Nimetz and Andrei met to discuss the Pacepa case over breakfast at the Romanian Mission to the United Nations. The Department reported the conversation to Ambassador Aggrey in telegram 252848 to Bucharest, October 4. Nimetz told Andrei that “in his personal view, it was very significant that the U.S. Government had responded in this sensitive matter by agreeing to facilitate, at the request of another government, the departure of a person who we had taken in. He knew of no similar case. The Romanian side therefore should consider this as very significant.” Andrei responded that a decision on the issue could only be taken by Ceausescu. (INR/IL, 980643000018, Box 11, Bucharest) No response to the offer was found.
