330 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The Chairman, IIC, Mr. J. Edgar Hoover, observed that it is well recognized by all that there is a threat posed by the capability which the Soviets have clandestinely to introduce nuclear bombs into the United States through diplomatic channels. He indicated that past studies reflect that two bombs, so introduced, could destroy Washington, D.C., and New York City. He noted that under the proposed modification of NSC Action No. 1868 nothing would be done in terms of opening sus­ pect diplomatic shipments until sometime later when improved devices were installed at key ports of entry. He said that the Internal Security Committees, at the request of the Planning Board, were presently studying the question whether examination of diplomatic shipments by detection devices should continue to be covert, and he advised that there was some difference of opinion on this score among the interested agencies. He added that in due time a report would be submitted to the Council by the Internal Security Committees on the basis of the review which it was now making on this question. The President inquired of Mr. Hoover whether the Atomic Energy Commission had given the Internal Security Committees the whole story relative to what the Soviets would have to do in order to introduce clandestinely into the United States a two or three megaton weapon. The Chairman replied that full information on this subject had been provided to the Internal Security Committees by the Atomic Energy Commission. The President indicated that he was not thoroughly familiar with the sizes of diplomatic packages entering the United States and he wondered whether the size of such diplomatic packages was sufficient to accommodate large nuclear weapons. Mr. Hoover responded that some of the diplomatic packages entering the country weigh as much as two or three tons, and he added that it was quite feasible to introduce disassembled segments of such weapons in different incoming diplo­ matic shipments with the idea of assembling them subsequent to their arrival in this country. The President inquired the reasons for having such large sized diplomatic packages, and the Secretary of State responded to the effect that the United States had to have the privilege of sending diplomatic packages of similar size to the Bloc countries in order to get in needed supplies and needed equipment such as heavy coding machines. Mr. Gray indicated that some of the heavy packages coming into the United States under diplomatic immunity contained such things as household furnishings, liquor, and the like. Citing an example of the size of some of the incoming packages, Mr. Gray made reference to the fact that sometime ago the Czechs introduced four packages, each of which weighed 3,000 pounds.
