1078  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
9. The basis for protests, propaganda, and possible UN action 
would probably be the allegedly illegal and hostile nature of the intel­
ligence activities of such satellites, and not Soviet claims to sovereignty 
in outer space itself. They could introduce the issue into the UN, either 
in terms of a demand on the US to cease, or in terms of a general meas­
ure to outlaw any military satellite or space vehicles, including those 
for reconnaissance. They would probably attempt to raise tensions and 
to make the issue appear to have dangerous consequences for world 
peace.
10. They will, in any case, probably exert all efforts to neutralize 
the transmission of data from vehicles which might be providing useful 
intelligence. Whenever the USSR does acquire a capability, it will prob­
ably seek to destroy US reconnaissance satellite vehicles. Such action 
might be accompanied by attempts to use heightened anxiety over 
war for a diplomatic offensive, and also to persuade the world that the 
USSR had a successful defense against ballistic missiles.
III. NONCOMMUNIST WORLD REACTIONS
11. World reactions to the US reconnaissance satellite program will 
vary significantly and will be influenced by the international political 
climate at the time, by the manner in which the US handles the pro­
gram, and by the Soviet reaction. Unless the USSR stirs up the issue, 
world opinion will probably be largely indifferent. But if the ­Soviets 
stimulate tension—for example by threatening countries which coop­
erate in a US “spy” program by furnishing facilities for tracking 
stations—and try to make the issue appear to have dangerous conse­
quences for world peace, the US would have to contend with adverse 
reactions in neutralist countries and among some segments of opin­
ion in Allied countries from those who would view the US action as 
provocative and risky.
12. The governments of the principal countries of the Free World, 
as well as military, official, and some other segments of opinion in these 
countries, are well aware of the requirement for effective intelligence 
on the USSR to support the US deterrent posture, and would not object 
to the reconnaissance satellite program. Many governments would 
be favorably impressed by evidence that the US could in fact pene­
trate Soviet secrecy. Favorable reactions in Allied countries might be 
enhanced by joint Allied association with the program. Nevertheless, in 
the event of violent Soviet reaction to the program, Free World govern­
ments would still have to contend with considerable popular anxiety 
over heightened international tension. However, most Allied govern­
ments would probably support the US program and would endeavor
