362 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Soviet efforts to destabilize Turkey and Pakistan, and intense Soviet pressure on other states in the region to line up with Soviet interests. (S) The result after several years could be a pattern in the Middle East and South Asia in which most of the region’s states are either Soviet vassals (on the model of Afghanistan) or willing members of a Sovietdominated security system because it seems the safer course (a role India has come close to playing in the past). (S) US policy overall must be guided by the realization that this prospect is now a fearsome probability, but not a certainty. We must therefore combat the probability as effectively as we can while at the same time planning against its occurrence, without making it a self-fulfilling prophecy. (S) This will require of us a policy of deeply echeloned containment. In contrast to the situation in the late-1940s and early 1950s, we cannot credibly draw a defensive perimeter and threaten massive military action if it is crossed. There are many perimeters, and some will inevitably be crossed. (S) The first layer, or forward echelon, of our policy must be a systematic effort to make Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, Yemen, Ethiopia, and Indochina as costly and painful as possible. This will require extensive support to Soviet opponents wherever we find them, not on the basis of their worthiness or chances of winning, but on the basis of their ability to tax Soviet power. We must proceed in this prepared politically and psychologically for the certain event that some of these clients will fail and that our support may after the fact be regarded as having assured their demise. (S) The second layer or echelon of policy should be a three-part effort 1) to fortify as best we can the key remaining buffer states of the area, Turkey and Pakistan, with military and economic aid, 2) to win the key “swing states” of Syria and Iraq away from Soviet influence, and 3) to increase our permanent military presence in the area, on-shore as well as off-shore. (S) With respect to the first two elements—fortifying the buffers and winning over the “swingers”—the obvious complications of doing these things become politically tolerable if one simply accepts the necessity of trying to achieve them without a prior guarantee, or even high likelihood, of success. (S) We need on-shore military presence now mostly for political reasons, to counter the political weight of Soviet military power in the north and to show that we have the nerve to push through the evident political obstacles to get on-shore presence. Over the next year a minimum goal should be a tac air contingent and marine presence in Oman. The risk of destabilizing Oman will simply have to be taken. Oman is
