839.00/2800: Telegram
[Document 580]
The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the
Secretary of State
SANTO DOMINGO, February 26, 1924—4 p.m.
[Received February 27—11:53 p.m.]
15. The legal period for the completion by the municipal electoral boards of
the permanent electoral registers in their respective communes expired at
midnight February 24. The boards of the three largest communes—Santo
Domingo, Santiago and La Vega—have each failed to include some
hundreds of citizens who had registered before the legal period for the
completion of the lists had terminated. This failure was largely due to the
obstructive methods pursued by the representatives of the Coalition Party
on the electoral boards in question.
The Coalition Party yesterday advised the Commission that it protest[s]
against the legality of the election to be held in those communes as well as
in others on the ground that qualified voters will be deprived of their legal
privileges as well as on the ground that the electoral boards had resorted to
illegal methods in the formation of electoral registers. This protest was
made notwithstanding the fact that the electoral law makes specific
provision for the inclusion or exclusion of qualified voters in the electoral
registers after the lists are terminated by means of petitions addressed
during the five days subsequent to the municipal boards, which petitions
may also be carried on appeal to the Central Electoral Board. The Coalition
Party through its representative on the Commission demanded that the
requirement in the electoral law that citizens in order to vote must be
included in the permanent electoral register, be abolished. It demanded that
all inhabitants in the Republic be permitted to vote on election day, the only
control maintained to be the presence of political observers in polling
booths or without. After prolonged discussion lasting over 18 hours the
members of the Commission unanimously adopted my counterproposal that
in order to obviate the difficulties presented, an extension of two days be
