1252
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
hardly surprising that it has not been possible to conclude them in 12
months. We have had targets before that have been exceeded, but it is
the ultimate success of the outcome and not meeting the target date that
is important.
—What is important today is that serious negotiations are un-
derway, and that we believe they are getting somewhere. The experi-
ence at Herzlia of engaging both Ministers and working groups simul-
taneously permitted the parties to begin grappling with some of the
central issues for the first time.
—Ambassador Linowitz had to handle a tough confrontation over
the security issue at Herzlia. But at the same time much valuable work
was accomplished. We have now put forward our suggestions on most
of the issues and these are being considered carefully by the two sides.
There is a much closer common concept of what kind of document we
should aim for as the outcome of negotiations than there was even a
month ago. We are moving steadily toward getting both sides to accept
a single text as the basis for negotiations.
—It is our intention to pursue these negotiations as vigorously as
possible until an agreement is reached. We will play our role as “full
partner” and will both put forward our own suggestions as we con-
sider appropriate and intervene to break deadlocks to move the process
forward. We are not interested in achieving an incomplete or inade-
quate agreement within some arbitrary time limit. We are determined
to get a meaningful agreement on autonomy and will extend the nego-
tiations if necessary to achieve it.
—There is already agreement on a significant list of functions to be
transferred fully to the Palestinian self-governing authority. The two
sides are now grappling with the remaining core issues: arrangements
for control over land; the principles to govern an equitable allocation of
water; designing arrangements that will fully assure Israel’s security
while giving the Palestinian authority an appropriate role in security
functions; arrangements in the economic sphere; voting rights for the
East Jerusalem Arabs. These will be tough issues to resolve but we be-
lieve it can be done with patience and determination.
—The President remains convinced that Resolution 242 and the
Camp David Framework offer the only practical way of building
toward a comprehensive peace. He is determined to see this process
through to success.
—The President has asked Secretary Muskie and Ambassador
Linowitz to outline to key European leaders the progress made to date
in these talks and to stress the complexities of the issues which can only
be ultimately resolved by tenacious attention to the negotiating process
itself in the months ahead. We will make clear to the Europeans that we
