748 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Council Planning Board for consideration by the National Security Council at its meeting on Thursday, 25 June 1959. 2. It is the view of the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force that there has been no change in the international situation since the recent approval of the basic military strategy section contained in NSC 5810/1 which would necessitate any change in the military section of Basic National Security Policy. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force recommends, therefore, that the Joint Chiefs of Staff representative’s proposal for Paragraph 3, the majority view in Paragraphs 10 and 12, and Paragraphs 15 and 16 as they now appear in NSC 5906, are suitable as the basic statement of United States policy. It should be noted that except for minor changes in Paragraph 3, all of these paragraphs are identical with those in the currently approved NSC 5810/1. 3. In reaching this conclusion, the following areas have been espe­ cially considered: a. The basic U.S. security objective should continue to be the main­ tenance of a position of military strength which will permit aggressive political action to achieve, by peaceful means, U.S. national objectives. The military forces and tasks, and their priorities, necessary to provide the position of strength to permit the exercise of U.S. initiative in world affairs are correctly and adequately described. b. The over-­riding military requirement continues to be the devel­ opment and maintenance of adequate and safe-guarded strategic mil­ itary power. c. Primary reliance on nuclear weapons as a deterrent, and for selective use in actual conflict, is the keystone of U.S. policy and pos­ ture. This concept is the only course of action open to the United States compatible with the economic well-­being of the United States and the free world and hence with the preservation of our fundamental values and institutions. d. With regard to Paragraph 16, it is the view of the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force that within the total U.S. military forces there must be a capability of deterring or, if necessary, defeating, local aggression with forces able also to contribute in general war. In the opinion of the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, the United States has in being and has, in fact, demonstrated that it has forces ready and capable of responding rap­ idly and flexibly to local aggression and to carry out initial general war tasks. 4. Notwithstanding the existing disagreements regarding military priorities and force structure, I am of the firm conviction that the mil­ itary strategy as currently expressed in NSC 5810/1 provides suitably flexible, current, adequate and clear policy guidance to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the military departments. It in no way pre-­judges military requirements to the detriment of any one Service’s ability to carry out its proper responsibilities for the national security. Further, it provides the very basis required by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to enable them to
