3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 200 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI half-hour would be set aside on the afternoon of the 22nd for a brief preliminary discussion of the Middle East between Gromyko and the Secretary. b. The Secretary indicated that Mrs. Vance would be pleased to give a tea for Mrs. Gromyko if she should accompany the Foreign Minister to Washington. c. Dobrynin suggested that Gromyko might wish to have an opportunity to talk with the Secretary alone, following the luncheon on the 22nd. The possibility was kept open that Gromyko might wish to return to the Soviet Embassy for a brief period thereafter, and before the start of the afternoon session. d. Dobrynin inquired who would be present at the meeting with the President. The Secretary replied that, in addition to himself, there would be the Vice President, Dr. Brzezinski and a notetaker. Dobrynin said that Gromyko would be accompanied at the meeting by himself, Kornienko and Sukhadrov, the interpreter. e. The Secretary suggested the possibility that in the course of the meetings, it would be useful to review the status of the various working groups set up following the Moscow meeting, and that the communique might include a reference to this review. Dobrynin concurred in the suggestion. 7. Miscellany. a. Dobrynin asked the Secretary whether there was any possibility of a favorable US response to the Soviet suggestions of a declaration on the non-use of force, and on no first-use of nuclear weapons in Europe. The Secretary indicated that the former did not appear to have practical value, but that we still had the latter suggestion under study. b. The Secretary asked Dobrynin about the Soviet view of developments in the Horn of Africa. Dobrynin indicated that the matter was a delicate one, but he went on to say that the Soviet Union had done its best to stop the fighting in the area, and was trying to hold arms shipments to a minimum. However, he added, irrationality on both sides made the situation difficult. c. Dobrynin inquired conversationally about the composition of the US Delegation to the United Nations, and to the Belgrade CSCE Conference. When these had been answered, Dobrynin indicated an interest in whether the appointment of Justice Goldberg7 to the CSCE meeting implied a change of policy. He also inquired whether the Secretary as well as the President would be speaking at the General Assembly. The Secretary said this had not been decided. 7 Carter appointed Arthur Goldberg, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court from October 1962 until July 1965, as U.S. Ambassador to the Belgrade Conference (CSCE).
