834
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
The Tudeh is said to have obtained the agreement of the other
groups affiliated with it in the National Resistance Movement to manu-
facture and use crude bombs in a limited terrorist campaign. Money is
being collected to pay for these bombs and also for the financial aspects
of the “release Mosadeq” campaign. Although reports conflict con-
cerning the success of the collections, it would appear that the Tudeh
and the National Resistance Movement are having difficulties in accu-
mulating the quantity of money needed for such an operation. The
Tudeh is also attempting to collect enough capital to carry out its own
objective of procuring the release of those Party members still held in
custody. These releases are engineered, according to reports, not only
by bribery but also by the payment of bail.
Current Tudeh Propaganda
Other Tudeh activities have been concerned primarily with the
continuing dissemination of propaganda. Hand-printed leaflets are
still distributed at strategic points in the city (one set of tracts was scat-
tered on the street a block from the Embassy). Two weeks ago the anni-
versary edition of the Party newspaper Mardom appeared in Tehran
and, at about the same time, a new magazine called Mosavar with a
violently anti-American, pro-Soviet slant commenced publication. It
would appear also that the Tudeh is responsible for a current rumor
and whispering campaign against the United States in general and the
Embassy in particular. One rumor insists, for example, that Ambas-
sador Henderson is putting pressure on the Government to execute Dr.
Mosadeq forthwith. Other rumors spread by the Tudeh and by its com-
patriots in the National Resistance Movement attempt to foster the be-
lief that the British and Americans are following divergent policies in
Iran.
The content of Tudeh propaganda since the August 19 change of
administration has reflected the Party’s new status in the country.
During recent weeks the persistent central theme has been a demand
that Dr. Mosadeq be released, coupled with a constantly reiterated in-
sistence that Mosadeq is the legal Prime Minister. In conjunction with
this theme, the Party contends the present administration has usurped
the power of government by means of an illegal and treasonable coup
d’e´tat. Tudeh propaganda also reflects the extent to which its nation-
wide organization has been hit by the Government’s security measures.
In a recent leaflet the Party complained almost petulantly that the Gov-
ernment had no right to decree such severe measures as the death pen-
alty against “patriotic anti-imperialist combatants.”
In the few Party newspapers and magazines which have appeared
recently, the favorite topic continues to be a series of accusations
against the United States. Tudeh publications warned the local popu-
lace that the United States plans to make Iran a colony, that Iran is to be
