Non-Proliferation 915 full control over its implementation, and could, under unforeseen circumstances cut off their fuel supply. One way to alleviate these fears would be to offer foreign nations part ownership in new US enrichment plants under terms which would guarantee their access to some of the plant’s output. For our part, we would insist on terms that would assure our control of plant operations, and fully protect classified data and technology. Such an investment plan could reduce foreign incentives to construct their own enrichment facilities, and could establish a basis for truely multinational fuel cycle cooperation. The Group requests your authorization to undertake ad referendum discussions with other nations to explore the prospects for such investment arrangements. Any resultant proposals would be submitted for approval.8 4. Discussions of Possible Multilateral Programs with Other Uranium and Enrichment Suppliers. Eventually, multilateral programs of assured fuel supply, would be preferable to bilateral ones, since they would ensure that proliferation goals were not undercut by commercial competition among suppliers, and because the US cannot expect to meet all foreign needs on its own. Accordingly, the Group requests your authorization of discussions and preliminary negotiations with other uranium producers, and enrichment service suppliers to explore: (1) the establishment of a secure uranium supply base, through various measures including possible guarantees by uranium producers; (2) a variety of possible investment arrangements between the US and others, including unilateral, cross-investment and barter plans; and (3) the establishment of multilateral pooling or collective guarantee arrangements involving joint planning, fuel sharing and back-up arrangements among suppliers. All of these arrangements would only be offered to nations which are supportive of our non-proliferation goals. In all cases, these discussions will be exploratory9—no commitments will be made without your prior approval.10 5. Internationally Owned Fuel Supply—The Fuel Bank. Over the long term, the ultimate in fuel dependability would be provided by an arrangement in which nuclear fuel supply is owned and sold by an international entity—as opposed to nationally owned resources subject to multilateral guarantees or management. One possibility is an international fuel bank. Such a bank would own supplies of both uranium and enrichment capacity (as measured in SWUs, Separative Work Units) and any nation which adhered to certain non-proliferation standards 8 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “explore idea only. J.” 9 Carter underlined the word “exploratory” in this paragraph. 10 Carter checked the “Approve” option and in the right-hand margin wrote “J.”
