Romania
721
would be found. In this connection, he cited the example of Stane
Dolanc. Dolanc was an extremely able and good politician. Before he
became Executive Secretary of the Presidium, no one had known him.
However, he had done an excellent job. Thus, in Minister Burtica’s
view, it would be possible to find some personality eventually who
could lead Yugoslavia. He did not think that the Soviets would inter-
vene directly in Yugoslav internal affairs because the Soviets knew
that the Yugoslavs, like the Romanians, would not sit idly by and allow
themselves to be occupied. (S)
The Vice President concluded the meeting by thanking Minister
Burtica for his visit and conveyed President Carter’s best wishes to
President Ceausescu. (U)
227.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Belgrade, May 7, 1980
Vice President’s Meeting with President Ceausescu from Romania,
Wednesday, May 7, 1980, Belgrade, Yugoslavia
Vice President: Mr. President, the loss of Tito is a great blow for
Yugoslavia. It is our hope that Yugoslavia will continue to be a strong
and independent nation.
President Ceausescu: Every action taken by Tito is lasting and dura-
ble. We believe the same policies will be further developed in the future.
Vice President: That is our hope. I met with President Kolisevski this
afternoon,2 and I reaffirmed U.S. support and renewed the President’s
pledge to work with Yugoslavia.
President Ceausescu: We do not consider there is any particular
problem with either Yugoslav policy or security. We really believe the
Yugoslav leaders will continue to promote the same policies developed
by Tito.
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Box 35,
Vice President’s Trip to Yugoslavia for Tito Funeral, 5/5/80–5/8/80: Background—
Bilateral Meetings. Secret; Nodis. Following Tito’s death on May 4, Mondale traveled
to Belgrade to attend the funeral as Carter’s representative. Clift forwarded the memoran-
dum to Dodson on May 13 for further distribution.
2 See Document 290.
